Title: Naked Came the International Publishing Conglomerate
Date: February 24, 2006

When The Naked and the Dead was published in 1948, the word "naked" still had
shock value. Mailer's novel was followed by books with such titles as The Naked
Society, The Naked Ape and the moderately oxymoronic Naked Lunch.

It wasn't long before shock devolved into cliche. The publishing world has
now transformed itself, at least as far as book titles are concerned, into an
enormous, sprawling colony of nudists. Amazon lists over a thousand books in
English with "naked" in the title.

A reader interested in religion may choose from The Naked Christian, Naked
Buddha, Naked Buddhism, The Naked Soul, The Naked God, The Naked Church, Naked
Angels, Naked in the Promised Land and Praying Naked. The Naked Parish Priest
may imply more than is strictly proper and Buck-Naked Faith suggests that
ordinary nakedness is insufficient.

For the button-down corporate world, there's The Naked Corporation, The Naked
Consumer, The Naked Employee, The Naked Investor, Naked Imperialism, The Naked
Entrepreneur, Naked Marketing, Naked Imperialism, Naked Economics, The Naked
Capitalist, Naked in the Boardroom, The Naked Manager, The Naked Trader, Naked
at the Interview, The Naked Factory, and Work Naked.

There's hardly an area of interest that hasn't been touched by the advent of
naked titling. Politics?: The Naked Empire, Naked Liberty, Naked Justice,
The Naked Communist. Geographical?:  The Naked Tropics, Naked Sun, The
Naked Island, Naked Heartland, The Naked Mountain, The Naked Tree, Naked
Savages, The Naked Airport, Naked in Baghdad, Naked in Da Nang, Naked City,
The Naked Tourist, Naked Wanderlust, The Naked Jungle, Naked Germany, even 
Naked in Cyberspace, wherever that is. Social?: Naked Conversations, Naked
Bitch, The Naked Leader, The Naked Duke, The Naked Marquis, The Naked
Warrior, Naked Ambition, The Naked Roommate, Naked Conversations, The Naked
Crowd.  Gastronomical?: The Naked Chef, Naked Chocolate, Naked Fruit, Eat
Papayas Naked, The Naked Martini. Anatomical: The Naked Face, The Naked
Neuron, The Naked Chiropractor, The Naked Quack. Domestic: Naked Rooms, The
Naked Wall. Artistic?:  Naked Clay, Naked Vinyl, Writing Naked, The Naked
Cartoonist, Naked Poetry. Athletic?:  Naked Skydiving, The Naked Rower,
Swimming Naked, The Naked Runner, The Naked Hunter, The Naked Pilot, Naked
Weightlifting.

It's disappointing to find nothing in the arena of naked basketball, despite
Dennis Rodman's expressed desire to play his last professional game naked-- to
which the NBA commissioner is supposed to have responded, "it would definitely
be his last."

Other professions: The Naked Therapist, The Naked Detective, The Naked Bird
Watcher, The Naked Spy, The Naked Civil Servant, The Naked Counselor, The Naked
Anthropologist.

The field of dance has produced a series of related titles:  Dancing Naked
Under Palm Trees,  ...in the Mindfield, ..at the Edge of Dawn, ...in Front of
the Fridge, ...in the Material World, ...on the Floor, ...in the Sun. There's a
whole genre of books for people whose tastes are more specialized than mine. A
sample:  Naked Hairy Jocks.

Nearly Naked is refreshingly modest.

As might be expected, naked has its parodists. The faux-romance Naked Came the
Stranger was followed by Naked Came the Manatee and Naked Came the Sasquatch.
Naked and the Undead is bloody good, and Naked Brunch is, I think, delicious.
The most exquisite parody: Rita Rudner's Naked Beneath My Clothes. I'm staking
my claim to Naked Came the Nudist.

I was entirely wrong to jump to the conclusion that The Naked Mole Rat was a
parody; it's a serious study of Heterocephalus glaber by an academic zoologist.