Title: In a Lonely Place (1950)
Date: October 27, 2023

On this last time through, I was struck by an element of the film of which I had not taken sufficient notice. It's a distinctly post-WWII movie. Dix Steele (Bogart) had been a successful writer before the war; he was, we're told, a good commanding officer; but now he's erratic, crazy jealous, his sanity at knife's edge. The film does not offer an explanation for his decline. When he's shown pictures of the brutally murdered Mildred Atkinson, he exhibits no emotional response;  it's as though he's so thoroughly inured to violent death that he lacks fellow-feeling. The audience must infer he's seen too many such deaths. In the past, I hadn't sought a cause for his symptoms, but this time, it was transparent to me that although the writers don't dwell on the war as a cause, they assume that the 1950 audience will get the point. It's shell-shock or battle fatigue or what is now called PTSD. When I came to appreciate the film's 1940s ambience, In a Lonely Place became not merely an intimate psychological drama with noir overtones, but a trenchant commentary on WWII devastation and disruption. And therefore a more profound and richer work of art.

I was curious enough about what is left unsaid in the film to look for a copy of the novel from which the film is drawn. It's Dorothy B. Hughes, In a Lonely Place, first published in 1947 and now reissued in 2017 by New York Review Books (thanks NYRB!. Not a difficult search, because it was right there on a shelf in the Boulder Public Library.

In a Lonely Place is a novel in the Chandler-Hammett-Gardner orbit. For those who love the genre, it might be a great read. For me, not an aficionado of mysteries or detective novels, it was, I'm afraid, a plod -- much marred by an arid, graceless prose style, with many a sentence so awkward that it pained both eye and ear. But just as I suspected, in the novel the WWII material is front and center -- and it's PTSD all right. The shocker, however, is that Dix Steele is not the Bogart-Steele of the film. Not even close. He's not a disturbed  ex-officer trying to adjust to the post-war world. Instead, he's a serial killer on the prowl for another victim. He's murdered his landlord and a former girlfriend, and a trio or quartet of young pretty women. He's a textbook misogynistic nutcase and therefore not nearly as interesting the film's complicated troubled Dix Steele.

I'm in awe of the brilliant transformation from book to script. The credit goes to two writers:  Edmund Hall North, who first "adapted" the novel, and Andrew P. Solt (a refugee born in Hungary as Endre Strausz) who wrote the screenplay. And of course to the director, the great Nicholas Ray.

(In the picture above, Dix's arm is around Laurel's neck. It should be an affectionate embrace, but he's too possessive. She's justifiably wary.)