Title: Why We Love Macbeth: Two More Reasons
Date: June 18, 2011

Pound for pound, Macbeth is of all Shakespeare's plays the most unrelenting and
horrifying.

One of its greatest moments occurs when Macbeth, seeking additional guidance,
pays a second call on the witches. "How now," he demands, "you secret, black,
and midnight hags!/ What is't you do?" The witches' response to his question,
though exceedingly laconic, is far scarier than anything the most computer-
aided-pixelbending horror movie could produce. They simply say: "A deed
without a name." Every member of the audience, and every reader, knows that
the witches are up to no good, but do they know how bad it is?  No. The
audience now learns that what the witches are doing is so loathsome that
there's not even a  word for it in the English language (and Shakespeare, of
all people, had English to spare). What could they possibly mean by "a deed
without a name?" Such a deed must be superlatively evil, worse than anything
that the most depraved reader or listener could possibly guess. The immensely
suggestive phrase "A deed without a name" pushes the limits both of imagination
and language.

Another magnificent moment comes when Macbeth imagines that Banquo, whom
he knows to have been murdered, has taken a seat at his feast. Macbeth
is startled and frightened, but he is also indignant -- so indignant that his
outrage becomes almost comic. He lapses into a reverie.

Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the
gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for
the ear: the times has been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their
crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.

Macbeth asserts that it used to be the case, both in olden times, before
Scotland became civilized, and even into recent days, that there was a natural
order to things. If you killed a man ("when the brains were out"), that person
had the decency to stay dead ("the man would die/ And there an end"). But
now, in these degenerate times, murdered men return and "push us from our
stools." Macbeth, who is under the spell of demons and who has committed
atrocity after atrocity, claims to be more "natural" than the spectre of
Banquo, who is "unnatural." In his eyes, killing people is the new normal,
and it goes against the grain when you kill a guy and he doesn't stay
killed. It's odd and lovely that Macbeth believes that he has a sincere
grievance with the world, especially when he's the one who has thrown things
completely out of whack. His exasperated complaint shapes itself into a weird,
ironic, perverse nostalgia for better days. We almost -- but not quite
-- feel for him.