Title: Brain Chemistry, Macbeth, Nihilism
Date: June 10, 2011

Our understanding of the human brain is mighty slim.  As a consequence our
therapies for insanity, for head injuries, and for dementia are primitive.

When John Donne was dying in 1633, his physicians tied pigeons to his
feet. Present-day medicine offers remedies for Alzheimer's sufferers that
are no more effective than pigeon tying. Brainwise, we linger in the dark ages
(which, by the way, has now been rebranded as "late antiquity"). Or the early
medieval period.

Not to say that nothing is known about the brain. There have been advances.

To bring myself up-to-date, I read The Tell-Tale Brain by V. S. Ramachandran,
a book which has been making a stir in pop-science circles. Ramachandran's
sensible thesis is that there are structures in the human brain that are either
undeveloped or that simply don't exist in the brains of apes. To posit so
is simply common sense. Human beings do things that apes don't: they study
themselves in the mirror, they compose and play piano sonatas, and they think
about their place in the universe.

Ramachandran is an ingenious experimenter but he gets beyond his depth when he
waxes philosophical -- which he does far too often. Here's an example of the
kind of thinking that rubs me wrong.

"I get chills," says Ramachandran, "whenever I hear Macbeth's immortal
soliloquy 'Out out, brief candle!/Life's but a walking shadow, a poor
player/ That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,/ And then is heard no
more. It is a tale/ Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/ Signifying
nothing.'"  He says that "these  words are one of the most profound and deeply
moving remarks about life that anyone has ever made!"

I don't question Ramachandran's chills, which are his own business, but I'm
bothered by his unthinking Bardolatry ("immortal solilquy"; "profound";  "that
anyone has ever made").  Poor Will doesn't need any more reverent cliches to
be shoveled upon him. He's already buried under heaps of them.

Bardolatry such as Ramachandran's obstructs thinking. What does it mean to say
that Macbeth's soliloquy is "profound... about life?"  Let's go to the tape.

When Macbeth says these words, he's under the spell of the witches, who are
"instruments of darkness."  At their suggestion, he's murdered his king,
murdered his closest friend Banquo and Banquo's son Fleance, and he's "savagely
slaughtered" Macduff's wife and children ("All my pretty ones...  All my
pretty chickens and their dam/ At one fell swoop"). Moreover, he's committed
uncatalogued atrocities innumerable: "Each new morn/ New widows howl, new
orphans cry." His brain is "filled with scorpions" and just before he utters
the soliloquy that gives Ramachandran the goosebumps, he learns that his wife,
burdened with guilt, has done herself in. Macbeth is not in a good way.

Macbeth is not a role-model and his philosophical ruminations are neither
insightful or profound. Quite the opposite. Though Macbeth is undeniably
eloquent, he's become a shallow nihilist. Life, in fact, is not "a tale told by
an idiot" and in Shakespeare's late-medieval religious universe, only someone
in the throes of the deepest despair, and certain that he is damned for all
eternity, would think so. Macbeth has learned exactly the wrong lesson. So,
apparently, has Ramachandran.

Gosh, great literature can sometimes be dangerous, can't it?

It's no secret that the universe with its billions and billions of galaxies
will go on very well without us.  Shakespeare, like everyone else, knew that
when looked at from the strictly scientific point of view, human beings are no
more than "many a thousand grains/ That issue out of dust."  But just because
we're tiny and it's enormous, we're not compelled to admire the despairing and
empty philosphy to which Macbeth subscribes.

Not while there are red wheelbarrows, winter love in dark corners, and "little
nameless, unremembered acts/ Of kindness and of love."