Title: The Pazyryk Rug
Date: June 23, 2011

I've been reading about rugs. I'm ignorant, but fortunately, there are dozens
of eaily-available and learned books, and I'm happy to say that our local
university library is going to keep me busy until my enthusiasm flags.

Everyone interested in rugs knows that the Pazyryk carpet (which I didn't
know about until a month ago) is the oldest known rug and about three thousand
years older than the next contender. It was discovered in 1949 near the
Mongolia-China border, in a Scythian tomb that had been flooded and frozen since
about 2500 BCE. It's magnificent and it's mind-expanding. It's been a long time
since something has created in me such a reverent sense of gaga-hood and wowage.

Although older than old, it's anything but primitive. Centuries, perhaps
millenia, of experimentation, learning, intelligence, craft, and effort
preceded its making. First our ancestors had to domesticate sheep, which,
I've learned, had to be selectively bred to become wooly rather than merely
hairy. Then came the invention of spinning and weaving. And dyeing, which is
a sophisticated and complicated art all of itself. Moreover, it's obvious that
the Pazyryk rug did not spring whole out of someone's brain --it's the climax
of a long artistic tradition. While some scholars detect Persian influences,
others think it wholly a creation of the steppes. The red dye, it's recently
been discovered, is Polish cochineal. How did the dye get to Mongolia?  I've
not read anything about the blue, but it looks like indigo, and if it is, the
process of getting wool to take indigo is extremely complicated.

The detail, though faded (fifty-five hundred years of refrigeration take
its toll) is worthy of the closest study: mounted horsemen, saddle blankets
and trappings, even the decorated manes of the horses, are rendered, knot by
knot, with great power.

And then there are the happy moose (or possibly elk, or some ungulate that I
don't know).

The rug now resides at the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg.  I intend to
visit it some day, but if the museum should want to put it out on permanent
loan to my living room, I would promise to treat it with the utmost respect and
appreciation.