Title: A Few Words About My Father
Date: October 21, 2019

Here's a memory from my youth. Let's say it's the early '50s. I'm a thoughtless,
self-absorbed adolescent, nominally studying at Erasmus Hall but in fact not
paying much mind to schoolwork. It's a Sunday dinner, so I've probably just come
home from playing several hours of schoolyard basketball or softball. We're at
the dining room table. Roast beef, possibly. There's a desultory conversation,
but then my father, Emanuel, savoring the loaded table, observes, right out of
left field I thought then, "I don't think we could eat better food." He paused.
"Perhaps fancier, but not better."

I didn't know what has prompted his observation but it made enough impact on
me that I retained it in memory for now these seventy years. I doubt that any
of the five of us dissented and I suspect that we continued to stuff ourselves
with meat and roasted potatoes and (inasmuch as it was the 50s), some sort of
soggy canned vegetable. But now, almost seven decades later, I think that I
have a better understanding of Dad's spontaneous celebration of the roast. I
also think that I know why that particular moment has stayed in my mind when so
much else has long since evaporated. After all, Dad was not given to gratuitous
compliments, certainly not to the food on the table. My father was neither a
gourmet nor a food critic (I've written about his eating habits elsewhere). I
now know that he wasn't commenting on the preparation or the presentation of the
food. He was savoring its inherent quality -- its grade A choiceness -- wait,
not just its quality so much as its abundance. But even more specifically, when
I think back, he was enjoying the knowledge that he was able to provide such a
bountiful dinner for his family.

To understand Dad's spontaneous overflow of emotion, it's necessary to recall
the facts of his own childhood. From what I've gleaned, the family in which he
grew up must have been among the poorest in America, the very bottom of the
economic ladder. His father worked in a factory -- which was just a large room
behind a storefront -- as a roller of cigars. It's well documented that in the
first part of the 20th century, cigar-rollers were one of the most exploited and
most underpaid of American workers. Grandpa's wage when Dad was growing up, he
told me, was $9 per week. The family, the six of them (the parents Isaiah and
Eta, the children Max, Sol, Mollie, and Manny) lived in a sixth floor cold water
walk-up flat -- that is, in an apartment in a tenement up six flights of stairs
(no elevators), water but no hot water. I don't know how many rooms in this
apartment but it didn't matter much, because, Dad said, they all spent their
time in the kitchen, which was the only room they could afford to heat.

Dad's mother, my grandmother Eta (she's Yetta in her naturalization papers)
didn't speak much English and I can only remember one conversation with her --
just a short while before she died in 1962 at age 89. It was a struggle for her
to speak my language but she managed to say two memorable sentences about her
early years in America. She said, with pride, "we was poor but we was clean,"
and (very relevant here) "we always had what to eat."  That sentence of hers
--"we always had what to eat"-- was said with almost exactly the same valence
as my father's "I don't think we could eat better food." For grandma, putting
food on the table for six individuals was achievement enough. It was a triumph.
Grandma didn't speak of her diet in the old country, but from her height (4'10")
and that of her husband Isaiah's (5'1"), I can guess that food was an issue and
that dearth was common. I also suspect that the sixth floor walk-up might have
been luxurious compared to the standard of living in StaryConstantin in Ukraine.

But to my father. He had no difficulty acknowledging the poverty of his early
years. I think, looking back, that he had some pleasure in knowing that he had
overcome the hardships of his youth. If he didn't have a jacket in the coldest
of winters, well, he had a sweater, and that was enough. I only remember one
complaint, and it wasn't about his family. During World War I, students in P.
S. 122 were lined up on the side of the room and were instructed to offer their
donations for the purchase of War Bonds. When they surrendered their dimes
or quarters, they were allowed to sit down.  But Dad was required to remain
standing because he didn't have even a nickel to donate. "Wasn't that a cruel
thing to do to a child," he said to me.

But poverty did not distort my father's personality. He was the precise opposite
of the stereotype of the upwardly mobile overachiever, grasping for more and
more.  He was actually rather contemptuous of such people. He said to me once,
"Anyone can make money if he makes it the whole business of his life to do
so." And I also remember an instance when I overheard a conversation among his
friends about how much their stocks had gained. After they left, my father
said, "When the stock market is going up, everyone's a genius." He himself
never had an extra dollar to invest in stocks. But enough is as good as a feast.

He was the person least interested in material goods that I have met in my
entire lifetime. He had no possessions and craved none. He was a real estate
lawyer in a world where clients squabbled over inches, but his opinion was
"Nobody owns anything. Maybe you can say you have a lifetime lease, but that's
all."

Here's another piece of wisdom that offered, and one from which I've profited. I
think I can quote this verbatim. "Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a
friend. And never be embarrassed to accept a favor from a friend. People like to
help each other."