Title: My Life with Telephones
Date: February 08, 2023

In the course of my lifetime, the telephone has gone from relatively rare
to ubiquitous, from wall to pocket, and from rotary dial to cell. From no
intelligence whatsoever to smart and then to very smart. Revolutionary changes.

When I was growing up in Flatbush, our family was prosperous enough to have a
telephone (not everyone did), but the device was only employed for local calls,
never for "long distance." Non-local calls were prohibitively expensive and were
only for deaths. To be called to the phone by long-distance was ominous.

Before the innovation of seven-digit dialing, we were Windsor 6-2077. Sometime
after WWII, our exchange was altered from WI 6 to GEdney 6. To me, this was an
early indication that the world was unstable and would be filled with ups and
downs. One day we were a Windsor, a royal house, and the next day we were a
Gedney, a brand of dill pickle.

Every telephone in existence looked exactly like this one.  The idea that they
would ever look otherwise was inconceivable.

For a month of so in the late 1950s, I had a job operating an old-fashioned
switchboard at the Sears warehouse on Utica Avenue -- definitely my most
satisfying telephone-related experience, lifetime. Ah that lovely click when the
plug fully entered its receptacle! A delight!  The one I sat at looked almost
exactly like this:

In my short time at the console, I became quite a proficient operator, only
cutting off important calls a handful of times. It's hard to believe that such
an antiquated-looking machine was still in use when I was a lad.

We must also recall the almost extinct telephone booth -- often out of order,
because someone wielded a crowbar to make off with nickels and dimes. And
smelly. Plus, one never had the right change when needing it most.  I do not
mourn the passing of the phone booth.

When we moved to Vermont in 1968, the Topsham Telephone Company had not yet
switched to seven digit dialing. Our home number was high-prestige 21, but we
were jealous of the family whose number was 9. Ours was a four-party line --
also a thing of the past. I wonder whether my grandchildren have ever heard the
phrase "party-line."  Or "rotary dial," for that matter.

When AT&T was deregulated and the market was thrown open to innovation, there
came a great explosion of telephone styles. Phones blossomed into many odd
colors and configurations. For a while, we owned one of these:

The Simpson phone was not my initiative but that of one of the younger members
of the family.

But more change was in the works. The prediction that there would be pocket
phones in the future seemed fantastical science fiction-y.  All phones had to
be connected with wires -- otherwise how could the sound get out of the wall and
into the handset. I scoffed.

Nowadays, everyone carries a cell phone. But it's not just a phone -- it's a
computer. It does everything -- perhaps too much. There is substance to the
frequently heard complaint that some individuals, especially young 'uns, relate
more readily to their cell than to the person sitting next to them. It's a
paradox: with more potential communication comes more loneliness. I myself must
admit that there's a fascination to the cell phone that is disarming.  I'm
trying not be allow myself to be addicted. But there is something wonderful
about a machine that lets you not only speak with but to actually see your
daughter, who is a thousand miles away. Not a trick that a rotary phone could
perform.

Not to be an alarmist or a Luddite, there's a serious downside to the cell.
It seems as though the machine  might be reorganizing youthful brains-- with
unknown consequences,

Scenes like this one have become scarily familiar:

Look up, children, look up! Please look up!