Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 2
Date: January 12, 2025

To begin my project of getting a fix on Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English, I attempted to read Professor Jeremy Braddock's Collecting as Modernist
Practice (Johns Hopkins, 2012).

My plan is to read these Cornell contributions to knowledge with as much empathy
and as little prejudice as I can muster.

Despite my good will, I got off to a bad start. The title of Braddock's book,
Collecting as Modernist Practice, struck me as dispiriting and uninviting. It's
an uncompromising coterie title that seems to say to me (and to every general
reader), "I don't care whether you read this book or not." And indeed the copy
that I borrowed from the university library had sat on the shelf unthumbed and
pristine for the twelve years since its publication. Perhaps it's the minuscule
typeface.

Collecting as Modernist Practice is not a page-turner. I found it rough
going, and I now confess that I read closely only the introduction and one
chapter -- and skimmed the rest.  Braddock studies the work of collecting and
anthologizing art and poetry in the modernist (mostly 1920s) period. The chapter
that I studied, The New Negro in the Field of Collections, was enlightening
and I was glad to have read it. Braddock is an indefatigable researcher.
Sentence after sentence is supported by extensive archival work and a plenty of
footnotes. I do wish that the author was as interested in the art and mystery
of literature as he is in literature's reception. Collecting as Modernist
Practice might be more at home in a department of sociology.

Braddock's prose style is awkward and forbidding. He loves long static sentences
with complex subjects and predicates that are sutured with weak verbs. In the
pages that I studied, I rarely encountered a metaphor or any other figure of
speech. Braddock is also partial to newly-coined polysyllabic abstractions that
he may think add heft to his thesis, but which in fact frustrate his readership:
minoritarian, identitarianism, anthologization, narrativizing. On the whole,
entirely too much suffixizationality.

I will always be grateful to Braddock for introducing me to Witter Bynner's 1917
Spectra hoax, of which I was ignorant, and especially for acquainting me with
the fabulous name of one of poets that Bynner invented: Anne Knish.

[January 13] Oksana Sartry writes:  "Vivian, I don't think that you're entirely
fair to Braddock. It's true that his prose style is imperfect, but remember that
the book is most likely his dissertation.  And for a diss. it's quite good. I
also think that when he writes about poetry, he's quite thoughtful and
insightful."

[January 13] Marianne Morrison, Ph. D. writes:  "Vivian, your too harsh about
Braddock's vocabulary. Those words that you poke fun at are the regular
vocabulary for people of his generation; your out of touch.

[January 14] Oksana Sartry replies: "I wonder why Johns Hopkins published this
diss. in its modernism series. Good diss., but immature book."

[January 17] Sean R. Fine writes:  "I'm interested in modernism, but frankly,
this book is absolutely unreadable. Whatever value it has is buried beneath tons
of jargon. Gives academia a bad name."