Title: Orts
Date: December 01, 2016

"Orts" is a rare but tasty word. Orts are the bits of bones, gristle, stems,
skins, pits and other inedibles that are left on the plate after one finishes
eating -- the stuff that is scraped directly into the garbage can. Orts are to
be distinguished from "leftovers" which are the uneaten remains of the meal that
are carefully sequestered for tomorrow's breakfast. Leftovers good, orts bad.

Shakespeare uses "orts" twice in the plays, both times metaphorically. The first
instance is in Julius Caesar, when Anthony tells Octavius how little he values
his colleague Lepidus. According to Anthony, Lepidus is "A barren-spirited
fellow; one that feeds/ On abjects, orts and imitations." In this instance, orts
seems to be prompted by the word "feed." A second appearance of the word orts
is in Troilus and Cressida. Troilus has discovered that his beloved Cressida
has been playing at fast and loose with Diomedes: "The bonds of heaven are
slipp'd, dissolved, and loosed/ And with another knot, five-finger-tied,/ The
fractions of her faith, orts of her love,/ The fragments, scraps, the bits and
greasy relics/ Of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed." It's a strong
speech and "orts of her love" is a powerful phrase, though rather obscure
nowadays to audiences for whom the "ort" is a mystery --which certainly includes
contemporary audiences.

Whether Shakespeare's first audiences would have required a footnote for orts
I do not know. It was never a frequently used word, though the OED attests its
presence in the language from 1440 to 1880. I don't know of any recent usages,
but once, when I was at lunch with a group of professional Shakespeareans, I
asked at the close of the meal, "What do we do with the orts" -- everyone at the
table knew exactly what I meant. Rather a specialized audience, however.

Orts should not be confused with Oorts. The Oort cloud is the presumed boundary
of the solar system, way out there, ten times further than Neptune, where the
comets are thought to reside until they are dislodged from their proper home
and come hurtling toward the inner planets. Orts and Oorts are both leftovers,
in the sense that they are the remains of an original creation, in the one
case chicken pot pie and in the other the universe. Orts are much smaller but
more palpable than Oorts. Makes a guy wonder what could possibly be denoted by
ooorts? Or oooorts?