Title: Another Crack at Moby Dick
Date: February 16, 2009

I read this great so-called classic of American literature once in the '50s and
twice in the '60s and I just didn't get it.  I've now re-read it and, after
forty-something years of seasoning and experience, I'm still a dissenter. Moby
Dick is like opera or ballet -- it's so highly stylized that either you buy into
it or you don't, and I don't. To me, Melville is a quite ordinary GrubStreet
quill-driver whose every sentence screams at the very top of its lungs, "Look
at me, I'm Shakespearean."  I resent Melville's attempt to draft using WS as
puller. Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between
me and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between me
and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the thinnest plot in the history of
800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds whale, and (last ten pages) whale
wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make
them laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first
two of these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby
Dick but I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them
wait" part.  Totally.

Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them
laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first two of
these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but
I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them wait"
part.  Totally.