Title: Sursum Corda;  Brain Surgery
Date: February 08, 2009

Last night I awoke from troubled sleep with a mysterious and
inexplicable Latin phrase drumming on my agitated brain. As best I can
remember the dream, I had taken a razor to an essay I was writing and had
cut out the two words--and I mean "cut out" as in scissored, not merely
deleted--"sursum corda."  And then there I was with a slip of paper on
which the two words were inscribed -- andnow comes the nightmare part--I
couldn't translate the damn phrase. I went so far (still in the dream!)
as to hypothesize a past participle "*sursus" of the verb "surgere" (to
rise)--although, as everyone knows, the proper form would be "surrectus"--but
I still couldn't parse the phrase (*"sursum" or "risen", would be a singular,
"corda," "hearts," a plural). I forced myself out of sleep, distressed that
I couldn't make sense out of what my dreamatorium was screaming was an
important phrase. So there I was in the middle of the night, checking the
Latin dictionary to discover that "sursum corda" is a versicle in the Roman
mass generally translated "lift up your hearts," but, inasmuch as "sursum,"
I can now attest, is not a participle but an adverb, might more properly come
into English as something like "upward your hearts." OK, now I understand
the phrase, but why in the living bejeesus was I a) dreaming in Latin, b)
dreaming a part of a mass, and c) slicing the phrase out of some papers of my
own composition?

Enough of that. Back to bed, back to sleep and then, holy moly, another weird
dream. No more Latin, at least, but now I'm being held responsible for the low
rate of pollination of apple trees. Whose apple trees?  I can't say.  And
what is the remedy. Brain surgery -- and on my brain. The surgeon announces
to me (somehow we're in a very official looking operating room) that "we're
going to remove the smallest bone in the human body, which is in the hinge to
the top of your head."He takes his scalpel, cuts through my hinge, and flips
opens my skull. Inside the dome (somehow I can observe the interior) right
where my brain should be, is a heap of glowing stuff that looks like orange
Jell-o.

OK, that's enough. Time to wake up once again.

Unanswered questions. a) why am I responsible for the fruiting of apples? 
Blame the lazy bees, for goodness sake. b) Who says the smallest bone in the
body is this imaginary hinge?  The smallest bone is in the inner ear--the
stirpes, I think. c)  what's with the Jell-o? Just because I couldn't translate
"sursum corda," must it therefore follow that my brain is gelatinous?  Some
of your most intelligent Wall Street investors and bank presidents couldn't
translate sursum corda, and they must be the most accomplished people we have,
at least to judge by their annual bonuses.

On the whole, I think that both of these dreams put me in somewhat of a
bad light. Nevertheless, I'm impressed that my unconscious is so gosh-darned
creative. Let's face it - it's a ton more imaginative than my daytime self,
which doesn't much concern itself with either the Latin mass or the pollination
rates of mali domesticae.