Title: Songs My Mother Sang
Date: July 08, 2011

My mother had a pretty fair soprano and as a young adult performed in amateur
musicals. She sang in that high, quavering style that I associate with artists
of the 1920s and 1930s, such as Ruth Etting ("America's Radio Sweetheart").
I remember that sometimes, when she wasn't busy putting the laundry through
the wringer or scrubbing the sink or dusting under the beds, she'd sit at
the old Hardman piano and sing the songs of her youth. She sang tin pan alley
songs, Gilbert and Sullivan ballads, so-called "Negro spirituals," and
also what I now know to be Victorian parlor songs. Her taste was formed in
the earlier part of the century (she was born in 1905) and had as far as I can
tell ceased to change after about 1935 with the arrival of my older brother and
diapers. My mother sang, for example, 1919's "Look for the Silver Lining": "A
heart, full of joy and gladness,/ Will always banish sadness and strife./So
always look for the silver lining,/ And try to find the sunny side of life."
She sang "I've been Working on the Railroad" (first published in 1894) with the
refrain "Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/ Someone's in the kitchen I know/
Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/Strummin' on the old banjo."  Neither
she nor I knew that "Dinah" was a generic name for a female slave, nor did we
speculate about what the heck was going on in that kitchen. She sang "Oh, the
old gray mare, she ain't what she used to be,/Many long years ago."  She sang
a version of what I can now identify as Ed Haley's 1894 hit, "The Fountain in
the Park", with the familiar lyric "While strolling in the park one day,/ In
the merry, merry month of May,/ I was taken by surprise/ by a pair of roguish
eyes..."  Sorry, but I can't remember the rest. She sang, "Shine on harvest
moon/ Up in the sky."  And also "Aint She Sweet." And "Home Sweet Home" ("Mid
pleasures and palaces though we may roam,/ Be it ever so humble, there's no
place like home").

But the song that stands most vividly in my memory was "Bill" from
Showboat. It's a lovely song, but I took it wrong. When my mother sang "I used
to think that I would discover/ The perfect lover some day," I  decided that
she was finding fault with my father, to whom I was most loyal. In my mind, my
father was noble and manly and intelligent, and I resented her singing about
"Bill, who's not the type at all/ You'd meet him on the street and never notice
him." The refrain was particularly painful to my seven-year-old self: "And I
can't explain,/ It's surely not his brain that makes me thrill./ I love him
because he's I don't know,/Because he's just my Bill."

I've since learned about fiction, and make-believe.  I can forgive her.