Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 5
Date: February 21, 2025

Elisha Cohn is an associate professor in Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English. Her Still Life, Suspended Development in the Victorian Novel (2016)
strikes me as two books in one. The first is quite lovely and filled with a
variety of splendid apercus. Cohn explores "lyric moments" in the novels
(confession: I read closely only the chapter on Thomas Hardy, the novelist
with whom I'm most familiar). She observes that Hardy (a poet as well as a
novelist) occasionally stops the progress of the story and allows his characters
to experience a moment of stasis or reflection or reverie that is more a
characteristic of lyric poetry than prose. I was much impressed by her analyses
of these moments -- and wondered why I had failed to notice such events --
or non-events -- myself. So criticism did what it's supposed to do -- widens
our understanding and appreciation of works of literature. I returned to the
Victorian novel armed with a new way of seeing. In fact, I'm now reading Little
Dorrit again for the express purpose of ascertaining whether a non-poet like
Dickens employs the same Still Life method. So far, not the case -- Dickens has
his own particular (and very successful) methods of expanding the consciousness
of his characters.

Ah, but then there's the other side of Cohn's book which attempts to develop
her useful insights within the slough of "theory." I half suspect that Cohn
felt obliged to make herself relevant or contemporary or tenure-worthy with
her tumble into this quicksand -- but perhaps I'm wrong. Perhaps she devoutly
believes in an apparatus that I find so incomprehensible and transient. In
this second part of the book, many famous names are invoked and admired; some
of these are very French and very revered; others  are merely professors at
American universities. Pages of text and footnotes defend against the horrid
possibility that Still Life might be "insufficiently theorized." And in these
speculative paragraphs Cohn discusses the deprivilegization of hierarchical
thought in favor of forms of lateralization in which individuations are
impersonal and singularities are pre-individual and which reterritorialize
along the lines of preexisting structures of power which re-consolidate into
static concepts, etc., etc. Which is when I either descend into a reverie (or
nightmare) of my own or hurl he book across the room.

[February 23  Audrey ap Howell writes:  "Vivian de St. Vrain, you've go it
wrong. The notion that there are poetic moments in the novels is well
established. The originality of this book lies in its theorizing of these
moments. You would know this if you had read carefully and not skimmed."

[February 24] J C Occhiogrosso writes: "This is a well-written book. Complicated
but not obscure."

[February 25]  Reuben Musgrave writes:  "I bet that Cohn is a delightful teacher
-- if she keeps to the events in the novels and stays away from bewildering
'theory.'"

[February 25] Savannah Courtermanche writes:  "All novelists pause the plot for
moments of reflection. Nothing new here."

[March 5]  Joy Jourgenson writes:  "This difficult monograph would have been
more useful as a series of short, insightful essays.  Too bad it had to be
expanded into a repetitive static book. Not the author's fault -- just the tune
of the times."

[March 6]  Eli Munn writes:  "Vivian, you're too old and out of it to have an
opinion worth anything. Shut it down and go back to your knitting."

[March 15] Rogers Roggen writes:  "I wonder, Vivian, how you can work yourself
up into such a snit about Cornell when the USA is going to hell in a handbasket.
Shouldn't you put your effort into more pressing matters."

[March 18] Homer vanNess writes:  "Reuben Musgrave, are you possibly the "Cousin
Rube" that I heard my parents mention? I know there's a Musgrave branch to my
family. (I found your name doing a random googlesearch). If you are Cousin Rube,
could you pm me at [email protected]. I'd love to hear from you. I think you
went to Cornell; so did I but much later."