Title: What We Watched in the Fifties:  Shane
Date: January 17, 2016

I didn't "get" Shane when I first saw it in 1953 when I just fourteen, and I
didn't ''get" it again last night when I watched it for the fourth or fifth
time, lifetime. It's a watchable film in my considered opinion but I have no
idea why various canon-creators have ranked it third or fourth among all 
Westerns. I revere Westerns but I can't revere Shane.

Not that there aren't some splendid moments. The first scene, when little
Joey with his kid-size rifle peers through the brush at a deer while, in the
distance, and through Joey's eyes, we see the figure of Shane a-horseback is an
excellent piece of film-making. We're going to see the whole movie through the
eyes of a child, the cinematography tells us. Moreover, it's going to be a film
about guns and Joey's love of guns and gunslingers. It's a very American story
shot through with the romance of weaponry, as is made clear right from the get-
go.

But it's downhill from there. The plot is minimal, classic, and familiar. A
Stranger Comes to Town. Even when I was a dewy youth I knew that Shane was going
to intervene in the struggle between the farmers and the ranchers. And that he
would resist as long as possible getting out his gun, and that his conversion to
violence would be cast as a Higher Moral Purpose. I had seen it all before, even
as an adolescent -- you can't negotiate with the bad guys; your weapon has to be
better than their weapon.

Van Heflin is the homesteader. He's a great, unappreciated actor, in my view.
But Alan Ladd is not credible as the mysterious stranger. First of all, he's
expressionless in face and monotonous in speech. Secondly, he lacks even a tad
of the charisma that's required of him. And thirdly, he's too small and skinny
for all the bareknuckle stuff. And Jean Arthur, I'm afraid, was simply too dowdy
to attract anyone's interest. The cast can't carry it off. Too much burden on
the child actor, Brandon de Wilde.

Why does Shane ride into the sunset at the conclusion of the story?  Why is
the most famous dialogue in the film, little Joey's plaintive "Shane, come
back. Come back, Shane?" There's really no good reason; nothing inside the
film compels his departure. Shane rides off because that's what the heroes of
Westerns do. The film is saturated with myth of the unconnected guy (well, he
does have his horse and his rifle) riding off, untrammeled by home, hearth, kids
and especially wives.

It's a powerful myth. My deep resistance to the film is that it is myth-driven
rather than character- or plot-driven. Shane doesn't create a myth; the myth
creates Shane.