Title: Shakespeare at Work: the Oxymoron
Date: June 18, 2020

The oxymoron, a figure of speech in which there is a sharp contradiction
between modifier and noun, has become a boon to humorists: "business ethics,"
"military intelligence," "pretty ugly," "jumbo shrimp," "Christian Science,"
"Utah Jazz."  But it's a figure that has a serious side as well. The oxymoron
expresses very well the contradictions inherent in literary and also human
life.  Life is a mingled yarn, is it not?  Both fair and foul, sometimes
in the same moment; sweet sorrow. Because Shakespeare tried to convey the
complexity of things, he employed oxymorons  throughout his career -- in simple
straightforward formulas at the early plays, but in his maturity in innovative
and sometimes startlingly beautiful ways.

The oxymoron has a long pedigree. It may go as far back as to a classical trope
called the adynaton, or collection of impossibilities. There is a treasure-trove
of oxymora in Alain of Lisle's thirteenth-century poem (or, more exactly,
prosimetron) De Planctu Naturae in which "amor" is described as "pax odio,
fraudique fides, spes juncta timor... mistus cum ratione furor,/ Naufragium
dulce, pondus leve (peace in hatred, faith in fraud, hope joined to fear,
madness mixed with reason, sweet shipwreck, light heaviness); there is a similar
passage, from the same century, in Guillaime de Lorris extremely popular Romaunt
of the Rose that begins "Love is a hateful peace and loving hate."

The oxymoron was given new life and vitality by Petrarch, whose sufferings for
young Laura famously caused him to freeze in summer and burn in winter. Many
sonneteers, continental and English, were indebted to Petrarch, among them
Thomas Watson, a poet who flourished in the years of Shakespeare's adolescence.
One of Watson's poems, which contained the lines "Love is a sour delight, a
sugared grief/ A living death, and ever-dying life" lay behind young Romeo's
modish and easily parodied oxymoron-rich rhetoric: "O brawling love, o loving
hate,/ O heavy lightness, serious vanity,/ Misshapen chaos of well-seeming
forms,/ Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health.... " Romeo was so
besotted by his own rhetoric that Juliet couldn't resist a joke at his expense:
"You kiss by the book." Romeo in 1595 owes a lot to Will in 1580.

Shakespeare knew that Romeo indulged too much of a good thing. Half a decade
later, in All's Well That Ends Well, Helena imagined her perjured promiscuous
lover Bertram at the French court dancing attendance on the ladies in a series
of tired oxymora: "his humble ambition, proud humility,/ His jarring concord,
and his discord dulcet,/ His faith, his sweet disaster."  In these lines,
Helana, and Shakespeare as well, repudiated fashionable oxymoronic couplings. On
the other hand, it is not love but hatred and anger that give rise to Timon's
oxymorons. For him, the loathed Athenians, those "smiling smooth detested
parasites, are "courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears."

In Hamlet, Claudius's insincere but brilliantly accomplished oxymoron          s
camouflage his sin. He ha                                                      s

as 'twere with a defeated joy,With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,With mirth
in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,In equal scale weighing delight and dole

taken Gertrude as his wife. The pairing of "auspicious" (the root meaning of
which is looking to the heavens to prognosticate by the flight of birds) with
"dropping" is especially wonderful.

Claudius's "delight and dole" were anticipated by Richard II's rhetorical
theatricality upon his return to England:

As a long-parted mother with her childPlays fondly with her tears and smiles in
meeting,So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth.

And there's the "wholesome iniquity" of the bawdy house in Pericles -- a play
in which calm comes in the form of "litigious peace."

In King Lear, a play about, among other subjects  a "precious unprized"
daughter, there is a submerged but stunning oxymoron when (in Edgar's words)
Gloucester is at last released from his suffering: "his flaw'd heart.../ 'Twixt
two extremes of passion, joy and grief,/ Burst smilingly." "Burst smilingly" is
a phrase which the younger Shakespeare could not reach; nor could any other poet
before or since.