Title: Wild Turkeys in My  Garden
Date: September 16, 2007

Even a decade ago, wild turkeys were an utmost rarity, and the sight of one in
the distance caused everyone to stop and peer. But each succeeding year, there
are more and more of them. They're everywhere -- on the roads, in the fields,
even under the apple trees, gorging themselves. Last week, a hen and a dozen
poults walked bold as brass right up onto our front lawn, ten feet from the
deck.  Didn't even bother to hasten away -- took their own sweet time wandering
off.

I don't believe that turkeys were native to Vermont, but it's well known
that since the reintroduction, they've expanded well beyond their former
range. They're adaptable and wily creatures.

The domestic turkey is legendarily stupid. Its brains have waned as its breasts
have waxed. The wild turkey, on the other hand, is smart, though given to
occasional lapses. Sometimes the hen leads her brood through the woven wire
fences. She knows the route, but one or two of the poults will find themselves
barricaded from the flock. They set up a wail. The flock comes to a nervous
halt. After a while, the spectator -- me -- can't endure the tension. I slowly
head over to see what I can do, trying not to alarm the lost fowl -- whereupon
the poults suddenly remember that they know how to fly. Unlike their domestic
cousins, they're strong fliers. They clear the fences with ease.

I now understand a few words of Turkeyish. The male gobble: "I am very large and
handsome; come mate with me."  The poult peep: "I'm lost.  Where is everyone."
The hen cluck: "Come along with me." The double cluck: "Everyone fly into the
trees."

Here's what worries me. Every year there are more and more turkeys. Even the
hunters can't keep up with the population explosion. Will the turkeys turn into
a rural version of pigeon? Overrun our gardens and fields?

Where are the fisher-cats, the foxes, the coyotes, the hawks?  Get to work,
guys. While turkeys are not exactly sitting ducks, they're still very tasty.