

================================================================================Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Blackboard Jungle
Date: January 01, 2006

In Blackboard Jungle, neither the author Evan Hunter, nor his lead character
Richard Dadier, who recently started to work at North Manual Trades High School,
can keep their eyes off teacher Lois Hammond's "full and rounded breasts."
She's so "busty" and "big-breasted" that every time she so much as shrugs her
shoulders, both Hunter and Dadier continually focus on the way that "her breasts
move." These remarkable bazooms are at some times concealed by a blouse that is
"thin nylon" and at other times by one that is "peekaboo." There are occasions
when the Hammond breasts are enhanced by "the delicate lace of her slip and the
slender straps of her brassiere," and other times when the "firm abundant cones
of her breasts [are] caught tight in a white cotton bra." But whether enhanced
or restrained, not only the "thrust of her brassiere," but even more so "the
obvious thrust of her breasts" are under constant scrutiny. After an inadvertent
sighting, Hunter and Dadier are able to report that one of these breasts (it
isn't specified whether the left or the right) is "a youthful breast, firm, with
a nipple large and erect."

It is dispiriting to recall that for high school students in the 1950s, this
romance-novel twaddle seemed like a breakthrough in the direction of realism.
But consider the context: in the novels that were read in Erasmus Hall English
classes, none of the heroines (Eppie, Rebecca and Rowena, Lucy Manette) had
any breasts at all, or at least, none that came to the attention of author
or reader. The Blackboard Jungle seemed to be frank, honest, down-to-earth,
and it was recognized in the schoolyard-and-drugstore culture of mid-century
adolescents as a "hot" book, and along with The Amboy Dukes and Forever Amber
was passed in cheap paperback editions from hand to sweaty hand. It reflected
a reality (bad language, sexual urgency, near-anarchic disorder, gratuitous
cruelty) far more present and immediate than did our 'official' reading.

Returning after all these years to Blackboard Jungle has been a sad revelation.
As a work of literature, it's piss-poor. The tough-guy prose aims to be hard-
boiled, but it's undercooked ("the boys in the class considered English a
senseless waste of time, a headless chicken, a blob without a goal"). The story
is padded with interminable didactic digressions, and many of its episodes are
either woefully overwrought or just simply meretricious -- Dadier's infant son,
for example, is stillborn for no earthly reason except to squeeze a sob from the
reader.

Nevertheless, and in spite of its amateurism, it's still a disturbing
book. Blackboard Jungle covers the first four months of Dadier's teaching
career: in the course of one melodramatic semester, he prevents the rape of a
fellow teacher, he's attacked and beaten on the street by a gang of students,
and he's slashed in a knife-fight in his own classroom. So much violence in
so short a period of time seems to be beyond belief. Does it accord with the
facts?  Wasn't it the case that the local bully-boy, Herbie W.,, attacked
Mr. Proshan, our seventh-grade social studies teacher and wrestled him to
the classroom floor?  Didn't the gang leader Runzi Marfeta terrorize the
schoolyard? Weren't there fights outside the Bedford Arch almost daily? Wasn't
it the case that every tenth student wore a "garrison belt," the three-inch
buckle of which was ground razor-sharp, just in case? It was the heyday of
"juvenile delinquents" and zip-guns and gravity knives and gang fights, and in
many of my classrooms the out-of-control ambience was established and sustained
by the psychopaths and sociopaths among whom I was educated. And isn't it also
the case that Blackboard Jungle doesn't even tell the whole truth but is a
sanitized version of real life? There's not a single mention of drunkenness,
of heroin and other widely-used drugs, of accidental pregnancy and illegal
abortion, or even of what used to be called, euphemistically, "broken homes."

Almost entirely anti-nostalgic, the novel did nevertheless provoke an occasional
smile: Delaney cards, "official class," "daddy-o," street corner harmonizers.
There's also one very brilliant comic touch in Blackboard Jungle. At North
Manual Trades High School, there's a men's teacher's lounge in which Richard
Dadier seems to pass a lot of his time, smoking. In the lounge is a couch, and
on the couch is a man -- a teacher -- lying prone, his face concealed. He's
asleep at the beginning of the novel, and he's still asleep at the end; Dadier
never sees his face and never learns who he is or what subject he's supposed
to be teaching. It's an exquisite metaphor for an exhausted and overwhelmed
educational establishment. Blackboard Jungle is a bad book, but Evan Hunter
earned his place in the story by bringing the scandal of high schools like North
Manual Trades to public attention.

Source: 2006/01/one_of_the_only

Title: One of the Only
Date: January 01, 2006

Call me prescriptive, but the all too common phrase "one of the only" offends
both ear and logic. What does it mean to say that "the $11 billion Crusader
artillery rocket system is one of the only weapons systems canceled by the Bush
administration?" If it's the "only" cancellation, say so. If it's "one of the
few," or even, one of "very few," why then, let's just go ahead and say that.
"One of the only" is an unpleasant and chilling redundancy -- it means no more
than "one of the one."  What's wrong with the word "only" that it needs help?
 Isn't "only" only enough?  Perhaps "only" is wearing out, and "onliest" --
now confined to rural or comic speech -- will someday replace it. Onliest has
the appearance of a superlative, but, logically speaking, "only" can't have a
superlative. But logic, as we know, doesn't always govern the path of language.
Redundancies and illogicalities abound, and awkward formulations such as "one of
the only" aren't all that very one-of-a-kind singly unique.

Source: 2006/01/the_replacement

Title: The Replacement Child:  Juliet
Date: January 06, 2006

In the narrowest definition, a "replacement child" is a being who is
intentionally conceived because an older sibling has recently died. Such
substitutes must endure the lifetime burden of competing with a lost and often
idealized child. Because it is almost impossible for them to please their
parents, they easily become confused and frustrated, or worse.

Here's a dry summary from a learned journal: "When bereaved parents give birth
to a child or children subsequent to a perinatal death, their constructions
of the family necessarily change. The subsequent child is thought to be at
risk of psychopathology (the replacement child syndrome) if parents have
not sufficiently grieved their losses."  "At risk of psychopathology" is a
hesitant, euphemistic formulation.

The term "replacement child" has also been defined more broadly: it may, for
example, refer to any child in a family that has lost one or more of its
offspring (rather than solely to one conceived as a direct consequence of a
death). In an even larger sense of the term, there are all kinds of 'symbolic'
replacements: one psychologist has gone so far as to suggest that any Jewish
child born after the European holocaust should be so considered. This idea seems
extreme.

In pre-industrial societies, replacement children received no particular notice
because infant deaths were so very commonplace. While there must be many
replacement children in traditional literature, the earliest who comes to mind
is Juliet in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, which was written in 1595.

Juliet's biological mother is aloof and distant, but she has a second and more
loving parent -- her nurse -- who does much of the actual work of mothering.
The nurse has lost her own daughter, Susan, and has become wet-nurse to Juliet.
"Susan and she -- God rest all Christian souls --/Were of an age. Well, Susan is
with God;/ She was too good for me." Clearly, Shakespeare suggests, Susan has
been idealized in her natural mother's mind. The Nurse has a replacement child
in Juliet, a state of being that goes far to explain the profound bond between
surrogate mother and surrogate daughter.

It is uncharacteristic of Shakespeare to discuss the infancy of his heroines,
nor can I think of any other pre-modern work that devotes so much space to
wet- nursing or to the trauma of weaning. Although he depicts in detail the
relationship between Juliet and her nurse, Shakespeare does not seem to
anticipate or foreshadow the interest that later centuries would take in the
replacement child syndrome. Instead, he focuses on Juliet's sexual alacrity.

The nurse tells a pertinent story (and leaves us with the impression that she
has told it many times before): when Juliet had just learned to walk, she fell
and "broke her brow"-- cut her forehead, as we would say. "And then my husband
--God be with his soul,/ He was a merry man--took up the child,/ 'Yea,' quoth
he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?/ Thou wilt fall backward when thou has more
wit,/ Wilt thou not, Jule?'  And by my holidame,/ The pretty wretch left crying
and said 'ay.'"  "Falling backward" is bawdy talk for a woman's posture in
sexual intercourse. Retelling her husband's tale, the Nurse dramatizes her
expectation that when Juliet comes of age, or "has more wit," she will be eager
to fall backward. To this proposition Juliet -- "the pretty wretch"-- says
'Ay.'  Juliet's personal psychology, Shakespeare seems to hint, formed itself
to gratify the suggestions of her surrogate mother.

The vigorous sexuality that might be appropriate for the nurse's natural
daughter Susan, who would have been a servant girl, has been transferred to the
bourgeois Juliet, who, if she had followed the example of her birth mother,
would have been properly restrained, repressed, and diffident. In effect, the
nurse contrives to live her own desires through her replacement child; the
result is Juliet's sexual impetuosity and subsequent death.

William Shakespeare was born in 1564, but an older sister Joan was baptized in
1558 and another, Margaret, in 1562. Both died in infancy. The future playwright
was therefore doubly a replacement child.

There's an additional complexity in the family drama because the infants he
replaced were female. How this oddity affected his own psychological development
is open to speculation. Perhaps because he was the oldest son in a family that
had lost two daughters, he was especially cherished. Or perhaps a boy who
replaced girls developed the empathy to create complex female characters in an
English drama that, until Juliet, had limited itself strictly to one-dimensional
stereotypes.

Source: 2006/01/phrasal_verbs_p

Title: Phrasal Verbs:  Put .*.
Date: January 13, 2006

The caprice of phrasal verbs (formerly called verb-adverb combinations) came
to my conscious attention sometime in the 1950s, when I first read Mansfield
Park. Fanny Price, the heroine, is lying on a couch; her sailor brother William
cries, "Poor Fanny!... how soon she is knocked up! Why, the sport is but just
begun. I hope we shall keep it up these two hours." I was shocked. In the P. S.
217 schoolyard where I learned my English, "knocked up" had one and only one
definition: made pregnant. There could be no doubt-- especially when the meaning
of knocked up was confirmed by such transparent sexual equivocations as "sport,"
and "keep it up these two hours."  When did proper Fanny Price find time to get
herself knocked up and how could I have been so inattentive a reader as not to
notice?  And where did Jane Austen learn schoolyard slang?

How in the world was I to know that in nineteenth-century England, "knocked up "
was an innocent phrasal verb that meant "tired.                                "

Phrasal verbs are treacherous. There's nothing in the basic definitions of
either "knock" or "up" that yields tired (or pregnant either, for that matter).

I was equally confused when Othello, quelling a disturbance, commanded the
contending parties to "Put up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them."
Inasmuch as I wasn't familiar with the phrasal verb, "put up," which means
"sheathe," I guessed that "put up" meant its exact opposite -- "brandish." "Put
up" is misleading: what's "up" about sheathe?

Just as there is nothing "up" about "up", there is nothing "out" about the
"out" in "put out." The meaning that I knew was the demotic one to which my
dictionary provides the formal "to indulge in promiscuous sexual intercourse." A
woman who puts out can get herself knocked up. But "put out" has other equally
unpredictable meanings: "make an effort," for one, and "annoyed" ("I was put
out by his use of verbs") for another. Moreover, a person who's put out, can
also be "put off," or dissuaded; "put on," or deceived; "put up," or lodged;
"put up with," or tolerated; "put down," or harshly criticized. A person can
be persuasive and "put across" a point, or be insane and be "put away" in an
institution, or can be frugal and "put by" money for a rainy day; or can be
gullible and "put upon."  Phrasal verbs are exceedingly nasty little critters,
and they must drive English language learners off their collective gourds.

Next week; same time, same station: got .*.

Source: 2006/01/my_campaign_for

Title: My Campaign for City Council
Date: January 16, 2006

My positions:

1)  NO DOGS WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal and near-fatal dog attacks,
dog bites, barking dogs, whining dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs annoying
citizens in parks and open space, the indulgence of dog owners. But what about
seeing-eye dogs? Slippery slope, that. Sorry, no dogs (except for purposes of
vivisection).

2)  NO CHRISTMAS LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce
resources. Global warming. Bad taste.

3)  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897? Death of
Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music in a motor vehicle that is audible
outside the vehicle.

4)  NO SMOKERS. Rationale: lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, bad
odors. Note: not "no smoking" -- "no smokers."  No going outside of city limits
to light up and then re-entering.

5)  NO IDLE CHATTER. Rationale: incontrovertible.

6)  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Rationale: I don't like tattoos. Why visible?  Whole-
body inspections would be intrusive.

7)  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale:
uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. I reject out of hand those
extremists who want to move the holiday to December 25. I'm a uniter, not a
divider.

My slogan:  Brilliant!  Charismatic!  Omniscient!  Hyperbolic!

Source: 2006/01/new_words

Title: Words New to Me
Date: January 16, 2006

There's a small mystery in Tolstoi's Sebastopol in 1855. An officer drives "a
telyezhka, which [says Tolstoi] stands halfway between a Jewish britchka, a
Russian travelling-cart, and a basket-wagon." How in the arithmetical world can
any object be "half-way" between three different kinds of wagons? A translation
problem, let's hope. Moreover, the word "telyezhka" doesn't appear in any
of my English dictionaries. An internet search located the not very precise
definition, "baggage cart." And what the heck is a "Jewish britchka?" In
nineteenth-century Russia, did horse-drawn vehicles have religion?  Not
according Gogol in Dead Souls, where a britchka is specifically located in
terms not of ethnicity, but of class; it's a "light spring-carriage of the
sort affected by bachelors, retired lieutenant-colonels, staff-captains,
and land- owners possessed of about a hundred souls." (Is it like or unlike
a troika or a drozhky?) "Telyezhka" and "britchka" made me realize that my
notions about horse-drawn vehicles are extremely hazy, and that when I read
pre-internal- combustion novels I pay too little attention to the distinctions
that separate Jaguars from jalopies; they're all coaches to me. But surely it
makes a difference whether our hero arrives in a fly ("a horse drawn public
coach") or a trap ("a light, often sporty, two or four wheeled carriage in
which passengers sit face-to face") or a landau ("a large four-wheeled covered
carriage"). Not to mention chaise, phaeton, cabriolet, sulky, surrey, curricle,
barouche, brougham, gig, hansom, buggy, victoria, four-wheeler, and dogcart.

Also in Tolstoi's Sebastopol; frequent references to "gabions," which are
"hollow cylinders of wicker or strap-iron like a basket without a bottom which
are filled with earth and used in building fortifications." If they have no
bottoms, how are they filled?

Other words new to me: from The Return of the Native, a number of lovely
dialect words from Thomas Hardy's county of Dorset: "nunnywatch," predicament;
"stunpoll," blockhead; "gallicrow," scarecrow; "kex," the dry, hollow stem of
a plant; "knap," the summit of a small hill; "vlankers," sparks; "huffle," a
gust of wind; "fess," lively; "withywind," bindweed; "scroff," firewood debris;
"scammish," clumsy; "twanky," complaining; and, most relevantly, "spring-van," a
van "resembling a large wooden box with an arched roof that opens from behind."

Source: 2006/01/sonia_green

Title: Sonia Green
Date: January 18, 2006

My daughter continues to urge me to write something autobiographical. To which I
reply, it’s all autobiographical. But since she wants hard news, not indirect
revelation, I offer this account of my grandmother, born Sonia Chafetz, later,
by marriage, Sonia Usilewski and finally, after a legal name change, Sonia
Green. She was born in 1884 somewhere in darkest White Russia (now called
Belarus). I have no idea exactly where, but I know that she was a distinctly
rural girl -- she loved to fish, to pick berries, to grow plants. Of her life
in the old country, I know almost nothing -– only that she was raised in a
cottage with a dirt floor and that the family brought the cow inside in the
winter to keep the place warm. I know that she didn’t have a proper bed,
and that at least for part of her childhood she slept on the mantle over the
fireplace, which sounds mighty precarious to me. She couldn’t have had much
in the way of formal education, but she did read and write Yiddish and still
understood Russian in her old age. I know this because in the late 1940s or
early 50s I would occasionally sit with her and listen to the broadcast of
debates at the United Nations (in those days there were subsequent rather than
simultaneous translations) and she would render the Russian to me, as best she
could in her halting English. She never did become fluent in the only language I
knew so our conversations were stilted and confined to utilitarian topics.

When she was young -- I’ve seen the pictures—she was dark, attractive, and
voluptuous. By the time I came to know her, when she was close to sixty, her
looks were long gone and she was disfigured by goitre and other diseases and
no doubt by the consequences of her many self-induced abortions. The family
story was that both she and Joseph were engaged to other people when they eloped
to America (my grandfather deserting from the Russian army, where he had been
drafted for the usual twenty-year term, and where his salary was a ruble every
other month). They arrived in New York in August of 1904 from Rotterdam. How
they found their way from Minsk to Rotterdam I was never told, but the Ellis
Island records report that they came through London.

My mother was born in June of the following year, or just about ten months
after her parents arrived in this country. My mother’s story was that at
first her parents had only one pair of shoes between them, so that Sonia had to
stay at home until Joseph returned from work. The family settled in Harlem; my
grandfather, who was urban and more sophisticated than Sonia, had been trained
as a pharmacist, but never found work in his field in the new world. I don’t
know what they did for a living (was he some sort of salesman?) except that for
a short time my grandparents owned a delicatessen at the corner of 4th and 10th
streets in Greenwich Village. I’ve gone to that corner many times and tried
imagine such a restaurant, but of course not a clue remains.

As far as I can guess, their marriage was uneasy. My grandfather was frequently
absent (my father once darkly hinted, “I don’t know whether it was other
women, or what”) and my grandmother frequently ill. My father also told me
that when he and mom married, he laid down a prohibition — it was in the days
when men made prohibitions -- that she wasn’t to act as intermediary between
Sonia and Joseph any longer.

I know that my mother had to leave school six weeks into the ninth grade to
care for her mother and two younger brothers. But that’s about all I was told
and there are no documents. I have a few memories: Sonia trying to teach me to
play fan-tan and five hundred rummy -– I was as bad then as I am now at card
games; Sonia planting in wooden Philadelphia cream-cheese boxes every orange or
grapefruit seed that came into her house, so that her tiny apartment had the
pleasant aroma of a hot-house; Sonia growing avocados in the winter but setting
them in my father’s garden (just around the corner from her third-floor
walk-up) in the summer. And I also remember her attempt to cure my father’s
sterile apple tree with an old-country remedy — rubbing the cut half of an
apple on the tree trunk in midwinter. I remember also stuffed cabbage, the
world's finest blintzes, and jars of apricot jam sealed with paraffin. In her
last years, Sonia lived with my parents; she had her own kitchen, a room that
had been remodeled from my former bedroom. She was weary of life and I suspect
that she died at least in part of malnutrition. I remember also that she owned a
pressed-glass ruby bowl that was always filled with hard candies. I was allowed
one candy per visit.

When Sonia died in 1971, she had no money and precious few possessions, but I
inherited the bowl. It was pretty, and I’m sorry to say that after a few years
I accidentally broke it. But it was easily replaced (it was in a popular pattern
and every second-hand store had the item for sale) and I bought one for about
$25.00. Some years afterward I broke the second one and bought another, but by
that time the price had gone up to $50.00. So, although my inheritance in cold
cash was a negative $75, I was left with grateful appreciation and many warm
memories.

Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Return of the Native
Date: January 24, 2006

In Thomas Hardy’s The Return of the Native (1878), Clym Yeobright and Eustacia
Vye are brimming with impetuous youthful lust. They meet at a deserted spot on
Egdon Heath -- a “vast tract of unenclosed wild” in southwestern England.
Here’s how Hardy describes their moment of passion:

“’My Eustacia.’

‘Clym dearest’

They remained long without a single utterance, for no language could reach the
level of their  condition: words were as the rusty implements of a bygone
barbarous epoch, and only to be occasionally tolerated.

‘I began to wonder why you did not come,’ said Yeobright when she had
withdrawn a little from his embrace.”

Instead of the eager hands and tongues that a modern novelist would supply,
Hardy substitutes a sentence about the inadequacies of language. Even so mild an
allusion to physical pleasure was shocking to Victorian moralists, who regularly
rebuked Hardy for ‘vulgarity.’ Hardy’s last and best novel, Jude the
Obscure, was derided as Jude the Obscene.

I myself had no idea that Hardy was a breaker of sexual taboos when I first read
The Return of the Native in 1955. During the fifty intervening years, I’ve
read almost every one of Hardy’s many books, some of them--Jude the Obscure in
particular—repeatedly and with great admiration. Why did I not revisit The
Return of the Native until this past week? The silly truth is that the novel
was required reading in English class, and inasmuch as I was an alienated and
unhappy high school student, I made it a point of honor to dislike assigned
books.

There’s also a second and more substantive reason:The Return of the Native
was truly disorienting for provincial city kids like myself simply because
so much of it turns on landscape. The novel is all about the way various
characters respond to Egdon Heath, a furze-covered “somber stretch of
rounds and hollows,” that is isolated, extensive, unchanging, brooding,
dotted with primeval pagan barrows, and populated by sheep, shepherds and
heath-croppers. To understand Hardy’s Wessex landscape,I would have had to
overcome two barriers: my appalling lack of imagination and my inexperience with
geography. Perhaps some of my classmates could visualize Egdon Heath. Many of
them came from families that owned automobiles, and had consequently voyaged
beyond city limits. They had looked upon an expanse of land larger than a
baseball field and upon feathered bipeds more exotic than the flocks of pigeons
that guanoed the steps of the Newkirk Avenue subway station.

Had I been less put off by unfamiliar scenery and less hostile to assigned
texts, I might have recognized that sparse Egdon and my crowded concrete
neighborhood had much in common. Both places were backwaters untouched by
modernity. Neither offered much in the way of education -– either individuals
who possessed any, or schools that were genuinely dedicated to providing it. My
territory, like Egdon Heath, was a place which anyone who happened to prosper,
even a little, speedily abandoned -- to the port city of Budmouth in Hardy’s
world, and to “the island,” that is, the new prosperous suburbs of Queens
and Nassau, in mine.

In the 1950s, I myself had only one big idea -- that there must be a world
elsewhere. Why then did I not sympathize with Eustacia Vye, whose sole and
only desire is to get herself away from Egdon?  She is as out of her element
treading aimlessly on the heath as I felt myself to be when I bicycled an
endless series of claustrophobic streets. More to the point, why didn’t I
identify with the reddleman Diggory Venn? Diggory lives alone in his spring-van
and wanders the heath selling reddle (a red dye used for marking sheep). If
I had been capable of reading imaginatively, I would have taken Diggory to
heart. He is Romanticism’s archetypical outsider and a character whom I
should or could have recognized as a fellow sufferer. I too was solitary,
introspective, and on a quest for knowledge, but these traits were not
understood –- as I understand them now -- as healthy questioning but instead
were stigmatized as psychological disability (“Why are you moping? Why is your
nose always in a book?”) An understanding of Diggory Venn might have lent
dignity and historical context to my private woes.

Even more to the point: there I was, awash with the imperious hormones of
adolescence, and yet unable to notice that, although reticent about gropings and
thrustings, The Return of the Native attaches enormous importance to sex. While
I was mesmerized by the superficiality of Blackboard Jungle and suchlike novels,
I somehow failed to observe that Thomas Hardy was very very serious about love
and lust, loyalty and betrayal, passion and jealousy — and that The Return of
the Native challenges its readers to acknowledge that sexuality was as dangerous
as it was redemptive. Was there a more important lesson for me to have learned?
Did my sixteen-year-old self catch the least glimmer of it? Not the slightest.

Source: 2006/01/polite_conversa

Title: "Nature to Advantage Dress'd": Polite Conversation in the P.S.217 Schoolyard, c. 1955
Date: January 28, 2006

Sheldon: Hey, look what the cat dragged in. Arnie: Well as I live and breathe.
Sheldon: You know what?  Arnie: What. Sheldon: That's what. Mel: Big shot.
Sheldon: Who died and made you king?  Mel: Ask a stupid question and get a
stupid answer. Sheldon: Where were you when the brains were passed out? 
Arnie: Yeah, eat this. Sheldon: You wouldn’t know your ass from a hole in the
ground. Mel: So what. Arnie: You’re so full of shit it’s coming out of your
ears. Sheldon: Takes one to know one. Arnie: You know what's a good match? 
Mel: What? Arnie: Your face and my ass. Mel: When you're finished, you can take
the spoon out of my ass. Sheldon: Come again?  Are you cracked? Mel: Eat me.
Arnie: You and what army?  Sheldon: Ain’t that the limit?  Mel:  Hey,
honey, shake it don’t break it. Arnie: Hubba hubba, ding ding.  Sheldon: What
a pair! Arnie: Built like a brick shithouse. Mel: You got the money, honey, I
got the time.  Sheldon: Don’t mean maybe. Arnie:  All talk and no action.
Mel:  Any more at home like you?  Sheldon: She can put her shoes under my
bed anytime. Arnie: Hard work but somebody’s got to do it. Mel: Saving it
for the worms?  Sheldon: Well, back to the salt mines. Arnie: Another day,
another dollar. Sheldon: That ain’t hay. Mel: Long day, no. Arnie: We were
just talking about you. Sheldon: that’s what she said. Arnie: Well, that’s
that. Mel: I don’t bust my hump for anyone anymore. Arnie: Couldn’t care
less. Sheldon: If you don’t like it, lump it. Mel:  Who cut the cheese?
Arnie:  Another county heard from. Mel: Do me a favor. Drop dead. Sheldon: I'm
feeling bright eyed and bushy tailed. Mel: Have a coffin nail? Arnie: Don't mind
if I do. Mel: I’ve been smoking all my life and I ain’t dead yet. Arnie: I
could eat a horse. Mel: He’d lose his head if it wasn’t tied on. Sheldon: He
has as much chance as a snowball in hell. Arnie:  He’s pissing against the
wind. Sheldon: Just a spit in the ocean. Arnie: Well, doesn’t that beat the
band. Mel: Be my guest. Arnie:  Can you beat that? Sheldon: Can’t complain.
Arnie:  Doesn’t time fly when you’re having fun. Sheldon: Who pulled your
chain?  Arnie: Yeah, clear as mud. Mel: You haven’t got the brains you were
born with. Arnie: Cool it. Sheldon: Heads I win, tails you lose. Arnie: Cross my
heart and hope to die. Sheldon: It’s curtains. Arnie: Do it, or else. Sheldon:
Does a bear shit in the woods? Arnie: That and a nickel will get you on the
subway. Sheldon: Close but no cigar. Mel: You know what time it is? Half past
a cow’s ass. Arnie: Same to you. Sheldon: What a crock! Arnie: Your mother
goes down for wooden nickels. Sheldon: Your mother! Arnie: Age before beauty.
Sheldon: All dressed up and nowhere to go. Mel: Doozie pots. Arnie: You know
what. Sheldon: What?  Arnie: That's what.

Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in_2

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Caine Mutiny
Date: January 29, 2006

In 1951, Herman Wouk won a Pulitzer prize for The Caine Mutiny. The novel
itself was a giant best-seller and along with it came the movie with Humphrey
Bogart and also a Broadway play. It was a big 1950s literary event.

It's almost exactly fifty years since I last read the book, and it's obvious
why it was such a triumph. The Caine Mutiny is a first-rate popular novel:
it’s long but fast-paced, clearly written, literate, suspenseful, timely,
and patriotic. The characters are carefully differentiated (although they veer
toward stereotypes). It’s memorable. Parts of it were as vivid as if I had
read them five months rather than five decades ago. I imagine that anyone
who read the book, no matter how long ago, will remember “the strawberry
incident,” “old yellowstain” and especially Captain Queeg and the two
little steel balls that he rolls in his hand when he is under stress.

The Caine Mutiny is not a novel that requires sophisticated exegesis. Wouk
is heavy-handed; he has a few points to inculcate, and he doesn’t allow
his readers much wiggle room. Perhaps the lack of ambiguity accounts for the
novel's popularity. While the The Caine Mutiny raises important questions about
war and authority, it resolves them too easily. Wouk lays on the patriotism
with a trowel. Although his navy is a nasty, inefficient place, individuals
(at least American individuals) regularly rise above their institutions. Wouk
preserves the optimism about war that Tolstoy lost in the Caucasus.

The main action of the novel turns on the mutiny and on the subsequent court-
martial. There’s also an engaging secondary story that could have been
extracted from a novel by John Marquand. Willis Seward Keith is an upper-class
Princetonian whose mother opposes his romance with Marie Minotti. Marie is
Italian, Roman Catholic, working-class, unschooled, and a night-club chanteuse
to boot, and she may been to bed both with her (gasp!) Jewish agent and with
her (horrors!) saxophonist. Is it possible that Willie can free himself from
maternal authority and marry her? In the Marquand universe, he would jilt Marie,
marry Constantia de Vere Buff-Orpington of the Newport Buff-Orpingtons, and
live a respectable bland country-club (and sexless) existence. But Marquand was
a proper Bostonian born in the nineteenth century, while Wouk was the son of
Jewish immigrants who was born in the twentieth. At first, Willie Keith bows to
his mother and puts an end to his romance, but Wouk rescues him. When the U. S.
S. Caine is kamikazeed, and Keith thinks he’s going to die, he realizes that
he’s made a big mistake. He survives, writes a long, eloquent proposal of
marriage, and in the very last pages of the novel seems to have persuaded Marie
to come aboard. She's amenable and he's euphoric, but whether or not Willie and
Marie can make the marriage work is left very much in doubt.

Is it mere coincidence that my two favorite novels during adolescence were
The Caine Mutiny and Mutiny on the Bounty?  If it's not coincidental but
meaningful, what ever happened to the incipient, budding mutinous spirit?

Source: 2006/01/edward_dmytryks

Title: Edward Dmytryk's The Caine Mutiny (1954)
Date: January 31, 2006

In my experience, film memories are generally sharper than book memories. Film
images crowd out the words. An exception is The Caine Mutiny. I remembered
the novel very well, and I was astonished that the film version, which I saw
last night and must have seen in 1954 or thereabouts, had almost completely
evaporated from my increasingly porous mind. I thought that I remembered
something in black-and-white, but this film is in very bright colors.

Perhaps my memory faded because the movie can't hold a candle to the novel.

Some of my many reservations: a) the actors are just too darn old. The novel
is about young men, dislocated in early maturity, coming to terms with harsh new
experiences. But the sailors who are supposed to be in their early twenties were
played by Van Johnson (38), Fred MacMurray (46), and Jose Ferrer (45). Captain
Queeg, who should be about thirty years old, was Humphrey Bogart, who was 55
and looked it, and who had, in fact, been wounded in World War I. The casting
completely compromises the story and skews naive into conspiratorial. Robert
Francis, who played Willis Seward Keith, was in fact twenty-four;  because
he's so much younger than his shipmates, he looks more like their mascot than
their contemporary. B) the romance between Keith and May Wynn (Marie Minotti in
the novel), which is marginal or decorative rather than intrinsic in the novel,
occupies far too much time in the film, and considerably dilutes the tension. C)
the ship model that’s used in the typhoon scene was ludicrously inadequate.
D) the ethnic tensions that are a source of complexity in the novel are elided:
May Wynn is no longer an Italian Catholic, so it’s impossible to understand
exactly why Keith vacillates about marrying her; Barney Greenwald (the defense
lawyer) is no longer Jewish. Simpler, in this case, is not better.

It seems that the U. S. Navy wouldn’t cooperate with the project until the
writers made certain changes in the script. It would be fascinating to learn
how much of the film was censored, and for what reasons.

Source: 2006/02/an_overheard_co

Title: An Overheard Conversation
Date: February 03, 2006

I was at Peet's Coffee in Alameda, California this morning, drinking hot
chocolate and reading Lord of the Flies. There were three retired guys a couple
of tables away, chatting. I overheard the following story:

"He was a lawyer for an intellectual property firm--a big-time litigator. He met
this woman and fell in love with her. She wasn't at all interested. She owned a
window-washing company. He quit his job and went to work as a window washer so
that he could be close to her."

That's as much as I heard, but I would have liked to know what happened next.
It's possible that the lawyer's perseverance was rewarded. The window-washer
lady came to understand that he loved her so much that he was willing to give up
his career to follow her. Eventually, she relented, married him, and together
they developed the biggest window-washing company in San Francisco. But then
again, perhaps she realized that he wasn't really in love -- in fact, he was
one of those obsessive stalkers that regularly appear in horror movies. So she
was forced to escape by selling her company, taking a new name, and moving to
Pocatello. He continued to wash windows, and started to specialize in eighty-
story buildings. One day, he failed to hook his belt properly and fell. No one
ever knew if it was an accident or suicide. Meanwhile she was happy in Idaho,
where she married a mild-mannered lawyer.

Or --another thought -- he forgot all about her but found that he liked washing
windows more than corporate law. But one day, he was hooked outside a skyscraper
window, and looked inside and there she was at a meeting. And he fell in love
all over again.

February 13:  I now think it most likely that he forgot all about the lady,
moved to rural Connecticut, changed his name to Seymour Glass, and became a
recluse who lived a house with very clean windows.

Source: 2006/02/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Lord of the Flies
Date: February 06, 2006

In my daughter's basement I found a dried-up, stained, pages-hanging-out 1959
paperback edition of William Golding's Lord of the Flies. On the cover:
"Copyright 1954." "Over 4,450,000 copies in print." "Sixty-second impression."
"Now Available For Students And Teachers: the Casebook Edition  containing
the full text of the novel, critical essays, notes, and bibliography." Lord of
the Flies leaped into public prominence in the mid-1950s and quickly became a
classroom staple. A quick googling found half a dozen websites designed to help
high school students generate reports on the novel's "symbolism," etc.

I didn't like Lord of the Flies when I read it back then and it's become less
likable-- and less worthy of respect-- over the last half-century. It's a
variation on Robinson Crusoe, except that this time a score of boys land (how?
and not a one of them injured!!) on an uninhabited island in the Pacific. They
very quickly degenerate into savages, murder two of their own number, and are
hunting down the last boy who possesses a modicum of civility when a naval
officer (nauta ex machina?) arrives to take command. Lord of the Flies is a
dyspeptic, dystopian novel; it's also, according to the websites, a story of the
contest between civilization and barbarism and,-- guess what?-- it's barbarism
by a country mile.

Robinson Crusoe himself was no perfect model of psychological health, but
Defoe's story has been admired for centuries (it's the most reprinted novel in
history) at least in part because it asserts that a resourceful human being
can triumph over a bad situation. Crusoe reads his Bible, keeps a calendar and
a diary, domesticates goats, develops a working agricultural system, learns
pottery, carpentry and other crafts, and builds himself both a summer and a
winter domicile. Lord of the Flies, on the contrary, is entirely pessimistic
about human capabilities: its flat, book-less, unskilled characters devolve
rapidly into war-painted, violent tribesmen. Robinson Crusoe embodied Age of
Reason optimism; Lord of the Flies is a post-Nazi novel in which there is no
culture, government is nothing more than incipient dictatorship, and religion
deteriorates into cruel scapegoating.

Why was it imagined that Lord of the Flies had something of value to say about
about human nature? It's a sure thing that if Golding had written a novel
in which an isolated group of people behave like reborn Crusoes and work
cooperatively to tame the forest and create a communal utopia, he would have
been derided as a simpleton. No room in the Cold War inn or on the best-seller
lists or in high school curricula for optimism!

Golding arranges it so that the descent into barbarism appears to be not
circumstantial but inevitable. He banishes from his island women and therefore
any need for reciprocity in social institutions. (Violence without heterosexual
sex--just what's needed in the high school classroom!) Moreover, the boys who
land on the island are not a representative set of human beings: they are
English public school children who've already internalized poisonous notions of
hierarchy, hazing, power and class. When, at the outset, they choose a chief,
they're really selecting a head boy for whom lesser creatures will "fag." Of the
island's inhabitants, the only one with more brain than earwax is the physically
repulsive Piggy, while the only boy whose instincts are democratic is slow,
tongue-tied, and indecisive. Meanwhile, Jack, to whom Golding grants leadership
abilities, is a slick soulless demagogue. The author may appear to be impartial,
but in fact he's stacked the deck so that the emergence of a proto-fascism
appears "natural." Golding, both a student and a teacher in English public
schools, seems to think that adolescents of his own circle somehow represent
common humanity. His analysis of culture is therefore as shallow as a parking-
lot puddle. And because it's so shallow, the novel is a treasure-trove for the
kind of teaching where the identification of "symbols" substitutes for genuine
thought, or emotion, or aesthetic revelation. It's a convenient opportunity
-- a casebook -- for the kind of bad reading that has damaged generations of
students.

Golding's island abounds not in intelligence but in absurdities. Is it credible
that three or four pre-adolescent boys armed only with sharpened sticks could
a) confront a wild boar and b) actually bring down a mature sow, and that the
sow would lie still, or allow herself to be held to the ground while one of
the boys repeatedly stabs and eventually kills the animal with a penknife, and
c) that the same boys, using no other tools than the single penknife, could
quickly skin, butcher and behead the sow, and then d) cut and drive into the
ground a post stout enough on which to mount that head?  Or e) that a few boys
could dislodge and push a rock that is "as big as a tank." Or that f) there
could exist an uninhabited Pacific atoll so small that a group of boys could
systematically search every inch of it like beaters on a hunt, but yet so large
that, without experiencing much in the way of rain, it could have streams and
pools of fresh water and, in addition, g) an inexhaustible supply of wild pigs
(indigenous? feral?).

If Lord of the Flies is an allegory, then perhaps such howlers don't matter. Yet
even an allegory should not cause a reader to guffaw at inappropriate moments.

Source: 2006/02/in_the_latest_n

Title: Beethoven Manuscript;  Missing Shakespeare Play
Date: February 12, 2006

The latest New Yorker reports the discovery of a long-lost manuscript by
Beethoven. It's not a new piece, but an arrangement for piano, four hands, of
the composer’s “Grosse Fuge,” or “Great Fugue,” -- which is one of
the most exciting and challenging pieces of music in the known universe. The
manuscript was sold at Sotheby's in December to an unnamed buyer for $1.95
million. I know the Grosse Fuge very well in the form of a string quartet; I
would love to hear the four-hand piano version sometime soon.

The Beethoven discovery renews my hope that some day another long-lost item
will re-emerge -- the Shakespeare play that's been missing for just about four
hundred years.

In 1598, Francis Meres compiled a list of the plays of Shakespeare that were
known to him: he mentioned, among a dozen others, Shakespeare's "Loue Labors
lost, [and] his Loues labours wonne." No one gave much credence to Meres, who
was thought to have hallucinated the second play, until 1953, when a book by
Thomas Gataker called Certaine Sermons (1637) was rebound and two sheets of
paper covered with Elizabethan handwriting were discovered in the backing. The
papers were part of the ledger of an otherwise unknown stationer in Exeter and
listed the books that were in his stock in August, 1603. Among them: "marchant
of vennis," "taming of a shrew," "loves labor lost" and "loves labor won."  So
Meres was right all along; Shakespeare had in truth written a play called Love's
Labor's Won. And it had been published. But the play must have soon disappeared
because the diligent compilers of the great 1623 Folio either didn't know of it
or couldn't locate a copy.

It's possible that the play has vanished into oblivion, but it's also possible
that a copy lies in a closet, drawer or vault. The Beethoven fugue was found by
a librarian who was cleaning a cabinet at the Palmer Theological Seminary in
Wynnewood, Pennsylvania  -- how the manuscript found its way to that location
is anyone's guess. The Thomas Malory manuscript -- one of the most important
literary discoveries of the last century -- was lying unidentified in plain
sight on top of a safe in Winchester Cathedral. So it's not at all impossible
that a quarto of Love's Labor's Won still lurks somewhere, waiting.

There are some other Shakespeare items of interest (and no doubt of monetary
value) that might also resurface. There's the missing quarto zero (Q0) of The
First Part of King Henry the Fourth (only a few pages of which are known,
and then only because they were accidentally bound into a copy of a later
quarto); there's Cardenio (co-authored with John Fletcher), which was probably
Shakespeare's last effort; there might also be a fuller manuscript version of
Macbeth (the Folio play seems to have been deliberately shortened for provincial
performance).  Also of interest: the anonymous Hamlet that was written a
decade or so before Shakespeare's, and which the playwright used as the basis
of his revision. Only a single line of the earlier play has survived: the ghost
is known to have cried, as shrilly as a street-seller of oysters, "Hamlet,
revenge."

Source: 2006/02/why_an_old_huma

Title: Why an Old Humanist Sometimes Feels That the World Has Changed
Date: February 18, 2006

Here's the description of a project posted on a literary website by (I'm
guessing) a young Shakespeare scholar: "I want to create a comprehensive
XML schema for Shakespeare's plays, and then apply the schema in an online
prototype. The schema will conform to TEI standards where possible and
appropriate, and exceed them where necessary. Creating a DTD will not give us
the versatility we want, so we have moved to a schema instead."

"XML schema?"  "TEI standards?"  "DTD?"  What language are we speaking?

Source: 2006/02/reading_proust_

Title: Reading Proust to the Grandchildren
Date: February 18, 2006

We were in California tending the grandchildren (a girl, 6, and a boy, 4) while
"the daughter" and her husband were on a sun-and-sand vacation down in Baja. The
children are in the habit of coming into their parents'  bed when they have
trouble going to sleep. We're in the habit of reading aloud before putting out
the lights. At present, I'm reading Swann's Way. One night, the children, as is
their custom, came in to snuggle. After they settled down, I resumed reading:
"I was not quite Bergotte's only admirer; he was also the favorite writer of a
friend of my mother's, a very well read woman, while Dr. du Boulbon would keep
his patients waiting as he read Bergotte's most recent book; and it was from
his consulting room, and from a park near Combray, that some of the first seeds
of that predilection for Bergotte took flight...." The children fell almost
immediately to sleep; Proust's undiagrammable sentences were too much for them.

The next night, same scenario. We're in bed. The children came in to snuggle;
they thrashed about for a few moments, giggled, eventually settled down.
I picked up Monsieur Proust. "To Mme. Verdurin's great surprise, Swann
never abandoned them. He went to meet them wherever they were, sometimes in
restaurants in the outlying districts where no went went much yet, because it
was not the season, more often to the theater, which Mme. Verdurin liked very
much;  and because one day, at her house, she said in his presence that on
evenings when there were premieres, or galas, a pass would have been useful
to them, that it had inconvenienced them very much not to have one the day of
Gambetta's funeral...."  And then, the young lady looked at the young man, and
he looked at her, and without a word, the two of them rose from our bed and
padded back to their own room.

Literary criticism in its most elemental manifestation.

Source: 2006/02/tell_her_about_

Title: Alien Abductions and Other Irrationalities
Date: February 18, 2006

In Abducted:  How People Come to Believe They Were Abducted by Aliens (Harvard,
2005), Susan Clancy recounts interviews with fifty or so "abductees." Each
person's experience is unique, but the various stories can be melded into a
composite narrative. "I was having problems with anxiety and depression. I was
at Fenway Park with my buddies watching a game. The next thing I remember, I
was on Mission Hill and it was five in the morning. I was always interested in
science fiction. I read Communion; I saw E. T and Close Encounters. I went to a
hypnotist, and memories started flooding back. I started sobbing uncontrollably.
They were long and tall, with huge black eyes that went around their heads. I
remembered them fastening a device like a suction cup to my genitals to suck out
the sperm painfully. They inserted a foot-long tube into my nostril. I know it
happened because I get nosebleeds. My dad thinks it's a transmitter they put in
there.  They've programmed other memories to disappear. Until I experienced the
aliens, life was empty, meaningless. Now that I have my memories, I understand
everything. What happened to me was overwhelming. It was real. I can't explain--
I felt it. I was changed from the person that I was.  It was the most positive
event of my life. It helped me to see life as beautiful, as a gift."

Alien abductees may hold to false beliefs, but they have powerful faith. Clancy
reports that once, at a convention of abductees, she tried to talk about the
unreliability of anecdotal evidence, the fragility of memory, the nature of
the sleep-paralysis syndrome, the creation of false memories under hypnosis,
Occam's Razor (the employment of the most economical hypothesis to explain a
phenomenon), etc. According to Clancy, there was a long silence, and then one of
the participants said, "tell her about the metallic tube that came out of Jim's
nose, the one that went down the sink before you both could catch it."

Eventually Clancy brings herself to discuss the obvious parallel of abduction
to religion, which, she says, she is reluctant to do because she has "about a
thousand Irish Catholic relatives [she] doesn't want to offend." Nevertheless,
she concludes that "alien-abduction beliefs can be considered a type of
religious creed, based on faith, not facts." Kind to her extended family, Clancy
does pursue the argument to the next logical step: that ordinary, accepted
beliefs of supernatural intervention in human affairs are exactly as credible --
no more, no less -- as belief in macrocephalic waifs with black wraparound eyes
who stick needles into your navel to produce hybrid children.

She also reports that one of her informants, when challenged, responded, "I
trust my gut and my gut says aliens." Is there a better argument for listening
not to our guts but to our brains?

Source: 2006/02/reduplicatives_

Title: Reduplicatives
Date: February 22, 2006

Reduplicatives, sometimes called "echo words," or "echo phrases" are
formulations such as hobnob, pell-mell, herky-jerky, hoity-toity, itsy-bitsy,
niminy-piminy.

In English, there are two principal classes of reduplicatives. Category one
consists of rhymes such as hodge-podge, willy-nilly, helter-skelter, kowtow,
harum-scarum, jeepers-creepers, okey-dokey, heebie-jeebie, gang-bang, hocus-
pocus (reputed to derive from the words of the Latin mass:  hoc est corpus
meum);  the second category contains words that are formed by ablaut or vowel
shift, such as ping-pong, shilly-shally, zig-zag, bibble-babble, pitter-patter,
splish-splash, flim-flam.

There are also some lovely oddities that resist classification: dipsy-doodle,
topsy-turvey, hunky-dory, tilly-valley, and, at the outer limit, hullabaloo.

Of the hundreds (perhaps thousands) of reduplicatives, almost all are comprised
of one or two syllables, but there are occasional threes: higgledy-piggledy,
jiggery-pokery. To the best of my knowledge, there are no four-syllable
reduplicatives.

Many are diminutives or are dismissive: hanky-panky, namby-pamby, claptrap,
mumbo-jumbo.

The language continues to generate reduplicatives. Some now common
reduplicatives were unknown to my youth: Maui-wowie, boob-tube, creature-feature
(a horror movie), fender-bender, gender-bender, chick-flick, AC-DC, fag-hag,
chop-shop (a place where stolen cars are cut into parts), brain-drain, artsy-
fartsy.

But reduplicatives are as old as the language. Shakespeare, who was fond of
reduplicatives, used them not just for comic effect, but at critical dramatic
moments. Some well-known examples: the weird sisters in Macbeth will meet again
"When the hurly-burly's done,/ When the battle's lost and won." "Hurly-burly"
signals the sisters' contempt for human effort. In Hamlet, Claudius admits that
it was a mistake to bury Polonius in secret haste: "we have done but greenly/ In
hugger-mugger to inter him."  The Catholic Hotspur (in The First Part of King
Henry the Fourth) complains that the great pagan magician Glendower speaks "such
a deal of skimble-skamble stuff/ As puts me from my faith."  A less famous but
still wonderful reduplicative appears in All's Well That Ends Well, where the
braggart soldier Parolles argues in purple pentameters that his young master
Bertram should abandon his bride and go the wars:  "He wears his honor in a
box unseen,/ That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,/Spending his manly marrow
in her arms,/ Which should sustain the bound and high curvet/ Of Mar's fiery
steed."  The rare "kicky-wicky," which some derive from French quelque chose,
is brutally insulting.

Three men come into a restaurant: one is from Walla-Walla, one from Pago-Pago,
and one from Ryukyu. They order cous-cous, mahi-mahi, and a kiwi salad. They ask
the mu-mu clad waitress (who suffers from beri-beri) about the quality of the
food. In some versions of this edifying story, she replies, "So-so."  What else
might she have said?

Source: 2006/02/what_we_read_in_1-1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Catcher in the Rye
Date: February 22, 2006

J. D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye is an anti-bildungsroman -- a "novel of
education" without the least shred of moral, intellectual, or spiritual growth.
Holden Caulfield, the novel's naive yet jaded narrator, learns absolutely
nothing either about himself or about life. Unable to profit from his various
encounters, he dismisses almost everyone he meets as "phony." The incessant
drumming on that one particular adjective leads a reader to hope that Holden
will find authenticity somewhere in his horizon, but The Catcher in the Rye
is not a novel that rewards optimism. It concludes with a vision of Holden's
pre- pubescent sister Phoebe going "round and round" on a symbolic carousel --
going nowhere, it would seem -- and in a brief coda Holden himself has been
institutionalized and placed under the care of an unsympathetic psychoanalyst.
Nor does the whiff of Humbertism in the relation between Holden and young Phoebe
contribute any last-second learning or cheer.

Even in the 1950s, The Catcher in the Rye enjoyed a cadre of fiercely loyal
partisans who powerfully identified with Holden Caulfield. I didn't believe
then, and certainly don't believe now, that Holden Caulfield mirrored the
anguish of my own particular soul. I was not a true believer, and I was not
entranced by Holden. For me, the novel was nothing more than a better-than-
average coming-of-age story -- although a dispiriting one because Holden does
not mature but instead remains stranded in perpetual, painful adolescence.

A novel without hope, The Catcher in the Rye has become an inspiration for the
hopeless. In Los Angeles, in 1989, twenty-one-year-old Robert Bando shot and
killed a young actress whom he had been pestering with trinkets and messages. In
a nearby alley, police found a .357-caliber handgun, a bloody shirt, and a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye. Two years later, John Hinckley shot and crippled
James Brady and almost succeeded in assassinating Ronald Reagan. Hinckley had
fantasized that killing the president would impress the actress Jodie Foster,
whom he imagined that he was wooing. In his pocket he carried a well-read,
tattered paperback of -- you guessed it --The Catcher in the Rye. In 1980, on
Manhattan's West Side, Mark David Chapman, concealing his pistol under a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye, shot John Lennon five times at point blank. He had
inscribed his copy of the novel with the words "To Holden Caulfield from Holden
Caulfield" -- Chapman had tried to legally change his name to that of Salinger's
troubled narrator. From jail, the proud murderer issued an endorsement: "My wish
is for all of you to someday read The Catcher in the Rye." At his trial Chapman
asserted that he had killed Lennon because the singer had become "phony,"
and at his sentencing he read to the judge the section of the book in which
Holden tells his sister Phoebe that he imagined himself in a field of rye with
"thousands of little kids" whom he must prevent from falling off "the edge of
some crazy cliff."

The Catcher in the Rye still sells well (15,000,000 copies in print by 1996) and
has become a fixture in the high school and college classroom, where successive
generations of adolescents can calibrate their degree of angst against Holden's.
But increasingly, and paradoxically, attention has turned from the novel to
Salinger himself, who has not published anything since 1965 and, secluded in his
Cornish, New Hampshire retreat, has become the world's most notorious hermit
since St. Simeon Stylites mounted his pillar in sixth-century Antioch.

Although he is a hermit, Salinger is anything but a saint. In 1987, in a bizarre
echo of Holden-obsessed stalkers, Salinger, then sixty-eight years old, flew to
California and barged onto the set of the TV show Dynasty in search of one of
the series's starlets, Catherine Oxenberg, with whom he had apparently fallen
into long-distance electronic infatuation. He was "escorted" off the set.

Did Catherine Oxenberg have a precursor?  She did, indeed she did. Several, in
fact, including Joyce Maynard, described as "the Lolita of all Lolitas," who
was eighteen and a freshman at Yale in 1972 when Salinger, at the age of fifty-
three, initiated a romance by sending her a fan letter.

These and other even less savory details about Caulfield-Salinger's life can be
found in Paul Alexander's thin, amateurish biography Salinger (Los Angeles: 
Renaissance Books, 1999), which does not propose, although it might, that J. D.
has learned as little about life as his most famous character.

Source: 2006/02/naked_came_the_

Title: Naked Came the International Publishing Conglomerate
Date: February 24, 2006

When The Naked and the Dead was published in 1948, the word "naked" still had
shock value. Mailer's novel was followed by books with such titles as The Naked
Society, The Naked Ape and the moderately oxymoronic Naked Lunch.

It wasn't long before shock devolved into cliche. The publishing world has
now transformed itself, at least as far as book titles are concerned, into an
enormous, sprawling colony of nudists. Amazon lists over a thousand books in
English with "naked" in the title.

A reader interested in religion may choose from The Naked Christian, Naked
Buddha, Naked Buddhism, The Naked Soul, The Naked God, The Naked Church, Naked
Angels, Naked in the Promised Land and Praying Naked. The Naked Parish Priest
may imply more than is strictly proper and Buck-Naked Faith suggests that
ordinary nakedness is insufficient.

For the button-down corporate world, there's The Naked Corporation, The Naked
Consumer, The Naked Employee, The Naked Investor, Naked Imperialism, The Naked
Entrepreneur, Naked Marketing, Naked Imperialism, Naked Economics, The Naked
Capitalist, Naked in the Boardroom, The Naked Manager, The Naked Trader, Naked
at the Interview, The Naked Factory, and Work Naked.

There's hardly an area of interest that hasn't been touched by the advent of
naked titling. Politics?: The Naked Empire, Naked Liberty, Naked Justice,
The Naked Communist. Geographical?:  The Naked Tropics, Naked Sun, The
Naked Island, Naked Heartland, The Naked Mountain, The Naked Tree, Naked
Savages, The Naked Airport, Naked in Baghdad, Naked in Da Nang, Naked City,
The Naked Tourist, Naked Wanderlust, The Naked Jungle, Naked Germany, even 
Naked in Cyberspace, wherever that is. Social?: Naked Conversations, Naked
Bitch, The Naked Leader, The Naked Duke, The Naked Marquis, The Naked
Warrior, Naked Ambition, The Naked Roommate, Naked Conversations, The Naked
Crowd.  Gastronomical?: The Naked Chef, Naked Chocolate, Naked Fruit, Eat
Papayas Naked, The Naked Martini. Anatomical: The Naked Face, The Naked
Neuron, The Naked Chiropractor, The Naked Quack. Domestic: Naked Rooms, The
Naked Wall. Artistic?:  Naked Clay, Naked Vinyl, Writing Naked, The Naked
Cartoonist, Naked Poetry. Athletic?:  Naked Skydiving, The Naked Rower,
Swimming Naked, The Naked Runner, The Naked Hunter, The Naked Pilot, Naked
Weightlifting.

It's disappointing to find nothing in the arena of naked basketball, despite
Dennis Rodman's expressed desire to play his last professional game naked-- to
which the NBA commissioner is supposed to have responded, "it would definitely
be his last."

Other professions: The Naked Therapist, The Naked Detective, The Naked Bird
Watcher, The Naked Spy, The Naked Civil Servant, The Naked Counselor, The Naked
Anthropologist.

The field of dance has produced a series of related titles:  Dancing Naked
Under Palm Trees,  ...in the Mindfield, ..at the Edge of Dawn, ...in Front of
the Fridge, ...in the Material World, ...on the Floor, ...in the Sun. There's a
whole genre of books for people whose tastes are more specialized than mine. A
sample:  Naked Hairy Jocks.

Nearly Naked is refreshingly modest.

As might be expected, naked has its parodists. The faux-romance Naked Came the
Stranger was followed by Naked Came the Manatee and Naked Came the Sasquatch.
Naked and the Undead is bloody good, and Naked Brunch is, I think, delicious.
The most exquisite parody: Rita Rudner's Naked Beneath My Clothes. I'm staking
my claim to Naked Came the Nudist.

I was entirely wrong to jump to the conclusion that The Naked Mole Rat was a
parody; it's a serious study of Heterocephalus glaber by an academic zoologist.

Source: 2006/03/hoop_words

Title: Hoop Words
Date: March 01, 2006

Now that "March madness" is nearly upon us, it's appropriate to reflect on
basketball jargon, which is distinguished by its many colorful monosyllables:
hoops, hops, bigs, stuff, slam, jam, slash, dish, board, glass, dunk, pick,
screen, paint, lane, point, wing, trey, rim, post, trap, "D", roll, box, press,
tip, swish, bank, brick, feed, stroke, hole, "J", rock, range.

But down-home slang is not basketball's only linguistic register. Curiously,
there's a contrary tendency toward polysyllabic words of Greek and Latin
origin. Some teams, for example, are said to be "physical." "Physical" (from
Gr. physicos = nature) means, in basketballese, "rough" and does not imply that
the other team plays either an ethereal or spiritual game. Until recently, a
guard played on the "outside" and the center on the "inside"; nowadays they've
become "perimeter" (Gr.) and "interior" (L.) players.  A fast break has become
"transition offense." A player doesn't drive to the basket; he "penetrates." 
Players no longer jump; they "elevate"; they don't block a shot, they "reject"
it.

In an odd linguistic development, a point guard no longer passes the ball; he
"distributes" (Latin: distribuere, to allot) it. In its ordinary meaning, to
"distribute" a basketball would be to cut it into pieces like a loaf of bread
and give each teammate a slice. Only a few years ago, it was still possible
to "switch" from guarding one man in order to guard another; now players
"rotate."  "Rotate," derived from the Latin word for wheel, means "to turn on
an axis, to spin."  A defender who did not switch but rotated would pirouette,
and pirouetting is not an effective defensive strategy. (A better classical
equivalent for switch would be "revolve.")  Even sillier than rotate: "rotate
over" or "rotate around"-- a usage that evokes the grotesquerie of a big guy
in a tutu pirouetting across the baseline -- a vision that is all the more
picturesque now that traditional basketball shorts have been replaced by big ol'
bloomers.

March 5:  Last night I heard a TV announcer say that a seven-foot tall player
had "a lot of verticality."  If he fell to the floor, I suppose that he would
have "horizonality." March 27: Also, "convert" for score, as in, "they had a
transition opportunity  but failed to convert."

Source: 2006/03/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Lolita
Date: March 02, 2006

I know that I read Lolita sometime during my senior year in college, which was
the last year of the socially-constricted Eisenhower presidency. Nabokov was a
celebrity at Cornell and I remember attending a lecture in which he delivered a
hilarious destruction of Soviet realism. He was the first novelist whom I ever
saw with my own eyes (I had sat next to Tom Pynchon in a course in Eighteenth-
Century English literature every day for a semester, but although Pynchon had
published a story or two in Epoch, he was just another gangley guy and hardly
the artist--or the enigma--that he would soon become).

Lolita had been published in Paris in 1955, so it's just a bit more than fifty
years old, and therefore halfway to its centennial, when, it's often asserted,
it becomes possible to distinguish between works for the moment and works
for the ages. An interim report: Lolita is doing very very well.  It's as
impressive now as it was then -- but for different reasons. When I read the
novel In 1959, I was dazzled by its verbal surface: the allusions to Poe, to
Hamlet, to Joyce (whose Ulysses I had read closely even then). Of course I
missed much, especially because at that time I had read almost no continental
literature. But I loved being able to decipher some of the novel's playful
mysteries: that, for example, "Vivian Darkbloom" -- who is Clare Quilty's
accomplice in crime -- was an anagram for "Vladimir Nabokov" and that Lolita's
teachers "Miss Horn" and "Miss Cole" spoonerized an obscenity. It pleased me
immensely that Charlotte Haze ordered a mattress from "a firm located at 4640
Roosevelt Blvd., Philadelphia," because I had spent three dreadful summers
working in the Sears Roebuck warehouse on Utica Avenue, where I might have
composed an Anatomy of Boredom. I knew to whom "Brown, Dolores" alluded, and I
knew why she squatted outside the gates of the cloister. And then there were
Nabokov's extraordinary rhetorical displays. Had there ever been a novelist
who cared enough to write a sentence like "the least pressure would suffice to
set all paradise loose," where "least" balanced "loose," "paradise" balanced
"pressure," and "set" offset "suffice?"

I loved Lolita and I read all that I could find of Nabokov's early works and
then all the new ones as they appeared. But it's been a long time since I last
read the novel and the sexual abuse of children is no longer, if it ever was, a
matter for flippancy. I was worried that Lolita would be insensitive and dated.
But it's not so. It's still satirical, and it's still fun, but now it's less
comic than it is sad. Humbert is still clever, but he's clearly a madman, and
the murder of Quilty is the best apology that he can render to Lolita. Humbert
knows he's the blackest of villains, that he's robbed Lolita of her childhood,
that he lived in "a world of total evil," and that "even the most miserable of
family lives was better than the parody of incest, which... was all I could
offer the waif." The novel shocked Eisenhower America because it was thought to
be lurid -- but it's no more lurid than Oedipus. It's fully, designedly, and
beautifully tragic.

Source: 2006/03/annoying_locuti

Title: Annoying Locutions:  "Within"; "Beg the Question"
Date: March 10, 2006

Why in the living heck do they say that the Nuggets are "within" two points of
the Lakers?  "Within" means less than than the proclaimed margin -- 1.9 points
perhaps. Why not say that the Nuggets are two points behind? Or trailing by
two points?  But not -- goodness gracious -- "within."  It's a perpetually
annoying piece of basketball-announcer slang and a good reason to keep the TV
sound muted. Moreover, why, given everything that I know about language change
and about prescription versus description, does such an ugly locution fill me
with grievous indignation?

And by all that's holy, "beg the question" does not mean "raise the question"
or "leads to the question." "Beg the question" is a term in logic which means
that the conclusion is implicit in the premise. It's a form of circular
argumentation. Aristotle first defined petitio principii and his analysis
served until a dozen or score of years ago, when, for some reason, "beg" became
confused with "beget." Let's try to hold the line on this one-- we need all the
logic we can muster in these perilous times.

Source: 2006/03/life_versus_art

Title: Life versus Art
Date: March 13, 2006

According to A. M. Sperber and Eric Lax (Bogart [William Morrow, 1997] p. 474),
during the filming of Beat the Devil in 1954, legendary tough guy Humphrey
Bogart (Duke Mantee, Sam Spade, Phillip Marlowe) was beaten three consecutive
times in arm-wrestling by legendary limp-wrist Truman Capote.

Source: 2006/03/my_brush_with_g

Title: A Brush with Greatness
Date: March 13, 2006

I'm not generally given to boasting, but it's a fact: the great Don Newcombe
once spoke to me -- me! He asked me to refrain from conversing with him. This
noteworthy event occurred in 1949.

During summer vacation, it was the custom for neighborhood kids to arrive
at Ebbets Field early in the morning. The games didn't start until 1:30, so
we'd take a half a day's supply of salami sandwiches and stand outside the
players' entrance at 10:00 or so in the morning, hoping to catch sight of
Robinson, or Cox, or Furillo walking up the ramp to the clubhouse.  After
the stakeout, we'd watch a couple of hours of batting practice, and then some
fielding practice, and then there would be a long pause while the groundskeepers
spruced up the field, and then we'd listen to Gladys Gooding at the organ,
and at last, anticlimactically, we'd watch the actual game. I sometimes paid
the 60 cents for a seat in the bleachers, but just as often I was admitted
with one of the free tickets that were distributed by neighborhood fraternal
organizations -- the PAL (Police Athletic League) or the Sons of Italy or the
Sons of Norway. What a treat -- you could go to a Dodgers' game and at the same
time be Norwegian for a day!

One morning, there I was, loitering among a crowd of kids just as Big Don
arrived. He was huge. I can't remember exactly what I shouted to him, but it
was probably something like "Hey Don. Are you going to pitch today? How's the
arm?  Do you think you'll pinch-hit. Huh. Huh?" Newk turned and looked directly
at me and said, and I quote, verbatim, "Shut up, kid."  What a thrill!  I had
been noticed by the great man himself. It was a transcendent moment -- even more
exciting than the time when, sitting in the left field lower deck, I scrambled
for a home-run ball off the bat of third baseman Bobby Morgan (a ball that, to
my eternal regret, I later sold for five bucks. But hey, five dollars could take
you -- at 60 cents a ticket, two 5 cent subway fares, and another 5 cents for "a
big delicious glass of Nedick's tasty orange drink,/ It's cool refreshing flavor
you'll adore" -- to five or six games, one of which might be a double-header.)

How can I emphasize this sufficiently?:  Don Newcombe spoke directly,
personally, to me.

Here's another event of titanic importance: in the last innings of a game, when
the guards who policed the bleachers were too bored to pay attention, kids
would sneak down into the good seats. At Ebbets, the Dodgers' bullpen was along
the right-field foul line, so it was possible to sit just behind the relievers
and try to engage them in intimate conversation. One day I was involved in an
exciting unidirectional chat with Hal Gregg, then on the downside of his career
(he had won 18 games in 1945) when the frustrated reliever impatiently swung
himself around and said to me, and once again I quote absolutely verbatim, "What
are you, kid, a magpie?"

As long as I'm in full bragging mode, I should also boast that I once possessed,
on a treasured scrap of paper, the penciled autograph of Bob Ramazzotti, a
Dodger infielder, who, in 1949, batted .154 with one home run and three rbi's.

Let me also add that it was considered the utmost pinnacle of schoolyard wit to
sit in the front seats of the Ebbets Field upper deck and drizzle sticky orange
Nedick's upon the spectators beneath.

Source: 2006/03/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Naked and the Dead
Date: March 14, 2006

I had great hope that I would love to read The Naked and the Dead. Although
Norman Mailer is quite a few years older than I, he's a Brooklyn boy who became
a somebody. Mailer went to neighborhood schools, then on to Harvard and the
Army, and made a quite a splash. (As a matter of fact, he attended P. S. 161 in
Crown Heights, a school that we at P. S. 217 regularly trounced in the summer
softball league.)  But The Naked and the Dead was less fun than I had hoped. It
is 721 exhausting pages long. It has too many words, too many characters, too
much flashback, too much repetitive talk. It's not epic; it's just long.

The profusion of detail swallows an exemplary story: on a south Pacific island,
a platoon of soldiers is assigned to perform an impossible task. The platoon
suffers deaths, injuries, wounds, tensions, and a variety of psychic traumas,
even though, unknown to any of its members, by dumb luck and superior numbers,
the American forces have long since broken through the Japanese lines and the
battle for the island has been won.

The novel had a huge impact in 1948 and throughout the fifties and it started
Norman Mailer on his astonishing and perplexing career. It was much discussed
in the P. S. 217 schoolyard not only as a hot book (lots of talk about sex and
a superabundance of "fugs") but also as a scary account of life in the United
States military.  It certainly frightened me.

It's hard to believe that fifty years have gone by I last read The Naked and the
Dead. I still admire its ambition and I'm impressed that Mailer was just twenty-
five years old when it was published, but I'm deeply offended by the want of
economy, the lack of discipline, the narrow perspective, the philosophical
incoherence, the plot lapses, and especially by the reliance on shallow ethnic
stereotypes. I can't help thinking that, if Mailer had had patience and wisdom
and, most of all, restraint, The Naked and the Dead might have been not a seven-
hundred page monster but a two-hundred page masterpiece.

But I doubt that P. S. 161 put much emphasis on the virtue of restraint.  In
storytelling, Brooklyn guys choose hyperbole over litotes.

Source: 2006/03/no_ham_in_your_

Title: No Ham in Your Hamburger?  It's a Cranwich.
Date: March 17, 2006

The word "alcohol" originates in Arabic as "al-kuhul" (said to mean "tincture
of antimony") and comes into English through Old Spanish. "Alcoholic," as in
"possessing the qualities of alcohol," is an old word, but "alcoholic" does
not acquire the meaning "addicted to alcohol" until 1880. In recent years,
"holic", which had no independent existence, has become detached from its
word of origin and appears as an enclitic or suffix to produce such useful
coinages as "workaholic," "shopaholic," "chocoholic, ""sexaholic."  Holic
is now so well- established as an indicator of compulsive behavior that it's
quite permissible to take almost any noun, slap a holic onto it, and invent a
decipherable adjective. A vacationer, for example, could be a beachaholic, a
swimaholic, or a sandaholic.

A fate similar to that of alcoholic befell the word sandwich. Originally a town
in Kent, Sandwich was later the name of a culinary-minded Earl. "Sand" is self-
explanatory and "wich" designated a tract of salty land. Wich, like holic, has
set out on its own career path and has generated such apparently essential new
words as "bagelwich" and "croissantwich." A croissantwich consists of a quantity
of something or other between two slices of croissant. If a bagelwich is made of
bagel and a croissantwich of croissant, of what is a sandwich made? The obvious
answer: bread, which, by a quirk of language, is signified by the morpheme
"sand."

There's no precise linguistic term for words created by the addition of
holic and wich, but they are closely related to a group known as "cranberry
morphemes." (A morpheme is the smallest unit of sound that carries meaning.) Why
cranberry?  Compare the two words "blackberry" and "cranberry."  Blackberry
resolves into two free morphemes: black and berry. Cranberry, however, is a
horse of another color, because "cran" all by its lonesome has no meaning at
all. (It did, once upon a time; cranberries were eaten by cranes.) "Cran" is
therefore a "bound morpheme." Unlike the black in blackberry, which functions
quite well on its own, "cran" is "bound" because if it were free it would be
meaningless. Technically, a cranberry morpheme is a bound morpheme that exists
in only one lexeme. Workaholic is a variety of cranberry morpheme because, like
cran, holic cannot stand alone; but while cranberry is unique, words containing
holic and wich occur in numerous manifestations.

It's therefore the case that English does not have an adequate word for
workaholic, bagelwich and their proliferating analogues. To supply this need,
I nominate "cranwich" (a coinage that is less than minute old as this is
written and is therefore a neonate neologism). The definition: a "cranwich"
is a cranberry morpheme that has gone wild and no longer limits itself to a
single appearance (like cran), but proliferates (like holic) -- and is easily
proliferable.

A hamburger was originally from Hamburg. At some point, burger detached itself
from hamburger, went wild, and produced such cranwiches as cheeseburger,
baconburger, bocaburger, and gardenburger. Along with these new words comes a
rather paradoxical phenomenon. Just as the sand in sandwich now means bread, so
the ham in hamburger means beef. This linguistic oddity will some day be a thing
of the past: more and more, the word hamburger is being replaced by the less
amusing but more precise beefburger. (Still beyond the horizon: breadwich.) It's
impossible to say why the hamburger yielded burger while the frankfurter (from
Frankfort) failed to cranwich: why do we have chicken franks and tofu franks
rather than chickenfurters and tofufurters?

Other cranwiches of note: Dracula has produced blackula and chocula: "ula" seems
to mean something both frightening and funny (although not in the case of uvula.
A scary uvula would be a uvulula). Godzilla produced hogzilla and bridezilla,
coinages which might lead the cranwich-naive to conclude that the god in
godzilla means god, which it certainly does not. Marathon, the Greek word for
fennel, was also the name of the city where the Athenians defeated the Persians
in 490 BC and from which the messenger Phidippides ran twenty-six miles to bring
the good news home. "Thon" has now severed its relationship with marathon and,
as a suffix, has produced innumerable cranwiches such as as knit-a-thon, jog-a-
thon, dance-a-thon, blog-a-thon, and, believe it or not, masturbate-a-thon. The
"Mc" in McDonald's has not only generated "mcmansions" and "mcjobs," but has
also opened up the possibility that an inferior or sub-standard cranwich could
someday be called a mccranwich. A compendious display of mccranwiches would be a
mccranwichorama.

March 24.   We're in Washington D. C.  On a cab ride we passed the Watergate
complex, the presence of which reminded me that I'd failed to mention one of the
major cranwiches of the last decade. The "gate" in Watergate has become a suffix
that denotes a scandal, as in Korea-gate, Iran-gate, Plamegate or, my favorite
(I like odd rhymes), debate-gate. Debate-gate, now largely forgotten, occurred
during the 1980 presidential campaign, when the fatuous hypocrite and ex-Jesse
Helms speechwriter George Will, using a stolen Democratic briefing book, coached
Ronald Reagan for his debate with Jimmy Carter, then later went on TV to praise
Reagan's "thoroughbred performance."

Source: 2006/03/makamah

Title: William Merritt Chase;  Makamah Beach
Date: March 22, 2006

The American artist most dear to me is the impressionist William Merritt Chase
(1849-1916). Chase painted plein air scenes in Brooklyn's Prospect Park and
Coney Island and also produced a truly wonderful series of landscapes set in the
south fork of eastern Long Island. I knew nothing of these Shinnecock paintings
nor of Chase himself until one day in 1987 when I happened upon an exhibition
of his work in the National Gallery in Washington. Even though I was much
taken with the paintings, I was too frugal to buy the catalog. By virtue of
Amazon, I've at last located a copy (D. Scott Atkinson and Nicolai Cikovsky, Jr,
"William Merritt Chase, Summers at Shinnecock 1891-1902 [Washington:  National
Gallery, 1987]).

In "At the Seaside" (1892), a group of women and children enjoy a lazy day on
an otherwise empty beach. In the distance to the left is a sailboat and to the
right, almost at the horizon, a sandy point. The costumes are of the 1890s,
but the sea and the surf and the clouds are timeless. It's a busy but very
peaceful scene. Similar Chase landcapes depict sea-grasses, scrubby trees,
sandy beaches, empty roads. Many of his canvasses are populated by his wife and
children.

Fully as idyllic as Chase's "Summers at Shinnecock" were my own Wordsworthian
"Summers at Makamah Beach, 1947-1949." Although Makamah was on the Sound (on the
north shore), it was as like as like could be to Shinnecock in the 1890s. My
family spent three magical summers there -- the best summers and by far the best
times of my otherwise entirely citified, asphalt childhood. We rented a very
simple wood-frame beach house. If my memory is correct, the house was mostly
deck with a minimal kitchen and a few sleeping rooms. It seemed like a great
distance to the nearest neighboring beach house, but, in retrospect, it was
probably no more than five hundred or at most a thousand feet. But to a kid from
the schoolyard, a thousand feet was more than plenty. I loved the emptiness --
no trolleys, no radios, no people. I remember wandering alone for hours at low
tide examining, with the patience of childhood, the crabs, snails, seaweeds and
the infinite variety of dead fish. To my vocabulary, I added such novelties as
inlet, point, cove, high tide, squall, blowfish, starfish, perch, sea urchin,
shiner, sinker, fiddler crab, hermit crab, razorback, softshell, float, outboard
and inboard, "sheared a pin," oarlock, dinghy -- words and concepts previously
beyond the outer limit of my imagination. There were porpoises almost every day
-- once I was all alone on the beach when two of them battled furiously for
several minutes right in front of my astonished eyes. No one else saw them, and
no one believed me. There was also an abundance of horseshoe crabs-- not crabs
at all, as I later discovered, but trilobites left over from the Paleozoic.
I think it was the horseshoes that started me reading about paleontology. I
remember also old Mr. van Etten, already more than a child when Chase was
painting at Shinnecock, who took me out in his rowboat to trawl for bluefish.

Wordsworth wrote about his childhood's "fair seed-time" and that he was
"fostered alike by beauty and by fear." While it's easy to exaggerate the amount
of fear back in 1950s Brooklyn, it's a fact that there was an almost absolute
absence of beauty. Makamah Beach offered not only beauty and variety but also
the possibility of different kind of life.

Source: 2006/03/mayflower_hotel

Title: The Mayflower Hotel
Date: March 28, 2006

We're in Washington  D. C., this week and inadvertently wandered by the
Mayflower Hotel.

A memory: in July of 1952, I stayed at the Mayflower for a few days with my
father's sister, my peripatetic and eccentric Aunt Mollie. It was a rare and
unique event. I came from an automobile-less family, and my parents were not in
the slightest bit adventurous. The trip to Washington was the sole occasion in
my childhood when I was in a city other than New York (and by New York I mean
deepest Brooklyn, with an occasional foray to the Bronx Zoo or to the Museum
of Natural History). It's hard to convey the full measure of the naivete with
which this schoolyard boy approached a new city. I knew that Washington was
smaller than New York and therefore assumed that it would consist of a smaller
Brooklyn, a smaller Manhattan, etc. I had no conception that different cities
had different geographies -- let alone different characters.

Highlights:  the Lincoln Memorial (I was exhilarated), the Jefferson
Memorial, a boat ride to Mount Vernon. My strongest memory is of exciting and
down-to-earth Harry Truman addressing a crowd from the base of the Washington
Monument on the Fourth of July. The result of this voyage into the unknown was
the realization that there were other cities, that they were accessible -- in
short, that there was a world elsewhere.

I'm permanently indebted to my Aunt for allowing me the opportunity to grasp
such a big idea.

And also that there was such a thing as a restaurant. It might seem incredible,
but from birth to college, I didn't enter a restaurant more than a half-a-dozen
times at the very most. In our family, there was neither the money nor the
inclination toward such extravagance. I still consider it a something of a
miracle that a guy like me can walk into a shop, sit down, and that people will
generously put food on my plate. All that I have to do in return is fork over a
few bucks.

Exactly thirty-five years later, I stayed at the Mayflower a second time when
AGP was honored and celebrated. At this Mayflower reprise, it was not Truman
but Ronald Reagan whom we encountered. I remember the dyed hair, the unnatural
orange skin, the ventriloquist's-dummy delivery of the speech that was handed
him, and the undeniable inference that he was already deeply incapacitated by
the Alzheimer's that would eventually kill him.

Source: 2006/04/and_speaking_of

Title: And Speaking of Berries...
Date: April 02, 2006

The cranberry, some say, is so named because it is eaten by cranes. Perhaps.
But it's just as likely that the word derives from the similarity between the
plant's stamen and the crane's beak --  as the common geranium or cranesbill
is named after the flower's distinct enlarged pistil. (The American cranberry
has an English cousin that is known, from its watery habitat, as the fenberry.
The fenberry is neither eaten in nor by fens.) But if in fact cranberries were
the food of cranes, what about the common bearberry (also known as crowberry,
foxberry, and hog cranberry) -- did this plant also derive its name from its
consumers?  I'm skeptical, as I am skeptical about the derivation of the word
lingonberry or cowberry, cows not being famous for berry eating. In fact, lingon
means berry in Swedish, so the lingonberry is, etymologically speaking, a
berryberry. Inasmuch as berryberries contain thiamine, they may help to prevent
beriberi.

The bunchberry, a member of the dogwood family, is also known as the
squirrelberry, pigeonberry, and crackerberry (from crake = crow), but never as
mooseberry, though it's prized by moose, who have themselves provided a name for
a favorite food -- the mountain maple or moosewood.

The circumpolar cloudberry is sometimes called the salmonberry, but no one
claims that it is nibbled by salmons. And what about the gooseberry?  There's
no discernible relation between gooseberry and geese.  There are also
gooseberries that have shed whatever goosiness they may once have possessed.
The plant that was originally known as the Chinese gooseberry was transported
to New Zealand, where it was selected, hybridized, and cloned, to emerge after
commercial re- christening as the kiwifruit or kiwi -- the name gooseberry not
considered classy enough for international export. To the best of my knowledge,
kiwis are not eaten by kiwis.

Blackberry and blueberry pose no etymological challenge, but raspberry is a bit
of a mystery, there being no obvious rasp to the berry. The word raspberry was
most definitely not derived from the slang term for a rude derogatory sound
-- a usage that is only traceable to the last part of the nineteenth century.
The unpalatable bristly dewberry has no particular connection to dew. It's
popularly said that the serviceberry is so called because, when it flowers early
in the spring, the ground has thawed enough to bury -- or conduct a service --
for last winter's dead. But it's a false etymology -- in fact, the service in
serviceberry comes directly from its Latin ancestor sorbus (just as the mul
in mulberry derives from Latin morus). The juneberry does in fact derive its
name from its month of flowering. The loganberry is named for its hybridizer,
James Logan, who crossed the blackberry and the raspberry. Although the name
huckleberry -- also known as a hurtleberry or whortleberry -- is sometimes
applied to the blueberry, it describes a botanically distinct species. The
slang term huckleberry for a layabout -- nowadays a slacker -- was in use a
generation or so before Mark Twain made it famous. Huckleberry Finn might just
as easily be known as Whortleberry Finn. The bilberry is more distinguished
when it is called a fraughan. The jostaberry is brand-new to the market; it's
a cross between a gooseberry and a blackcurrant. (Currants are berries even
though not called so; the word currant derives from their older name -- raisins
of Corinth.) The strawberry has nothing whatsoever to do with straw. Some
think that name derives from the chaff-like external seeds or achenes which
cover the fruit, but it's more likely that the name is drawn from the plant's
habit of growth: runners stray or are strewn over the ground. A thousand years
ago strawberries were called earthberries, a name not especially suitable for
commerce.

Source: 2006/04/motherhood

Title: Quintessence of Motherhood
Date: April 04, 2006

A friend, a retired nurse, was keeping watch when her ninety-plus-year-old
mother was about to breath her last. The mother, who had not been coherent for
some days, was either unconscious or sleeping deeply when she suddenly roused
herself, looked closely at the daughter, uttered the words "you need rouge," and
died.

This story is self-explanatory but nevertheless I feel compelled to embark on a
course of no doubt supererogatory explications. The mother expresses a variety
of emotions: some positive, some not so good.  Primarily she is affectionate
and protective. She wants her daughter to take care of herself and be her best,
so she proposes a practical cosmetic enhancement. But at the same time, she is
intrusively judgmental, because the statement "you need rouge" clearly finds the
daughter deficient and in need of cosmetic enhancement.

The mother is also impolite -- but only in the way that people who know each
other intimately can sometimes be unmannerly. This particular mother wouldn't
speak nearly so frankly to anyone in the world but her own daughter. In
addition, she's competitive. "You need rouge" means not only "you're pallid, you
need help," but also hints at "I never needed rouge."

It's a humorous anecdote, because it's about the eternal continuity of
mothering.  Even at the moment of death, the mother remains entirely and
unequivocally maternal. The phrase "you need rouge" also makes us smile because
it displaces other last words  -- words of wisdom or serenity or love -- that
we might anticipate or for which we might hope.

And what about the daughter?  Was she, or should she be, pleased, resigned,
offended, amused?

Source: 2006/04/there_was_an_ei

Title: Beast in the Backyard
Date: April 08, 2006

On the night of August 23, 1990, an eighty-pound, two-year-old female mountain
lion wandered into our backyard.

The story appears in a book on cougar-human interactions (David Baron, The Beast
in the Garden [New York: Norton, 2004], 182-187) -- a book which also contains a
picture of "our" lioness, lying drugged on the ground (167).

My strongest memory of that encounter doesn't appear in the book and deserves a
report.  The lioness was crouching on a low branch of a box elder, and a goodly
number of police loitered on the street and in the yards and alleys waiting
for the wildlife-control officer and his tranquillizing dart. Eventually the
marksman arrived and shot the lioness. The animal leaped down from the tree.
As soon as she hit the ground and started to run, we could hear the sound,
resonating throughout the neighborhood, of car doors being slammed shut as
the officers rushed into their vehicles -- to re-emerge only when the lioness
collapsed.

Last week, there was another mountain lion in a near neighbor's backyard. It was
daylight;  the owner of the house had her video camera available and produced
a very clear record of a magnificent animal -- much larger and more formidable
that the one we had seen. Two nights ago, the neighbors held a meeting and the
author of The Beast in the Garden, who lives in town, came to tell us about
cougars in our county and what to do if we encounter them. The good news is
that the odds of being attacked are small: only one local person (a high school
student jogging alone near Idaho Springs) has been killed -- or taken, the
word is -- during the last decade. The author's advice: bring a companion with
you when you go walking in the mountains-- it's unlikely that a catamount will
attack two people, and if he should attack, then there are two of you to fend
him off. (He didn't repeat a familiar bit of local humor: "Always bring  a
friend with you when you walk in mountain-lion country. Remember, you don't have
to outrun the lion; you just have to outrun your friend.")  He also reminded
the audience that it's wrong to run away (because you will look like prey) but
that you should make yourself look big, make noise, throw rocks, etc. Do not,
repeat do not, play dead -- or worse yet, get down on all fours and try to crawl
away. But on the whole it's not the mountain lion you see who's the danger; it's
the mountain lion whom you don't see, but sees you. The one you feel.

A jogger was in the mountains with his faithful pooch at his side.  He came to
the top of a rise and there, on the road, was a big panther.  The jogger's dog
immediately disappeared into the roadside vegetation. The man did everything
right -- shouted, threw things, stared the lion down. Eventually, and slowly,
the big beast moved away and the jogger continued on his run. When he came to
the bottom of the hill, Faithful Companion, who had taken the long way around, 
reappeared and resumed running  with his master.

Man's best friend, but within sensible limits.

Source: 2006/04/prayer_science

Title: Prayer Science
Date: April 10, 2006

According to The New York Times (3/31/2006), the world of prayer science is
all in a dither. A new study has apparently demonstrated that "prayers offered
by strangers had no effect on the recovery of people who were undergoing heart
surgery." The study was a big, expensive deal: ten years of work at a cost of
$2.4 million (contributed by the ever-zealous Templeton Foundation, a powerful
supporter of prayer research). The details are utterly and weirdly fascinating.
"Researchers monitored 1802 patients at six hospitals who received coronary
bypass surgery. The patients were broken into three groups. Two were prayed
for; the third was not. Half of the patients who received the prayers were told
that they were being prayed for; half were told that they might or might not
receive prayers. The researchers asked the members of three congregations -- St.
Paul's Monastery in St. Paul; the Community of Teresian Carmelites in Worcester,
Mass.; and Silent Unity, a Missouri prayer ministry near Kansas City -- to
deliver the prayers, using the patients' first names and the first initials of
their last names. The congregations were told that they could pray in their own
way, but they were instructed to include the phrase "for a successful surgery
with a quick, healthy recovery and no complications.'" The shocking result:
"researchers found no difference between those patients who were prayed for and
those who were not." Prayer, it would appear (or intercessory prayer as this
variety is called), does not change things.

I admire the dedicated men and women of science who put heart and soul into this
project, but with all due respect, I must question both their conclusions and
their protocols. For starters, the inference that prayer doesn't work is far too
broad. Inasmuch as the scientists engaged only Christians to pray, all that they
proved was that Christian prayer doesn't work. It's marvelously ethnocentric to
suggest that just because Christians tanked, other religions could not succeed.
It was Bailey Smith, the President of the Southern Baptist Convention, who
authoritatively proclaimed that "God does not hear the prayer of a Jew." And
yet, in a stunning theological upset, the scientific evidence now proves that
God Almighty does not hear the prayers of Christians. But such a conclusion
is itself far too hyperbolic. In actual fact, all that the study established
is that God did not hear the prayers of three particular groups of prayer-
providers. It's certainly a black mark against the Teresian Carmelites and their
friends, and it will be a cold day in hell before they see another Templeton
prayer contract, but there's nothing to say that Southern Baptists, even Bailey
Smith himself, with his private line to the Almighty, might not have had more
sway with the Great Jehovah.

If the researchers had not been so blindly and thoughtlessly ethnocentric,
they might have solicited the prayers of people of various faiths, especially
those praying to different gods. Or even better: they might have assembled
disparate groups of prayer providers. In one set, for example, there would be
a Catholic, a Jehovah's Witness, and a Hindu; in another, a Muslim, a Wiccan,
and a Methodist; in a third, a Scientologist, a Baptist, and a Muggletonian.
Although the number of possible permutations is intimidating, the cause is
noble: to determine impartially which of these groups can best cut the prayer
mustard. It's wrong to put the entire burden on Christians. Scientists need to
mix and match the various religions so that they can discover the most effective
synergistic combination, or as it might better be called, the appropriate prayer
cocktail.

In addition, the study is guilty of flagrant mishandling of dosage. There was
simply no control over the amount of prayer that was administered. Just as
traditional medicines come in cubic centimeters, prayer comes in units of time.
Let's say that one person praying for one minute yields one prayer unit. 
Pending further study, there's no way to establish exactly how many prayer units
a heart patient might need. For a bypass, fifty prayer units might be a minimum
dosage, but perhaps twice or three times as many units might be necessary to
alleviate the symptoms of a hallucinator of witches, extraterrestrials, or
other supernatural beings. It's entirely possible that the prayers in this
study failed simply because they didn't meet a minimum prayer-unit threshold.
Moreover, it's important not to over-prescribe. For all we know, excessive
prayer might precipitate iatrogenic illnesses. And it's also a question of
efficiency: once an optimum dosage can be established, prayer providers can
go about their business and not waste their time generating superfluous and
expensive prayer units.

Moreover, prayer scientists seem to have given no serious consideration to the
group power of prayer providers. Given the present abysmal state of prayer
science, it's still unknown whether prayers are more effective when delivered by
just one or a very few providers, or in large choruses. Jews seem to think that
a minyan, or quorum, is ten, but hard science has not confirmed this number.
It's therefore imperative to experiment with different size groups in order to
establish a proper medical-minyan. This is not easy, or inexpensive, but it's
essential.  It would indeed be unfortunate if it turns out that a thousand
prayer providers are necessary to improve the condition of just one bypass
patient, but good golly, the Ancient of Days works in mysterious ways, and it's
not for us to question His prayer needs.

There are some other areas in which more scientific rigor is required. A) 
different diseases: just because prayer didn't work for bypasses doesn't mean
it won't work for scrofula. Perhaps some diseases are more prayer-responsive
than others. B) fervor: prayer science has made the naive error of assuming that
all prayer providers are equal. Yet the unalterable laws of random distribution
determine that some people will pray more effectively than others. In point of
fact, it's entirely likely that some prayer providers will be more effective
with one disease than another. If I were a patient, I'd be mighty bent out of
shape (and might even seek legal recourse) if I were assigned a prayer provider
who had a proven track record with ulcers but who amounted to zilch for my hip
replacement.  C) identification: prayer providers were given only the first
name and initial of their prayee. But "Bob S." is entirely too vague-- there
might be hundreds of "Bob S"'s all over the world undergoing bypass surgery at
any given time. How the blue blazes is the Lord of Hosts supposed to know which
particular "Bob S" is meant?  Fortunately, there's an easy solution to this
problem. Prayer providers should continue to pray for Bob S., but just remember
to add the last four digits of his social security or major credit card number.

I'm not the only person disappointed with this study. According to the Times,
"Bob Barth, the spiritual director of Silent Unity, the Missouri prayer
ministry, said the findings would not affect the ministry's mission. 'A person
of faith would say that this study is interesting,' Mr Barth said, 'but we've
been praying a long time and we've seen prayer work, we know it works, and
the research on prayer and spirituality is just getting started.'"  Bob B's
assertion that "prayer works" is anecdotal thinking and has absolutely no merit
whatsoever, but I can't imagine a single person who wouldn't agree with him that
prayer science is "just getting started"-- and also that it has a long bumpy
road to travel. Fortunately, the Bush administration invested over $2 million
of our tax revenues in prayer research, with more in the pipeline, so some
revolutionary breakthroughs in the spiritual sciences soon might be achieved. 
We'll be waiting.

Source: 2006/04/more_on_prayer_

Title: More on Prayer Science
Date: April 12, 2006

In my post on the Templeton prayer study, I did not mention the outcome least
congenial to prayer enthusiasts: not only did prayer do no good, it also caused
real harm. “A significantly higher number of the patients who knew that they
were being prayed for — 59 percent — suffered complications, compared with
51 percent of those who were uncertain [whether or not they were being prayed
for”].

How could it happen that prayees did worse than patients who were just let
alone?  Dr. Charles Bethea, co-author of the Templeton study and cardiologist
at the Integris Baptist Medical Center in Oklahoma City proposed that "it may
have made [patients] uncertain, wondering am I so sick they had to call in their
prayer team?"  It's a possible scenario -- it’s no secret that depressed and
anxious patients do worse than happy ones. But the “patient is anxious”
explanation doesn’t work for those who didn’t know that they were on the
receiving end of prayers.  Among the group of unwitting prayees, “18 percent
suffered major complications, like heart attack or stroke, compared with 13
percent in the group that did not receive prayers.”  Researchers offered no
hypothesis for this unanticipated result except to say that it was a chance
outcome.

So let us review: when prayees know that they’re being prayed for, their
decline is a product of anxiety; when they don’t know that they're being
prayed for, their decline is the result of chance. In both cases, the unwanted
phenomenon is explained by natural rather than supernatural causes.

Let us now imagine that the study produced contrary results and that the prayees
had lower rates of complications than the unprayed. Would there not have been
banner headlines in newspapers and on Fox proclaiming that prayer has been
proven to be effective remedy for the complications of surgery?

The error in logic is enormous and obvious. When prayer fails, it's for
natural reasons. If and when prayer succeeds, it's because of supernatural
intervention. It's a flagrant double standard where a symmetrical standard
should be mandatory. If prayer succeeds because of divine intervention, it's
only logical that it must fail because of symmetrical supernatural intrusions --
because, for example, malificent demonic forces located the prayer providers,
hijacked their prayers mid-flight, and turned good into evil. It's a difficult
hypothesis to prove, it's true, but it's exactly as credible as the ideas that
are put forward by prayer science.

Source: 2006/04/lions

Title: Predators Then and Now
Date: April 16, 2006

There's more neighborhood mountain lion news: yesterday a seven-year-old boy,
walking in the rearward of a group of six or seven hikers, was pounced upon in
the mountains just west of town by a big guy. The child was bitten and clawed
but is now recovering. Family members drove the lion away.

In my view, they should never have allowed the child to pull up the rear.

I’d been thinking about predators even before this last attack (see the
entry for April 8).  By one of those curious convergences that make life so
rich, I just happened to be reading Bruce Chatwin’s The Songlines (New York:
Viking, 1987), a travel narrative ostensibly about the sacred but invisible
paths along which the ancestors of the Australian aborigines traveled and
'sang the world into existence.'  The thesis of this quirky, self-indulgent
and intermittently brilliant narrative is that human beings are by nature not
sedentary but migratory.

But the book isn't only about migrants;  n one of The Songlines' many meanders,
Chatwin writes a few pages on the age-old interaction of human beings with big
predators like the mountain lion. He takes issue with the much-loved claim of
right-wing thinkers that human beings are naturally territorial and aggressive
-- that we are nothing more than naked apes who must continually strive to
control larger and larger dominions. Instead, he offers the alternative view
that because of our long history of fending off predators, human beings are
naturally not aggressive but defensive  -- and, moreover, that It's the
defensive imperative that caused our species to move from savagery to civility.
He asks us to think of the situation of the earliest humans. "The first men were
humbled, harried, besieged -- their communities few and fragmented… clinging
to life and one another through the horrors of the night."  "Might not,"
he asks, "all the attributes we call ‘human’ – language, song-making,
food-sharing, gift- giving, intermarriage... have evolved as stratagems
for survival, hammered out against tremendous odds, to avert the threat of
extinction?"  It's a challenging, overarching hypothesis -- and whether or not
there are facts to validate it is beyond my ken.

It's certainly true that first humans in Africa had to cope with a variety of
nasty predators -- lions were there long before people -- and that when  our
ancestors migrated to Europe they walked into a wild, dangerous country. The
European lion, panthera leo, widespread from 900,000 years ago to the end of the
last ice age, was a third taller and longer than surviving African lions, which
themselves can weigh 450 pounds and reach a length of 8 1/2 feet. The lions in
the virginal land that our ancestors crossed the Mediterranean to colonize would
have been as tall as a fully grown Paleolithic man and might have weighed as
much as 880 pounds.  And remember that for 99% of our time on earth, humans
were either entirely unarmed or possessed only of the hand ax -- a palm-size
piece of sharpened but haft-less flint. No matter what theory of the origins
of civilization we embrace, we should remember that our genes were selected
in a world of woolly rhinoceroses, mammoths, aurochs, and wolves and that we
competed with the big bears for what were then the best residences on earth--
the limestone caves in the Ardeche region in France.

It's in these caves that the memory of European lions is beautifully preserved.
Thirty thousand years ago, a long tradition of animal representation climaxed
in the paintings in the Chauvet Cave. There are beautiful representations of
European lions on the hunt and at rest in Jean-Marie Chauvet's The Dawn of Art:
The Chauvet Cave (New York: Abrams, 1995) --  irrefutable evidence that our
forefathers knew them at first hand.  It's unquestionable that many a child
-- and many an adult -- fell prey to these adversaries. And perhaps Chatwin
is right; perhaps those humans who survived to reproduce were selected not
for aggressiveness but for congeniality and especially for artistic ability.
How else can we account for our species' continual preoccupation, or perhaps
obsession, with all the many forms of beauty?

April 17.  The authorities tracked and killed an 80-pound female panther. I
sincerely hope that it was the offending animal and not an innocent bystander.

Source: 2006/04/three_cheers_fo

Title: Three Cheers for the Blue, White and Red
Date: April 18, 2006

It's been a Krzysztof Kieslowski festival here the last few days. We've watched,
two times each and with concentrated and astonished attention, Kieslowski's
Trois Couleurs films: Bleu, Blanc, and Rouge. Individually (which is how
we viewed them in 1993-94 when they first appeared) they're splendid; taken
together, they're an even more wonderful achievement.

Kieslowski tells complicated stories with economy and precision; I don't know
any filmmaker who can make every corner of the frame count for so much. It must
be his training as a maker of documentaries that accounts for the rich, factual
surface of his narrative. And yet his chosism -- his thing-ism -- is always in
the service not of plot only but of the enigma as well. Kieslowski knows what
accomplished novelists also know -- that an object, studied closely, becomes
a metaphor. The three films share a common theme -- that it's impossible to
find happiness outside of society  -- but the presentations are so various and
imaginative and the characters so rich that philosophical questionings are as
unobtrusive as they are omnipresent.

Kieslowski swore off directing when he finished Rouge, but had apparently
relented and had started on another trilogy (Heaven, Hell, Purgatory) when the
heart attack killed him. But there's the earlier work; we'll track backwards to
watch, once again, The Decalogue and The Double Life of Veronique.

Source: 2006/04/spellcheck_humo

Title: A Little Spellcheck Humor, Maestro
Date: April 20, 2006

I first stumbled over Spellcheck's wayward sense of humor years ago when I was
writing about Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. Spellcheck rejected Capulet,
which is Juliet's family name, and presumptuously instead offered the choice of
either "co-pilot" or "copulate."

Spellcheck is deeply offended by proper names, uncommon words, neologisms, words
in a language other than English, etc., and sometimes makes its impatience known
by suggesting dadaist or absurd substitutions.

For example, everyone (everyone except Spellcheck, that is) knows that
Muggletonians are members of a religion founded in England in the 1650s by
Lodowick Muggleton which held, among other doctrines, the idea that heaven was
only slightly above the reach of our uplifted arms. Spellcheck has an irrational
animus toward this harmless, near-extinct religion and proposed as substitutes
for Muggletonian, the words "Argentinian," "Miltonic," "Macedonian," "Justinian"
and (as a pure instance of spellcheckian whimsy) "melatonin."

Apparently untutored in geography, Spellcheck rejected the ancient north African
and modern upper New York state city of Utica in favor of "Attica," which makes
a kind of sense, but also "Utah," which is a bit off-the-wall, "Utopia," which
is nowhere, and the imaginative but bizarre "erotica."

A recent entry on berries provoked an orgy of spellcheckian absurdity.
For fenberry, "Canberra"; for crowberry, both "crowbar" and "crockery";
for lingonberry, "linguine," "lingerie" and "nunnery"; for whortleberry,
"wheelbarrow";  for earthberry, "authoress"; for cloudberry, "glittery" and the
truly wild, out-of-left-field "Goldberg."  Speaking of left field: for rbi's,
Spellcheck proposed both "ribs" and "rabbis"; for Ebbets (as in Ebbets Field),
simply "beets";  for Newcombe, as in the great Dodger pitcher Don Newcombe,
"encumber."

In another recent post I invented the word "mccranwichorama," defined as a
display of inferior coinages of words in which detached segments (such as the
wich in cranwich) acquire new meaning. I knew that when I batted mccranwichorama
over the net, I would probe the outer limits of Spelllcheck's powers, but I must
say that the program rose to the occasion when it parried with a transcendent
absurdity: for mccranwichorama:  "mercurochrome."

Source: 2006/04/purity_baseball

Title: Baseball Purity
Date: April 30, 2006

My father played excellent tennis and basketball -- he was a guard on the CCNY
team under Nat Holman until he left school to put a few cents in the family
coffers.  During the 20s and 30s he also played some semi-pro baseball. He'd
make $5.00 or $10.00 a game as a "ringer" -- and in those days, an extra buck or
two went a long way.

He was a catcher and had the busted-up fingers to prove it. He paid for the
broken bones when the arthritis caught up with him. Although he had been an
unusually strong man, in his last years he didn't have enough left in his
twisted fingers to pull the match out of the matchbook to light his pipe. But he
could still discuss "inshoots" and "outshoots."

Sometime in the early 80s (it was after mom died), he was in the hospital
recuperating from a hip replacement. He was not a good patient and the
confinement left him testy and bored, but he could be a little cheered by
watching whatever sports were on the TV. One day I visited him and found the
television off.

"Pop, there's a Yankee game on. Why aren't you watching it?"

He waved his gnarled old hand. "American League. DH rule. Not baseball."

I'm glad he didn't have to see the changes since he left the scene. It's a new,
impermanent, history-hostile, TV-friendly, high-scoring production: franchises
jumping all around the country; new stadiums with mighty short porches; players
coming up to bat wearing not only gold necklaces and earrings, but also helmet,
gauntlets and greaves; the incredible shrinking strike zone; pitchers no longer
allowed to knock down the over-aggressive batter; an epidemic of steroids that
has led to  unnaturally bulked-up sluggers; balls flying out of the park as if
the guys were playing Sunday-afternoon slow-pitch softball; mediocre hitters
slamming 40 hr's a year -- not to mention baseball played in the thin Colorado
atmosphere where the batted ball takes off like a rocket and where curve balls
can't curve.

I know exactly what my father would have said: "Not baseball."

Source: 2006/05/whats_the_deal_

Title: What's the Deal with Mike Yamagita?
Date: May 02, 2006

In Fargo, a tightly structured film, the extraneous Mike Yamagita episode might
easily have been cut.

Here’s the story (Fargophiles may bypass the plot summary). Mike is a
high- school classmate and possibly an old boy friend of Marge Gunderson. He
telephones Marge when he learns that she’s the police chief investigating the
Brainerd triple homicide. When they  meet in a hotel bar in Minneapolis, Mike
makes a half-hearted pass which Marge decisively rebuffs. Mike then reveals
that he had been married to a mutual friend, Linda Cooksey, but that Linda
died of leukemia. Because he’s lonely and, it would appear, because he’s
embarrassed to have crossed the line with Marge, he breaks into sobs. A couple
of scenes later, Marge is on the phone with a girl friend. She is surprised to
learn that Mike never married Linda, that Linda is very much alive though she
had been “pestered” by Mike for over a year, and that Mike’s been having
psychiatric problems.

The Mike Yamagita excursion doesn’t easily connect to the gruesome botched-
kidnapping main story. What, then, is its reason for being?.

The Coens like to toy with audience expectations. When we first hear Mike on the
phone, we recognize the same flat upper-Midwest accent with which we've become
familiar -- and so, we're taken aback to discover that Mike is Asian-American.
But is it a gimmick or does it matter?  Mike himself plays against type. Almost
everyone in the film (although not Carl Showalter, the excitable talkative
funny-looking guy who's destined for the wood-chipper) is laconic and stoical.
Mike's bawling opposes him to both the stereotypical impassive Asian as well as
to the stereotypical low-key Swedish Lutheran. But can his display of sentiment
be trusted? Mike is no less insane than Gaear Grimsrud, the psychopathic killer,
but he’s addled in a sweeter way. He wants desperately to be part of a family.
It's because of this longing that he harasses Linda Cooksey and fantasizes
a romance with Marge. In its own Coenesque way, Fargo is a film that extols
families. Although the Lundegaards are not a good model, Marge and Norm are
emphatically in the process of creating a good and decent family. So perhaps,
taken all together, the Mike Yamagita episode adds an unexpected quirky element
to the film, challenges ethnic assumptions, and reinforces, in a 'funny kind of
way,' Fargo's family values.

The Mike Yamagita subplot also deepens the character of Marge Gunderson.
Although she’s interested in Mike--she primps for their "date" -- she’s not
a bit flirtatious. There must be hundreds of policiers in which the tough cop
engages in gratuitous sex, but Marge is not that kind of policeperson. When she
confines Mike to his side of the table, she reinforces her status as the moral
center of an otherwise amoral film. But Mike catches her off guard and she’s
not nearly as discerning in fancy duds as she would be if she were in uniform.
The Fargo screenplay describes Mike as “bald, paunching.” (The coinage
“paunching” must mean “becoming paunchy.”) By changing direction and
casting the handsome Korean-American actor Steve Park,-- a native of Vestal,
New York, by the way -- in the role of Mike Yamagita, the film makes him less
pathetic and more sexual. While Marge does resist, she’s curious enough about
him to make it her business to investigate. She ably balances restraint with
curiosity.

Finally, there’s a broad sketchy parallel between the Mike Yamagita sequence
and the main action of the film. Jerry Lundegaard attempts a scam that
eventually kills his wife; Mike Yamagita attempts a similar scam when he tries
to insinuate himself into Marge’s life by, so to speak, 'killing' his own
imaginary wife. Marge thwarts both scams.

Three different approaches, then: one about Mike, one about Marge, and one about
plot parallels. But has the heart of this mystery been plucked?  Do we now know
what Mike Yamagita is doing in Fargo?  I don't think so. Is there anyone out
there in the cinemablogosphere who can improve on these suggestions?

Source: 2006/05/rare_baseballsh

Title: A Rare Baseball-Shakespeare Confluence
Date: May 03, 2006

It's not often that there's an intersection of the disparate universes of
Shakespeare and baseball. Yet even such distant areas of experience occasionally
overlap.

A contributor to a Shakespeare discussion group of which I am a member recently
wrote about Jim Bouton's Ball Four (1970) (a very good baseball book),
"Like Bill Bradley's excellent Life on the Road, it was written from the
player's perspective." If I remember correctly from my own reading, it neither
sensationalized nor glamorized professional athletics.

This Shakespeare correspondent had "recently read Howard Bryant's earnest
history of baseball in the 1990s called Juicing the Game (Viking, 2005) and was
reminded that Ball Four did not make Bouton's fellow ballplayers happy." "Bouton
revealed to the world what most everyone in baseball already knew, and what most
people outside it suspected: Players took amphetamines.... They had girls in
different cities.'  Ball Four sold two million copies but Bouton himself was
ostracized and eventually harassed out of baseball."

Now comes the baseball-Shakespeare confluence. Juicing the Game reports
that sometime after Ball Four appeared, Bouton was "on the mound against
Cincinnati... when he heard the voice of Pete Rose bellowing from the top step
of the dugout, 'Fuck you, Shakespeare'. Literary criticism has seldom been more
explicit."

It's a good story, but the correspondent to the Shakespeare list does not
fully explicate its significance. "Fuck you, Shakespeare" uses the epithet
"Shakespeare" as a generic term for a writer -- almost as though Pete Rose could
not think of the name of any other author. Under ordinary circumstances, to call
someone a Shakespeare would be laudatory. This particular usage is either a very
uncommon or a unique instance of the epithet serving as a term of derogation.
In a way, it's a tribute to Shakespeare's prominence. "Fuck you, Flaubert," had
such words been bellowed by Pete Rose, would have carried a dissimilar valence.

I myself feel confident in surmising that Rose's acquaintance with Shakespearean
drama -- and with the written word in general -- is less than profound. No one,
even those who vastly admired the convicted rapscallion's skill with the bat,
has ever confused 'Charley Hustle' with 'Bertie' Russell or Charley Dickens.

"Fuck you, Shakespeare" reminds me of two of my favorite baseball/intelligence
anecdotes. The first is the laudatory evaluation of Yale-educated Yankee
pitcher Ron Darling by his teammate, center-fielder Mickey Rivers: "he knows
the answers to things what I don't even know the question of."  A second
anecdote has a similar valence. I 'll call the participants in the following
genuine conversation Player A and Player B because I no longer recall who they
were (although I do remember that both were Yankees). Player A: "That guy is a
total idiot." Player B: "What are you saying? He has an IQ of a hundred thirty."
Player A: "Yeah?  Outta what?"

May 9.  My brother Jon called to say that Ron Darling never played for the
Yankees. He hypothesizes a memory failure on my part: Darling was with the
Mets and the center-fielder in question therefore must have been Mookie Wilson
(former Rockies outfielder Preston Wilson's uncle and stepfather [note Hamlet
reference] and the man who hit the grounder that went through Bill Buckner's
legs). But the identification of Darling's admirer isn't crucial; let's just
agree that he was someone with the linguistic competence of a Pete Rose.

Source: 2006/05/a_writing_famil-1

Title: A Writing Family
Date: May 07, 2006

Yesterday we learned that my nephew Steven's book on the philosophy of martial
arts will appear in July. Hosannas to him. Steven's wife, Terrylynn, has a book
out on criminal justice.

It's a writing family. The direct descendants of Isaiah and Eta have produced
books on a wide variety of subjects.

It began when my father construed and annotated the standard form of real estate
contract. And then my brother Jon published that novel about the dance and
another family member of his generation wrote that introductory book about
Shakespeare and a bunch of stuff on English literature. NGP''s book on election
technology. My cousin Marian's twin daughters (upon whom I haven't set eyes
since their grandfather's funeral, which was in 1965, I believe) have written a
number of books. Nancy, a folklorist wrote about the hammered dulcimer and about
musical instrument making in New York in earlier centuries. Nora, a medical
anthropologist, has written a classic account of sign-language on Nantucket as
well as volumes about third-world medicine. And then there's Eve's journalism
(not yet in hardcover). If we look to the descendants of Isaiah's father, we can
include Hiram C's book on global justice.

I bet there are other books -- I've lost track of many members of the extended
family.

Also:  my sister-in-law Ellen's book on the internet; my daughter-in-law's
writings on advanced technology, and probably all sorts of other things by non-
genetic family members.           I have no statistics, but I'd guess
there's a higher concentration of published authors in our family than in most.
Is there a gene for scribbling?

It's interesting to me that except for the one novel, there are no other
stories, poetry, screenplays.Our inheritance: facts rather than fantasy.

Source: 2006/05/seven_years_lat

Title: Seven Years Later and Still Going Strong
Date: May 08, 2006

Here's a letter that I wrote to the local newspaper. It appeared in 1999 when
AGGP retired.

"I have read all sorts of commentary in this paper about the public school
system -- letters from parents, students, board members and from both grudging
and supporting taxpayers -- but I can't ever remember reading a letter from the
spouse of a teacher. So here's the perspective of a person who has sat on the
sidelines for almost forty years.

'My wife, AGGP, retired this June from a career in teaching secondary
mathematics that began at Warren Junior High School in Newton, Massachusetts,
in 1960 and continued in the local schools, initially at the junior high school
level and since 1977 at BHS.

'In my considered opinion, public school teachers, especially secondary school
teachers, rank among the genuine heroes of American society -- right up there
with hospice nurses, smoke-jumpers, and astronauts.

'Consider the conditions of employment. Perhaps readers of this letter can
bring themselves to think back to their own youth, or possibly they can remind
themselves what it was like to share a home with one or two young people.
Remember the mood-swings and the erratic behavior. Then try to extrapolate from
this recollection and imagine two thousand energetic adolescents crowded into an
ungracious old building where the air is always too hot, too cold, or too fetid.
Imagine a world in which the girls are slightly more rounded and boys just a bit
hairier on Tuesday than they were on Monday. Two thousand hormone-fueled young
people who are so supercharged that they can't make it from history to English
without playing keep-away with each other's shoes; whose normal mode of greeting
is to shoulder their best friends into a bank of lockers. It is a world of games
and exuberance but I'm sorry to say that it is also a world of troubles -- of
cliques, of alcohol and drug abuse, of private pain and of public disorder. And
yet five times a day, five days a week, an accomplished teacher manages to keep
thirty or so of these young ones focused for fifty minutes on conic sections or
sinusoidal graphs.

'A high school is also a place of increasing expectations and shrinking
resources. Five teachers in an office suitable for one. Larger and larger
classes. it was only a few years ago that BHS's mathematics department could
employ a para-professional to xerox the exams and keep track of the textbooks
and calculators and overhead projectors. Not too long ago there was released
time for a department chairperson to make the schedules and screen prospective
teachers and advise students. No longer: the public as said, "cut out the fat,"
and has decided that teachers can handle these chores between classes.

'What happens after school is out for the day? Piles of exams and notebooks and
homework to be read and returned tomorrow. Lessons to be prepared. I have seen
with my own eyes that it is ordinary for a teacher to put in two solid ten-hour
days on the weekend. And the phone calls. I'd be willing to wager that there are
several hundred people reading this letter who have called our home between 5
p.m and 9 p.m. because Amber or Zack has stopped attending classes and hasn't
handed in homework for a week, or just "can't get" hyperboles, or will have to
miss school next week because of a family ski trip.

'And what of that much-vaunted summer vacation? In my experience, the first half
is spent in a state of profound collapse, and the second spent gearing up for
the the one hundred and fifty new students who will roll in come August.

'But let me report on AGGP's response to working conditions that would crush
mortals not as strong as your heroic secondary school teacher. "I love my
functions class. My algebra students are trying so hard. My basic students are
great. They did a splendid job on matrices. I have such wonderful kids this
year."

'Is it a good job?  For those who are fortunate enough to have a genuine
calling, as AGGP has so clearly had, and who possess tremendous physical
stamina, and who can look with amusement rather than horror at an infected
navel-ring, it's great; for others, better to choose an easier profession.

'And what are the rewards for four decades of teaching?  There is a warm
retirement ceremony and a letter from someone in human resources, a plaque and a
handshake and a very modest pension (health insurance not included).

'But then there are the rewards that truly matter. The first is the pleasure
of knowing that in an "I, me, mine" culture, a teacher has honored the precept
that asks us to promote the general welfare. But more particularly, there's what
happens whenever we stand in line at the movies or take a walk on the mall.
"Oh, Mrs. P. You don't remember me, but I was in your algebra class a few years
ago. I've been meaning to write to you and thank you. I learned so much in your
class. Now I'm a doctor/engineer/chemist/businessperson." And not regularly, but
every once in a while: "Oh, Mrs. P. You'll never guess. I'm a teacher now. it's
exhausting but I love it. You're my model. And someday I hope to be as good a
teacher as you."'

Source: 2006/05/angels_and_fool

Title: Angels and Fools
Date: May 12, 2006

"Earth Angel," by Jesse Belvin's Penguins, offered, or seemed at the time to
offer, a succinct and accurate distillation of relations between the sexes. The
song appeared in 1954, when I was a vulnerable 15-year-old, and was a monster
hit, perhaps because of its ideological clarity. "Earth Angel" is of the genre
that has lately come to be called "doo-wop"; in the P. S. 217 schoolyard, we
just called it "juke-box music." Here's a pithy stanza: "Earth angel, earth
angel, will you be mine/ My darling dear, love you all the time./ I'm just a
fool, a fool in love with you." The heart of the matter, and the essence of life
as we knew it -- the simple-minded, retro-Victorian doctrine that  girls are
angels, boys are fools.

Looking back, I have no doubt that such an oppressive formula was painful for
girls. It must have been hard for young women who knew themselves to be flesh
and blood to pretend to be angelic. But I didn't concern myself with the effect
of the song on them -- girls were clearly and obviously different from us. Not
that I knew anything at all about female culture; the world in which I lived was
rigidly segregated by gender. I didn't have sisters and while the guys talked
obsessively and ignorantly about girls, we almost never talked with them. Even
in the high school lunchroom, girls sat to one side, boys the other. On the
stoop, and In the schoolyard and the drugstore, we talked baseball, flipped
cards, played softball and basketball and stickball, and practiced spitting
for distance. I didn't have a clue what girls were doing -- probably at home
starching their crinolines. It was therefore easy to believe what "literature"
told us: girls were or should be beautiful, aloof, distant, polite, ethereal,
sugar and spice and everything nice, and certainly not sexual -- in short,
angels. Boys, on the other hand, were not just nasty and foul-mouthed, as we
knew from first hand experience, but also pathetic, filled with longings that
they gratified imperfectly several times a day, fumbling, awkward, big-eared,
pimpled, and sloppy. The girls were all Bettys and Veronicas -- desirable but
unattainable. Perhaps in better neighborhoods there was an occasional Archy, but
at the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island, there were only Jugheads. We were, in
brief, exactly what "Earth Angel" had described: anguished adolescent fools.

The notion that girls were unburdened by the flesh took a big hit when I
found myself in one of those lower-level high school English classes where
the disorder was such that weeks would go by without the teacher attempting a
single lesson. Two very young but very tough girls (huge hair, pounds of makeup,
stiletto heels, and bras so pointy that they could a bore a hole in the chest
of any guy brave enough to risk an embrace) were discussing a "health" class in
which chastity had been advocated by one of the maiden-lady teachers. One of
the girls whispered: "She should take up a candle and see how it feels." Whoa,
daddy! And then, a few days after I arrived at college, on a dark, moonless
night, I overheard one "older" woman say to another, "there must be a mile of
cock on this campus and I can't get six inches." At the sound of those words,
"angels" all over America plunged to earth.

And a few months afterwards, "fool," too, gave up the ghost.

Source: 2006/05/within_once_aga

Title: "Within" Again; Backbiting
Date: May 13, 2006

On March 10 of this year, I registered an objection to use of the word "within"
in sportscaster-slang. Here's my complaint: "Why in the living heck do they
say that the Nuggets are "within" two points of the Lakers?  "Within" means
less than than the proclaimed margin -- 1.9 points perhaps. Why not say that
the Nuggets are two points behind?  Or trailing by two points?  But not
-- goodness gracious -- 'within'."  Now, at the website Language Log, an
accomplished young linguist, Benjamin Zimmer, has independently offered a
theory of the origin of this idiom. He claims that "within" is short for "pull
within," as in the case of a rower plying his oars to literally "pull" within a
certain distance from his opponent. Over time, he says, "pull within" migrated
from sports such as racing and rowing, which measure advantage in distance, to
sports such as baseball and basketball, which measure advantage in discrete
numbers, and where, he concedes, "the metaphorical fit was not exact." It's an
interesting theory, and it might very well be correct. It's consoling to imagine
that there's a reason for the irrational use of "within."

Zimmer is less persuasive when he moves from linguistics to chronology. 
He claims that "it became common by the mid-20th century for announcers and
reporters to talk about teams pulling (to) within a certain number of runs,
points, goals, or even games in the standings." He offers no evidence for the
"mid-20th century" assertion. I can't say that my memory supports his version of
history. I've been listening to basketball games on the radio since just after
World War II, when the NBA succeeded the old BAA, and I'm moderately sure that
I didn't hear the idiom "within two points" until the 1980s at the earliest. It
was an unpleasant innovation in language that stuck painfully in my ear. To the
best of my recollection, "within" was the relatively recent invention of Marv
Albert  -- one of his limited repertoire of linguistic tics. Others: "from
downtown," "served up a facial," " yesss," "a spec-tac-ular move."

Marv Albert, it may be remembered, was a protege of the late great Marty
Glickman, sprinter and sportscaster, and (regular readers of these essaylets
will be delighted to learn) as far as I know the only genuine celebrity to
have set foot in the fabled P. S. 217 schoolyard. Glickman would not have been
proud of Albert, who is less well known for his creativity in language than for
his strange sexual exploits. In 1997, Albert plead guilty to sexual assault.
He had proved himself to be a man without a tad of castration anxiety and of
exceptional, perhaps unparalleled, courage, when he first bit a woman fifteen
times on the back, drawing blood, and then forced her to perform fellatio. A
spec-tac-ular move!! Just a couple of months after the Albert nonchalance,
Mike Tyson bit Evander Holyfield on both ears, taking quite a chunk out of one
of them -- the left, I believe. I had high hopes for a great TV moment: the
sportscaster Marv Albert interviews the boxer Iron Mike. Two Brooklyn boys
discuss the theory and practice of oral incorporation. Yesss!

May 19: On Language Log, Benjamin Zimmer responds to my reminiscence that
"within two points" was a creation of the 1980s. He offers comprehensive
evidence that the idiom "pull within" was in print as long ago as the 19th
century. Although he hasn't offered a chronology for "within" without a
preceding "pull," and hasn't discussed radio basketball (how would he access
radio archives, even if they exist?), he's certainly a thorough and imaginative
researcher. But just because a phrase can be found deep in the archives
somewhere, doesn't mean that it was in common oral usage.

Source: 2006/05/the_worst_perso

Title: Adolf Award for Worst Person of the Century
Date: May 18, 2006

The winner of the Adolf for worst person of the century goes to Pope Urban
II. The century in question is the first one of the previous millennium, or
1000-1100. Like many other Adolf award winners, Urban perpetrated evil deeds
that have continued to provoke hatred, war and suffering even to the present
day.

HIs principal crime: Pope Urban fabricated a litany of Muslim atrocities in
order to incite Christians to wrest Jerusalem from a “race” that he called
“absolutely alien to God.” In November, 1095, in Clermont in the south of
France, Urban told an eager audience that Muslims had circumcised Christians and
spread their unspeakable blood on baptismal fonts; that they had “cut open the
navels of others, tearing out their vital organs” and that they had committed
appalling atrocities upon women “of which it is more evil to speak than to
keep silent.”

Some say that his catalog of mutilations and barbarities was based on faulty
intelligence but most think it was his own invention. Urban did not just incite
and condone warfare, he sanctified it. His crusade would be a pilgrimage --
and therefore a form of penance. Combatants who died in its course would be
purified. God, it was claimed, has instituted “holy wars” so that knights
might find a new path to salvation.

Roughly one hundred thousand crusaders answered his call and set out for the
Levant to take Jerusalem from the infidels.On the way, they warmed to their
task by conducting genocidal attacks of unprecedented brutality upon the Jewish
communities of the Rhineland (communities that had been in place before the
advent of Christianity). These quasi-sanctioned raids are now known as “the
first holocaust.”

The passage of the crusaders to the middle East was made easier because
the Muslims were divided into two factions --Shiite and Sunni -- that were
perpetually at daggers drawn. The crusaders laid siege to Antioch in October,
1099, and when they took the city, slaughtered its entire Muslim population.
In possession of Antioch, they found themselves entirely surrounded by
hostile armies. But God was on their side. The timely intervention of
“countless armies with white horses… led by the saints George, Mercurius,
and Demetrius“ allowed them to fight their way out of the city.

The crusaders headed south and in midsummer of 1099 besieged Jerusalem. Muslim
defenders taunted the crusaders by setting up crosses and urinating on them;
in response, the Christians catapulted the bodies of captured Muslims over
the walls. When Jerusalem fell, the celebration was euphoric. The Provencal
crusader Raymond of Aguilers reported that “some of the pagans were mercifully
beheaded, others were tortured for a long time and burned to death in searing
flames. Piles of heads, hands and feet lay in the houses and streets. Infants
were seized by the soles of their feet from their mothers’ laps or their
cradles, and dashed against the wall, breaking their necks.” Covered with
gore, weighed down with plunder, “rejoicing and weeping from excessive
gladness," the crusaders "worshipped at the Sepulchre of Jesus the Savior.”

Although Pope Urban II died just two weeks after the fall and sack of Jerusalem,
there is no question but that his Adolf was well and truly earned and that his
legacy lives on.

Source: 2006/05/the_holy_lance

Title: The Holy Lance
Date: May 20, 2006

In 1098, crusaders were trapped inside the walls of Antioch and their mission to
capture Jerusalem was gravely jeopardized. When things were at their worst, one
of the crusaders -- a Provencal peasant named Peter Bartholomew -- was visited
by St. Andrew, who revealed to him that the lance with which the Roman soldier
Longinus had pierced the side of Jesus was hidden in Antioch's Basilica of St.
Peter. St. Andrew informed Peter that "he who carries this lance into battle
shall never be overcome by the enemy."

Bartholemew's claim met with initial skepticism because it was an established
fact that the Holy Lance lay safely in the relic collection of the Byzantine
emperor in Constantinople. Nevertheless, the authorities agreed to investigate.
Twelve men dug until overcome by exhaustion at the spot to which Bartholomew
pointed, but they could find nothing. Finally, Peter himself dropped into
the hole and brought forth a shard of metal. "All across the city there was
boundless rejoicing." Suddenly invigorated by the possession of this powerful
relic, their morale euphoric, the crusaders broke out of the city, overcame the
armies that surrounded them, and proceeded to Jerusalem.

Some months afterward, Peter Bartholomew had another vision: that the entire
crusade  was compromised because some of its soldiers were polluted by pride or
cowardice. He announced that he himself would choose and put to death soldiers
of the cross who were steeped in sin. There was a backlash against Peter and the
authenticity of the Holy Lance was challenged.

Peter decided to prove his truth in a trial by ordeal. After fasting for several
days, he ran, carrying the Holy Lance, between two piles of burning olive
branches four feet high and thirteen feet long. He was severely burned and died
several days later. The Holy Lance lost its magic and morale plummeted. The
crusaders were forced to seek an alternative. The ingenious Raymond of Toulouse
dispatched his follower Hugh of Monteil to Latakia to retrieve a fragment of the
cross on which Jesus had been crucified. In the end, the discrediting of the
Holy Lance proved to be only a temporary setback.

The facts in this and the previous essaylet come from Thomas Asbridge, The First
Crusade, a New History (Oxford University Press, 2004).

Source: 2006/05/help_from_cyber

Title: My Cyberfriends
Date: May 22, 2006

People out there misjudge me. Marcia Wainwright, for example, is certain that I
need to lose thirty pounds in thirty days. She proposes that I use her "miracle
African weight loss herbs." OK, maybe I'm a few pounds above my fighting weight,
but certainly not thirty -- what the heck is she thinking? Joellie Adella is
concerned about my hair loss situation. Elsie Bertie thinks that I need fuller
and more erotic lips. Susan van Elk wants to help me discover the benefits of a
healthy colon. The "enormity" of my "manhood" is a worry of Penelope French; its
lack of "rockhardness" seems to make Hoodiea Gordoni mighty eager to come to my
aid. Jacklyn Hughes feels that my sperm count is low; she can help (but how? and
for goodness sake-- why?). Thank you very much, guys, but I don't really need
your assistance: hair, lips, colon, etc. are all doing just fine.

There's more:  Caroline McPherson and William McWilliams both think that I need
to accessorize: she suggests "bling watches and designer handbags" while he
proposes "Rolex replicas." I don't know what Natasasha (sic) thinks she  knows
about me, but, frankly, I'm not especially anxious to employ her services as a
"screwbuddy"; nor do I welcome the efforts of Ms. Ginger Snapz -- possibly a
pseudonym -- who has big surprises in store for me and whose specialty is pole-
dancing. These ladies have a wrong impression. So too does Teressa Brandel,
who offers to solve all my problems by introducing me to "horny teen barnyard
slutzz." Not this grandpa.

Considering all the negativity, it's good to know that there are not only
Russian princesses but also a former Nigerian cabinet official out there who
are eager to improve my finances. They both have "unbelievable offers" for me.
Sure I have to send a few thousand bucks to an offshore bank, but I'm promised a
return of great enormity on an investment that is rockhard.

Source: 2006/06/my_life_with_gi

Title: Life with Gilbert and Sullivan
Date: June 01, 2006

When I was no more than a hemidemisemiquaver, I would listen attentively as my
mother sat at her old Hardman piano and sang ditties by Gilbert and Sullivan. I
believe that the first song I ever learned “by heart” was “I’m called
Little Buttercup” with its still mysterious “pretty polonies.” In 1947,
when the D’Oyly Carte company made its first post-war American tour, I was
taken to see a performance of H. M. S. Pinafore. I was utterly transported. No
subsequent theatrical experience has worked equivalent magic. I still think that
it’s a little miracle that I saw with my own rapt eyes such legendary Savoyard
stalwarts as Ella Halman, Darrell Fancourt, and Martyn Green.

Pinafore was the only stage play that I saw until I was past adolescence and
out of the house. What could have prompted such uncharacteristic extravagance
on my parents' part? Whatever the cause, the result was that my infatuation
with Gilbert and Sullivan's operas was early established. The attachment was
difficult to sustain because there was no family phonograph; moreover, those
thick, heavy albums of 78s would have broken the budget. I was fortunate to
possess a tattered old anthology of G  & S songs from which I would pick out
tunes as best I could.

In college I had a roommate who was a genuine savoyardophile and who arrived
with a "hi-fi" and an extensive collection of ‘long playing’ records. I
took advantage of his resources and his knowledge. During the fifties and
sixties I attended performances of the full G & S repertory in various amateur
and semi- pro productions-–even a rare Utopia Ltd. at the Loeb Drama Center
in Cambridge. I also acquired a treasured collection of D’Oyly Carte and
Glyndebourne performances on vinyl. During the seventies and eighties, I
couldn’t clean the house or cook a meal without the assistance of Sir Arthur.
But turntables and 33s went the way of 78s, and then the vinyl itself came to be
sequestered in plastic tubs in the basement.

I was G & S-less for a decade or so, but Topsy-Turvy (1999), the great Mike
Leigh film, rekindled an unfaded love. Now, sixty years after my first Pinafore,
I’m compiling a new collection of recordings (everything’s out there on CD
if you’re patient). I now own reissues of classic D’Oyly Carte recordings
and also of a sparkling Mikado by the Welsh National Opera. In the fall, the
entire collection will be transferred to the iPod. Who would have guessed that
I'd have gone through four or five new technologies in my lifetime? And yet the
song remains the same.

What is the attraction? Gilbert and Sullivan, I think, gave me early
authorization to be silly. The operas licensed criticism of oppressive or
irrational social norms. Everything was fair game. Inasmuch as I was raised in
a rigidly conformist society, the G & S precedent was a great liberation. I’m
absolutely convinced that a great big hunk of my sense of humor was formed
around a Gilbertian core.

When I was a boy, it was the clever patter songs that most struck me. They’re
still good, and some are brilliant. Bunthorne’s soliloquy in Patience,
in which he confesses that “he’s not fond of uttering platitudes/ In
stained glass attitudes” is as fully on target now as it was in 1881. Simply
substitute tired modish Derridadaism for the "high aesthetic line," and “the
meaning doesn’t matter if it’s only idle chatter of a transcendental kind”
jumps right out at you.

But nowadays, it’s not Gilbert's free-standing wit but Sullivan's glorious
ensembles that cause the shiver of delight. Instances: Iolanthe's “Oh, many a
man in friendship’s name”; Ko-ko, Pooh-Bah, and Pish-Tush singing “To sit
in solemn silence in a dull dark dock”; in Ruddigore, the trio “In sailing
o’er life’s ocean wide,/ No doubt your heart should be your guide/ But it
is awkward when you find/ A heart that does not know its mind.” And many
others, including, certainly, the quartet from Yeoman of the Guard: “Strange
adventure, maiden wedded/ To a groom she’s never seen.” Still another
transcendent moment: the high silliness in Pirates, when the assembled choruses
kneel to sing the resplendent, ridiculous: "Hail poetry, thou heaven-born
maid…  All hail, divine emollient." I think that the touchstone of all
touchstones is a truly wondrous brief duet in Iolanthe, when the lovesick Lords
Tolloler and Mountararat, tenor and baritone, rejected by Phyllis, who chooses a
simple shepherd over their dignities, leave the stage singing "Neath this blow/
Worse than stab of dagger/ Though we mo-/ Mentarily stagger,/ In each heart,/
Proud are we innately,/ Let’s depart, dignified and stately.”

In addition to the satire, and the splendid music, G &S also supplies great big
helpings of joy. G & S manage to persuade me, at least for the duration of the
play, to give credence to “rapture, rapture,” and that “pleasures come
in endless series,” and “joy unbounded,” and “laughing song and merry
dance,” and “happier than any/ A pound to a penny,/ A lover is when he/
Embraces his bride."

There’s much to deplore in Gilbert’s creations: nasty racism, an
insufferable obsession with class (embraced even as it appears to be refuted),
jingoism, which is sometimes satirized but often (as in the faux-japonisme
of The Mikado) unconsciously accepted, as well as the constant distasteful
bludgeoning of middle-age women. But just as we forgive Shylock in order to
embrace King Lear, so we must suspend our moral indignation to revel in the best
of Gilbert.

Last week, two of the grandchildren visited for a few days. We rented the DVD of
the Central Park Kevin Kline-Linda Ronstadt Pirates. The kids were attentive,
engaged. Next time they visit: more Gilbert and Sullivan. Perhaps we can plant a
savoyardian seed.

Source: 2006/06/everything_is_c

Title: Everything is Crepuscular
Date: June 02, 2006

When I encountered an excerpt from wunderkind J. S. Foer's Everything is
Illuminated in the New Yorker, I was dazzled. The writing was witty, focused,
intelligent, and emotionally rich.

Now I've read the whole book, and I'm deeply divided about this Jekyll-Hydish
performance. The good parts are still excellent. Jonfen's Ukrainian adventures
in search of Augustine are beautifully managed  -- although I must say that the
joke about Alex's English, so wonderful in the excerpt, quickly grew wearisome.
But the interspersed history of the shtetl of Trachimbrod is just plain bad.
It's boring, embarrassing, and imitative, consisting not only of helpings of
I. B. Singer and of the least attractive aspects of Marquez and his numerous
unmagical epigonoi, but also of an unhealthy dollop of supermarket-checkout
prose. Can Foer discipline his talent, find his own voice, and move into the
big leagues?  It would be tragic if he continues to indulge his genius for
imitation. Or perhaps he'll be both good and bad, like Larry McMurtry, who's
written world-class novels (Leaving Cheyenne,  Lonesome Dove) but has also
squandered his talent on pounds and pounds of glossy trash. Time will tell.

Source: 2006/06/pythons

Title: How to Deal With Enormous, Man-Eating Pythons
Date: June 07, 2006

A few weeks ago, I noted that in The Songlines, Bruce Chatwin made the case that
early humans were prey more than they were predators. Now I've read a new book
on the subject: Donna Hart and Robert W. Sussman, Man the Hunted (Westview,
2005).

The book's title is a bit misleading because it concentrates on primates other
than modern man. Nevertheless, it was good to be reminded of the circumstances
under which our hominid ancestors lived. Seven million years ago and until
recently, our diminutive forbears were forest dwellers who were pursued by huge
crocodilians, outsized eagles, packs of hunting dogs, a variety of giant cats,
and hyenas the size of modern lions who had jaws strong enough to crunch human
skulls in a single bite.

And also man-eating snakes. In the course of their discussion of snakes,
the authors of Man the Hunted report on the instructions provided to early
missionaries to Africa on the proper response to pythons. (A 25-foot-long
reticulated python can weigh up to 300 pounds.)

Remember not to run away; the python can run faster. The thing to do is to lie
flat on the ground on your back with your feet together, arms to the sides
and head well down. The python will then try to push its head under you,
experimenting at every possible point. Keep calm, one wiggle and he will get
under you, wrap his coils round you and crush you to death. After a time the
python will get tired of this and will probably decide to swallow you without
the usual preliminaries. He will very likely begin with one of your feet. Keep
calm. You must let him swallow your foot. It is quite painless and will take a
long time. If you lose your head and struggle he will quickly whip his coils
around you. If you keep calm, he will go on swallowing. Wait patiently until
he has swallowed about up to your knee. Then carefully take out your knife and
insert it into the distended side of his mouth and with a quick rip slit him up.

Well-meant advice, I'm sure, but perhaps difficult to follow. Suppose you're
just not in the mood to allow the python such liberties with your person.
Suppose you've forgotten to bring your knife; suppose the python decides to
start with your head rather than a foot. Suppose you involuntarily wiggle just a
teensy bit. Suppose you just don't feel that it's a good day to be engulfed.

I think that, on the whole, running away and screaming at the top of your
lungs is a more sensible reaction. But then again, I never signed up to be a
missionary.

Source: 2006/06/the_colorado_ro

Title: The Colorado Rockies and the Christianists
Date: June 13, 2006

From 1947, when Jackie Robinson broke the barrier, until 1957, when Walter
O’Malley hijacked the franchise to Los Angeles and cut the heart out of
Brooklyn, the Dodgers represented the best of America. While the United States
remained legally segregated by race and fractured by religion and ethnicity, it
was the Brooklyn Dodgers who offered the nation a vision that was more inclusive
and more just.  One year before Harry Truman issued an executive order banning
segregation in the armed forces, eight years before Rosa Parks refused to give
up her seat on a Montgomery bus, eighteen years before the enactment of federal
statutes protecting the right to vote, the Brooklyn Dodgers hired Jack Roosevelt
Robinson to play first base. And on an unforgettable day in April in Cincinnati,
when racist fans hurled taunts at Robinson, Pee Wee strolled over and put his
arm on Jackie’s shoulder.  It was an iconic moment and one that transformed
not just baseball, and sports, but the world.

The boys of summer made us proud to be democratic, proud to be Americans. All
good men were Brooklynites, at least some of the time. Moreover, the Dodgers
were talented: they won five pennants during those years, and, in 1955, they
won the world championship. Half a century later the Dodgers are still the most
loved, most chronicled, most mythologized team in history.

What will be written about the Colorado Rockies fifty years from now? 
The Rockies’ watchword is not inclusion but exclusivity. They are a
team not of destiny, but of narrow sectarianism. They search for and
hire players of “character”-- which means players of their particular
"Christian" denomination. Their general manager, Dan O’Dowd, is thoroughly
delusional. "You look at some of the moves we made and didn't make. You look
at some of the games we're winning. Those aren't just a coincidence. God has
definitely had a hand in this." A hand in what?  In a history of failure?  In
a losing record?  Last place in their division once again?  God takes sides in
baseball games? Either God is bush league with bat and glove or O’Dowd is a
one helluva sloppy theologian.

O’Dowd, along with club president Keli McGregor and manager Clint Hurdle,
join together for telephone prayer sessions. Is it possible that they hold
on to their jobs not because they are capable of assembling a winning team,
but because they subscribe to the same beliefs as owner Charlie Monfort (“I
believe God sends signs, and we're seeing those")?

Baseball is not about religion. It’s about 95-mile-an-hour fastballs, about
hard sliders, about come-from-behind ninth-inning victories.  Colorado
taxpayers didn’t fund three-quarters of the cost of Coors-–Coors!!! -- Field
so that evangelical ballplayers could testify to their faith.

And what a curious faith! The Rockies depart from established Christian thinking
and veer toward the banal new cult of “prosperity gospel.” Reformation
Calvinism had asserted that an omnipotent deity elects some for salvation and
consigns many more to damnation. Believers sometimes understood material
success to be a sign (but never, ever a reward) of salvation. The Rockies’
unChristian theology turns Calvinism upside-down and defies common sense when
it proclaims that faith leads directly to base hits. (As a matter of fact,
“prosperity gospel” seems to work better for the capitalist owners than for
the players. The team loses, but the franchise increases in value).

There's no hint of supernatural intervention in the Rockies unremarkable record.
If the Rockies were to run away from the opposition, it would indeed constitute
a "miracle" -- but a miracle only in the common secular sense of the word. It
would be a miracle indeed if an incompetent skinflint ownership could somehow
stumble into success.

Are the Colorado Rockies the most foolish, fatuous, and vain organization in the
mountain west?  Not in the least. There's a church in Broomfield that has a
website where “you can send your prayers and encouragement for the Rockies by
clicking here.” Click for Christ. Good Lord!

I wonder if the Rockies ever knew, or if they would like to learn, who it was
who said “do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves
the world, the love of the Father is not in him." If they could answer this
question,they'd be in a position to recognize that there's less real religion
in the entire history of the Colorado Rockies than in five seconds of Reese and
Robinson.

October 19, 2007.  More on the Rockies and religion? Click here.

Source: 2006/08/the_pond_once_b

Title: A Fish Story
Date: August 20, 2006

The pond, once brimful of brekkekkek-kexing, has become virtually silent. What's
happened to all the frogs?  Is it acid rain?  Or is it the great blue herons
who patrol the shoreline morning and evening?

I think we've located the culprit. The pond has been colonized by catfish,
specifically, by the brown bullhead or horned pout.  Omnivores that they are,
the pouts must have been dining on those gelatinous strings of frog eggs, or
perhaps even hunting down the tadpoles. At least that's the theory.

To reproduce, pouts scoop out a nest near the shoreline and deposit a cluster
of eggs. Then they hover nearby for a week or so, fanning the area with their
tails.  One pair made a nest just where we enter the pond to swim and they were
guarding their clutch a little too aggressively, so I decided to take action.
There I was, spade in hand and poised to strike. I felt as though I was a figure
in a diorama at the natural history museum -- "Paleolithic Man Hunted Fish with
Sharpened Sticks."  My technique might have been primitiive, but nevertheless
I managed to nail one of the ugly suckers -- a twelve inch guy with a flat face
covered with nasty barbels -- and a few minutes later I planted him in the
vegetable garden, where he's now recycling himself into tomatoes. Later in the
summer, a guest caught a second pout with a net.  More juicy red tomatoes.

But what about the hatchlings and fingerlings?  Perhaps the herons are on our
side.  Meanwhile, we'll put out a call for a fisherman. Although horned pouts
are hideous, they're reputed to be good table fare -- not my table, however.

We're looking forward to a froggy renaissance.

September 5.  I've now read in Scientific American that herons kill and eat
catfish. They spear them with their long beaks, carry them to dry ground, and
repeatedly wound them. Then they swallow them whole. So when the herons come to
visit the pond, we'll have to maintain both distance and silence and let them
work. It's good to know that the great blues are our allies.

Source: 2006/09/an_iris_anecdot

Title: An Iris Anecdote
Date: September 11, 2006

In my Vermont garden, I grow a number of different varieties of German (also
called bearded) irises. One variety -- a bicolor I inherited a decade ago from
my sister-- had died. I put a spade into the ground to see if I could discover
the source of the problem, and I found that the rhizomes had deteriorated to a
loathsome smelly unholy mess the consistency of overripe bananas. It was a truly
disgusting situation and one that I had never encountered before. For the sake
of garden sanitation, I dug out the decay and some surrounding soil and carried
the filth to the local dump.

Later in the summer, I read this sentence in a garden book: "we cannot confirm
the folk wisdom that bacterial soft rot in irises can be caused by horse
manure."  I knew that rot in iris rhizomes could be spread by iris borers, but
these irises were borer-free. On the other hand, I had been working the soil
with load after generous load of horse manure. So perhaps there's some truth to
the derided superstition. In any case, since I switched to fertilizing irises
with the abundant droppings of sheep I haven't had a recurrence of the disease.
But then again, I haven't been able to re-test the particular susceptible
variety--it being an iris now extinct in my garden.

Source: 2006/09/an_anniversary

Title: An Anniversary
Date: September 12, 2006

On the second Monday of September,1956, I found my way to Rockefeller Hall and
my very first college class. It was a laboratory section of Chemistry 105.

There were more than a thousand people enrolled in the course.

We had all taken a mathematics aptitude test, and I had been placed in an
advanced section of twenty so-called mathematically gifted students.  (Only
rarely in my lifetime have my skills been so badly misjudged.)  In my section
there were nineteen young men, all armed with slide rules -- a device, now
blissfully extinct, that I never mastered -- and one very pretty brown-haired
brown-eyed maid (still sixteen, I was later to discover) with an athletic step
and a musical voice. The guys, brandishing their slide rules, clustered around
the young lady-- bees, or drones rather, drawn to the solitary flower. Many were
the offers to help her insert her thistle tube into her cork. Alas, I could
offer no assistance, introductory chemistry class being both the alpha and omega
of my scientific career.

Nevertheless, in despite of my laboratorical inadequacies, this sunny September
day fifty years later, I'm still married to that brown-haired brown-eyed young
woman.

So today we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the first sighting.

Source: 2006/09/bush_read_three

Title: Bush Read "Three Shakespeares"
Date: September 13, 2006

More outrageous even than "mission accomplished" is the absurd claim that,
during 2006, our very own president, George W. Bush, has read fifty-three books.
It's a fool's game to try to re-invent the class dunce as an intellectual, but
they're trying.

There's some incriminating videotape floating around the "internets" in which
POTUS, heretofore known to devour only the box scores, boasts that he's an "ek-
a-lek-tic" (his pronunciation!) reader. Not only has he been laying into Camus,
he's also read "three Shakespeares." He's both full o' shit and unidiomatic.
Native speakers of English don't say "three Shakespeares"; they say they've
read "three Shakespeare plays."  Next the Great Decider will tell us he's just
hustled over to the Kennedy Center where he listened to three Bachs.

The White House press office has supplied the names of two of the plays to which
Bush lays claim  -- Hamlet and Macbeth. Was there a third play?  If there was,
it's name, like the third murderer and the fabulous WMDs, is lost to history.

If W. had actually turned the pages of Hamlet and Macbeth, he might have noticed
that in both plays, a bad man has become head of state by extralegal means. 
Claudius poured a bit of poison into the ears of Hamlet's father and Macbeth
stabbed Duncan. Neither ruler thrives in his ill-gained position, and neither
has been able to repent his evil deed. Claudius can't bring himself to pray and
Macbeth's way has fallen into the sere and yellow leaf. Fat chance that our
unelected president would notice the parallel to his own situation -- or that
he would be moved to repentance and renunciation. In the world of literature,
there's justice:  Claudius is run through with a sword and Macbeth is beheaded.
No such luck in real life.

And what about the mysterious third play that the Uniter claims to have read? 
If he were looking for parallels to his own career, he could flatter himself by
reading one of the three plays that dramatize the life of King Henry V, in which
a scapegrace prince reforms, gives up alcohol and screwing around, and becomes
the conqueror of France. The parallel is inexact, because Henry enjoyed some
traits of character that George distinctly lacks: courage, eloquence, and the
willingness to endure the same hardships as the soldiers who serve under him.
A better parallel to George II is the succeeding Henry-- Henry VI-- a pious,
immature, weak man unable to control his powerful advisers.

In truth, the character in the thirty-seven "Shakespeares" whom Bush most
resembles is neither Claudius, Macbeth, nor either of the Henrys, but Lepidus
in Anthony and Cleopatra. Shakespeare depicts Lepidus as a man who's happened
into a position far beyond his natural abilities. He's way over his head in
the Second Triumvirate, not at all of the stature of the heroic but flawed
Anthony or the efficient, masterful Caesar. Even the servants recognize that
Lepidus is simply bush-league. One of them tells the audience that "to be
called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in't, are the holes
where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks."  This is a bit
of Shakespearean obscurity certainly beyond the budding intellectuality of
incurious George. It means simply that Lepidus must fill a position as huge as a
Ptolemaic sphere, but he can't because he's tiny and makes no impression at all,
and as a consequence his circle is as vacant as an eye-socket that lacks an eye.
Shakespeare does not think well of Lepidus and soon allows him to be carried off
the stage, drunk. So much for morally and intellectually pitiful men who try to
play with the big boys!

Bush might be even less than a Lepidus, who, when he's not drunk, speaks
plainly enough. Perhaps a better comparison is to one of Shakespeare's braggart
soldiers, like Parolles in All's Well That Ends Well, or to one of the
malapropizing clowns -- as for example Much Ado About Nothing's Dogberry. 
Dogberry is given to such Bushlingo moments as "is our whole dissembly
appeared" and "be vigitant."  And other illiteracies.  But it was beyond even
Shakespeare to imagine a world in which a clown could become head of state.  To
him, such a reversal of the natural order would have been unthinkable.

Source: 2006/09/my_new_tooth

Title: My New Tooth
Date: September 15, 2006

Toward the end of July, while I was in Lyme, New Hampshire celebrating a
friend's third marriage, I bit into a fancy cracker that was topped with a
fragment of sun-dried tomato. With my tongue I felt what I assumed to be small
stone. I spit it into my hand and after a few disorienting moments realized that
I was looking at one of my very own teeth. Number 10, in dentist's language,
upper left front.

I was shocked;  I'm not used to teeth falling out of my head-- especially so
undramatically. No pain, no cracking sound. I put the tooth in my pocket and
found a mirror to inspect myself -- mighty vampirish, I thought.

The next day I saw a dentist down in Thetford and was advised that I needed a
root canal, followed by a "post and crown," which sounded less like a dental
process than a London pub. A week or so later and I was off to White River to
a root canal guy, who hummed Joanie Mitchell songs while digging into my mouth
and kept checking the weather to see if he could get in a golf game before the
rains came. I asked him why the procedure was so damn expensive and he muttered
something mighty unconvincing about the "level of technology."  What with the
abscess and all it took two long visits for him to finish rooting around in my
canal.  And then one day I took a drink of homemade lemonade and felt another
tooth fall out, but -- false alarm -- it was just a lemon pip.

The root canal didn't do anything about the big empty space in my head.  I've
heard that there are some ladies who find that other-side-of-the-tracks look
quite attractive, but in all honestly it didn't seem to do much for my woman. So
back home to Colorado and a visit to still another dentist, who installed a post
and also a temporary artificial tooth and sent me to the "lab" for a "custom
color."  The lab was a surreal experience-- way out in the country in a dumpy
building there's a oversize space where several rows of white-coated-scientist
types with microscopes and very official looking tools sat crafting teeth.
Probably out-of-work sculptors, or possibly impoverished MFA students.

Custom color -- why would I want a custom color?  After the house and the
car, this prosthesis is going to be the most expensive object I own.  I think
it should be gleaming white, not mottled and yellowed like my native teeth.
I'm paying big money, and I want everyone to know that #10 is brand new.  I
wouldn't  buy a new car and immediately dent and scratch it, would I?

Another couple of weeks and I should be all custom-colored, posted, and
crowned.  And from now on I'll remember to stay away from sun-dried tomatoes. 
Dangerous stuff.

September 20.  I've been putting the old tooth under my pillow for a month
now, but no luck.  Apparently the tooth fairy is indifferent to sexagenarian
choppers.

September 28.  The permanent fake tooth has now been installed. I like it
better than the original. It does its job and it's not going to have cavities or
fillings or pain. If I had the cash I'd give thought to a full set.

Source: 2006/09/on_tenure_in_co

Title: On Tenure in Colleges and Universities
Date: September 20, 2006

Most people either don't understand academic tenure or regard it as a flagrant
scam -- nothing more than a lifetime cushy job burdened with little work and
rewarded with long summers vacations. Popular wisdom is entirely incorrect.
Tenure is a good deal for those who achieve it and it's a bargain for America.

The conventional defense of tenure is that it protects freedom of speech.
 Professors, it's thought, are natural born dissenters who are likely to
propound unusual ideas, which, unless they're 'dangerous,' should be tolerated.
(Even though it should be obvious that it's only the dangerous ideas that need
protection.)

There's some truth to this proposition. Some jobs have been saved (but those who
remember the McCarthy period know that university administrators often tripped
over themselves to appease the attackers). The professoriat should be encouraged
to dissent -- it's good for the country to encourage divergent and challenging
views. But it's also true that on the whole, professors are not particularly
controversial. If there have been cases in which scientists, or business
faculty, or professors of literature or music have needed the protections of
tenure, they must be rare indeed. Occasionally, very occasionally, a social
scientist says something just a bit too anti-establishment, and then along
comes some yahoo legislator to demand that the dissenter be fired and tenure
be 'investigated.'   Nevertheless, it's hard to make the case that a hundred
thousand faculty in non-controversial fields need to be tenured so that one or
two people a decade can say something outrageous. I myself think that first-
amendment rights as confirmed by the courts are just as good and perhaps better
protection than tenure for dissenting views.

In my opinion, the best justification for tenure is not freedom of speech but
frugality. Let's begin with the self-evident truth that a person who earns
tenure in a respectable institution possesses some very positive intellectual
and psychological traits. While one doesn't have to be a genius to write a
dissertation, one has to be able to amass evidence and structure a logical
argument and write a decent sentence or two. One must be diligent;  one must
be self-motivated (only half of people who finish graduate courses manage
to complete a dissertation); moreover, in the process of securing tenure, a
person gains experience in presenting information to groups and also learns a
great deal about management and mentoring. These various skills are readily
transferable to the private sector of the economy where they would be well
rewarded. But when a person of talent and ability chooses to work in the
academy, he or she forgoes a large part of his potential earning capacity.
 nstead of a high salary, he receives a lower salary plus the security which
comes in the form of tenure. So it's perfectly reasonable to conceive of tenure
as compensation in lieu of cash.

When an accomplished individual accepts tenure and a diminished salary, society
benefits in a number of ways. It hires talent on the cheap, so education becomes
less expensive. If universities had to match private-sector salaries, the cost
of sending a million young adults to universities would become prohibitive.
There's also a less obvious but equally important benefit. Without tenure, only
the independently wealthy would be able to specialize in, say, in old Mayan,
or Tokugawa Japan, or any of thousands of subjects that require concentration
and effort but do not have any particular market value. These important but
exotic subjects would either disappear from the curriculum, or they would
be taught by faculty who would bring to the table the biases of the moneyed
classes.  (This was indeed the case in America before the 1940s when tenure
became institutionalized.)  Faculties would revert again to what they were when
Harvard had its Gold Coast: social clubs for amateurs and coupon-clippers. More
than any other innovation, tenure has produced the modern democratic university,
where faculty can be drawn from any social class.

I don't mean to say that there aren't problems with tenure.  Tenure is
difficult to obtain, but it's also difficult to lose, and faculties could
do a much better job at self-policing. If a professor isn't doing his job,
isn't keeping up with his subject, isn't make a good faith effort to make
a contribution to learning, then he should surrender his claim to lifetime
employment. There certainly is such a thing as "deadwood"-- though much less
of it than popular mythology would claim. But the deal is this:  lifetime
security for a lifetime of learning. Those who don't honor the agreement should
be speedily purged. No free rides for the lazy dogs.  But this caveat aside,
tenure is a fine, successful institution.

American universities have become and still remain the envy of the world; 
the tenureless university would be less innovative, less democratic, and less
distinguished.

Source: 2006/09/did_roz_chast_a

Title: Did Roz Chast Attend P. S. 217?
Date: September 21, 2006

Diligent readers of this blague (a "fit audience though few," as John Milton
said in a slightly different context) will remember that I've reported on the
language, the culture and the sexual politics of P. S. 217 and its neighborhood.

Newsflash!! It now appears that P. S. 217 contributed to the worldview of the
century's finest cartoonist, the New Yorker's Roz Chast.

I had long suspected that Roz Chast was a neighborhood girl -- where else but in
darkest Flatbush would a nine-year-old go to bed with "The Big Book of Horrible
Rare Diseases?" The most overt clues to her place of origin are found in the
'cartoon a clef' "Ultima Thule," in which a young girl imagines life in various
exotic non-Flatbush neighborhoods: "Red Hook, which was filled with drunken
sailors, loose women, and stevedores; Flatland, which stretched flatly and
unpopulated, into oblivion; and Sea Gate, with its maze of Venetian canals,
from which, once you entered, you'd never emerge." In the last panel of this
masterpiece, a girl in a green pleated skirt floats freely in outer space: "I
just wanted to see what was on the other side of McDonald Avenue."

McDonald Avenue, during my childhood, was the outer limit of homey Flatbush.
Every once in a while, when I was feeling particularly adventurous, I'd ride
my bicycle across McDonald, but I always hustled back. Two reasons: a) it was
different there -- different architecture, different kinds of stores, different
people, and b) the streets ran at a 45 degree angle to the norm. Very scary,
very 'here be dragons.'

I had a job on McDonald Avenue when I was in high school: I shelved books at the
Kensington Public Library (which was scarcely more than a storefront operation),
but the building was on our side -- the Flatbush side -- of the street. I don't
think that I ever crossed to the foreign side -- why would a sane person want to
do such a thing? So my intuition was that if Roz Chast grasped the mystical end-
of-the-earth aura of McDonald Avenue, she had to have grown up somewhere in the
vicinity of P. S. 217.

More evidence:  In the New Yorker for September 4, there's a Roz Chast
bildungscartoon called "What I Learned." After nursery school, where she was
informed that "if you swallow your gum, your guts get all stuck together, and
you die," our young heroine "went to grade school in [her] neighborhood." And
there's a full panel of a square featureless brick building labeled "P. S.
217."  The building doesn't resemble the P. S. 217 of my memory except for the
concrete schoolyard and the chain-link fences that surround it, but it must be
the real thing. The curriculum is ever-so-familiar: Vasco da Gama, "Our Friend,
Corn," chain-stitching. Although nothing about the compass and the protractor,
for some reason.

I had read that Roz Chast grew up in Brooklyn, and that her parents still lived
in the old neighborhood. Just for fun, I looked up the surname Chast in the
white pages. It's an uncommon name;  in fact, there's just one Chast in all
of richly-populated Brooklyn. Here's the relevant map. The Chast apartment on
Webster Avenue is a block or so from the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island
Avenue where P. S. 217 is located; even more startling -- it's no more than a
couple of hundred feet from East 9 Street, where I lived from age zero to age
17. Case closed.

Roz Chast's genius cannot be circumscribed.  She's the master of the
mock-heroic for which Flatbush is famed; she's to the cartoon what Woody Allen
is to movies -- someone who interprets the world through Brooklynish eyes. She's
the sly queen of kvetchitude. And she's a graduate of fabled P. S. 217. I'm so
proud.

Source: 2006/09/geographical_dy

Title: "Geographical Dyslexia," or "Directional Disability," or, People Who Lose Their Way
Date: September 23, 2006

[January 17, 2012.  There are at this moment three pages of comments appended to
this entry, which I wrote almost six years ago. The comments are most
interesting and revealing.  Don't miss 'em -- Vivian].

In The Accidental Tourist (New York [Knopf], 1991), Anne Tyler describes
a malady that, as far as I know had never before been acknowledged in
literature.  All four of her eccentric Leary siblings share "a total inability
to find their way around." Macon Leary, who writes travel books for a living and
is the novel's focal character, christens this trait "geographical dyslexia."

I'm not convinced that "geographical dyslexia" is a good name for the Learys'
condition. An alternative, "directional disability," is not much better.
Whatever the name, sufferers will know what is meant.  There's a class of
people (I'm one of them) who are chronically lost; who take a few steps in a
strange city and can't find their way back to the hotel; who don't know how to
exit the building they've just entered because they've strolled a corridor or
two; who are totally befuddled and even panicked when they drive into a familiar
intersection from an unaccustomed direction; who break into a cold sweat when
someone says, "you know how to get home -- just reverse the directions"; and
who, because they're frequently lost, are subject to ridicule and mockery from
their very own families and from their most intimate friends.

Macon Leary has a theory about his persistent dysgeographica. He thinks he's
disabled because all his life he's moved from house to house, and "people who'd
been moved around a great deal never acquired a fixed point of reference,
but wandered forever in a fog." I know of no evidence to support this wholly
improbable suggestion. Macon clutches at a straw because there's no data (and
there's no data, at least in part, because there's no accepted name for his
condition).

Every sufferer nurses his own unscientific, anecdotal theory. I was once
convinced that my dysgeographica was related to my total absence of rhythm --
as a child I could never learn to pump a swing or even to jump rope. My brother
thinks that it must be connected to his aversion to heights. My niece takes
the view that it's somehow related to her motion sickness and to her bouts of
dizziness. A friend thinks that the trouble stems from the fact that she was
naturally left-handed but was trained to be right-handed. In fact, no one knows
whether dysgeographica is connected to any other trait, or whether it's one of
a cluster of traits. In terms of hard science, the directionally disabled have
been allowed to languish in the dark ages.

I'm almost convinced that dysgeographica runs in families. My father was
monumentally disabled, and one of my brothers is so impaired that he's
occasionally looked to me for directional advice. Barking up the wrong tree, is
he!! (I have another brother who always knows exactly where he is -- perhaps
he's adopted.) In The Accidental Tourist,  Anne Tyler, who's a very sharp
observer of mankind, tellingly attributes dysgeographica to all four Leary
siblings.Tyler also notes that Macon has learned how to cope: he "kept a
stack of index cards giving detailed directions to the houses of his friends
-- even friends he'd known forever." Coping mechanisms are essential to the
dysgeographical. When I have to drive any distance without a navigator, I
write the directions with a thick pen in a notebook and keep it open on the
passenger seat. For some reason, I can't seem to retain more than one or two of
the approaching turns in my mind, so I must continually refer to the notebook.
Mapquest has proved to be a boon, especially if I remember to print out in very
large type.

In The Accidental Tourist, no one pokes fun at the Leary siblings. But in real
life, it's considered quite amusing to laugh at the chronically lost. People
don't understand that dysgeographica is a disability like colorblindness.
I can't say how many times I've been instructed to "concentrate," or "pay
attention' -- advice which is just as effective as commanding a color blind
person to make an effort to register shades of yellow or blue. Without a label
and without a support group, the dysgeographical will continue to be ridiculed.
It's time for us to unite. Unless we do so, we are not only doomed, like Macon
Leary, to be "adrift upon the planet, helpless, praying that by luck [we] might
stumble across [our] destination," but doomed to be humiliated as well.

(July 22, 2007.  I've written again on directional dyslexia.  If anyone is
interested, take a look here, here, and here.    And now one more.)  And
also.

Source: 2006/09/the_leader_thea

Title: The Leader Theater;  Our Leader
Date: September 24, 2006

I was not a committed moviegoer as a youth -- punchball, basketball, softball,
stickball in the street all having more appeal. But often enough, on a Saturday,
especially when the weather was bad, there were double-feature matinees at the
Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue.  =Admission for children was fourteen
cents when I first started attending; I think that by the time I reached high
school the price had risen to as much as a quarter. It was a harmless way
to spend a long afternoon. The theater was usually over-crowded with noisy
ragamuffins who threw popcorn at each other during the love scenes. There was an
impotent "matron" with a flashlight who had the frustrating job of maintaining a
modicum of order.

Musicals mystified me-- I remember waiting for the dance numbers to end so
that we could get on with the plot. I loved westerns and detective stories and
tolerated, though I was frightened by, the war movies.

In the cavalry-and-Indian movies (Stentorian voice :  "In the Years Following
the Civil War...") there was a recurring scene that made quite an impression
on me. Indians have attacked an "isolated farmhouse" or a wagon train. The
colonel who has just come from West Point to take command of Fort Apache or Fort
Bragg or Fort Collins summons the wizened scout who has spent his life on the
frontier. The fresh-faced colonel tells the experienced old buckaroo that he's
heard that there are Indians camped down by the bend of the river, and that he's
going to send a detachment of troops to teach them a lesson. The scout looks
at the arrow that the colonel shows him, and says, "But colonel, them Indians
down by the Brazos (or Snake or Powder or whatever river it happened to be that
particular Saturday matinee) are Comanche; this here's a Kiowa arrow."  But the
bull-headed, ignorant colonel won't listen. As far as he's concerned "they're
all injuns," so he orders an attack, and soon the whole frontier is in flames
and before the movie comes to an end, settlers are hatcheted and the Kiowas are
decimated.

Now I'm sure that George Bush went to see the same movies as I did. But he
couldn't have grasped their point; it was far too subtle for his intelligence.
He must have thought that the stubborn colonel analyzed the situation correctly
when he said that "injuns is injuns," because nowadays  we have a foreign
policy that says, if we're attacked by Al-Quaeda, let's just turn around and
revenge ourselves on the Iraqis. After all, Arabs is Arabs. The result: the
entire frontier is in flames.

There was a recurring scene in the war movies as well. An American soldier, or
a French resistance fighter, has been captured by the Germans. He refuses to
talk; won't spill any secrets.  The German colonel says to him: "ve haf ways of
making you talk. I'll haf to turn you ofer to him." And then the camera would
focus on an obvious sadist in an SS uniform, licking his lips. Next there was a
brief but terrifying shot of the captive sweating and screaming.

In dozens of films, the villainous Germans routinely employed torture. Americans
and their allies, on the other hand, were brave and upright and honorable and
played by the rules.

I can guarantee that at this moment there are movies being made all over the
world in which the colonel is American and the sadist is CIA. And these films
are going to be watched on Saturday afternoons by generations of children.

What has George Bush done to us?  What have we allowed him to do?

Source: 2006/09/in_which_the_au

Title: In Which the Author Confesses His Want of Imagination
Date: September 26, 2006

I was taught, and I have no reason not to believe, that there are three forms
of matter.  There are solids, there are liquids, and there are gases.  But
nowadays I'm expected to believe that there are at least two other forms of
matter.  No matter how I frazzle my brain trying to imagine what in the world
can exist that isn't a solid, a liquid or a gas, I make no headway.  But then
I think-- suppose I happened to live in a world in which there were only solids
and gases -- where all solids, when heated, immediately sublimed into gases? 
Suppose there was no ice made of water-- only substances such as dry ice which,
it will be remembered, turns directly into carbon dioxide when warmed.  In such
a world, it would have been beyond my conceptual ability to conceive of matter
other than the two forms with which I was familiar.  Liquids would have been
unimaginable.  I can only conclude that other forms of matter are definitely
possible;  it's just that I myself can't imagine them.

Similarly, there are the familiar colors of the visible spectrum:  red, orange
yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.  These are the only colors (well, except
for brown, and black, and white).  But it's well known that birds see colors
that humans (who apparently lost some color-sensitive cells during the course
of evolution) cannot detect.  There are infra-red and ultra-violet colors to
which birds respond but that humans are not equipped to perceive.  What do
these colors look like?  I can't possibly imagine, although I dearly wish that
I could. An analogy:  let's say that we humans were constructed in such a way
that we could see only the colors of the spectrum that lie between yellow and
blue;  there would be no way that we could imagine red or orange, even if we
knew that other creatures detected those portions of the spectrum.  We would
live in a world that had been drained of color.  But, in fact, compared to the
birds, we do live in a color-attenuated universe.  Moreover, there's no way
that we can imagine what it is that we're missing.

I wonder also about bats.  Bats are blind but they navigate very precisely by
echolocation, which is nothing more than very sophisticated radar.  They emit
high-pitched squeals, and they process the echoes of these emissions in a manner
that is so precise that they can catch mosquitoes on the wing.  But what is
in their minds?  Does the radar create a picture -- perhaps something like a
three- dimensional black-and-white movie?  Or more likely, is something created
in the bat brain that only a bat will ever know and that humans will never, ever
be able to imagine.  And what about whales, who are not blind as bats but both
see and also gather information by sonar.  What's it's like being a whale?

We're limited by the evolved architecture of our brains.  We can't imagine
what we can't imagine.  We can, however, know that there are phenomena that we
can't imagine -- which is something, I guess, but all-in-all a rather paltry
compensation.

(Plasma and the Einstein-Bose condensate, sometimes termed alternative forms
of matter, are not so much alternatives to solid, liquid, and gas as they are
states of the atoms themselves:  plasma amounts to, if I understand what I've
read, atoms stripped of their electrons, while the EBC is a bunch of atoms that
don't form themselves into a lattice as they would in solids.  They just lie
there, a frigid clump, each unrelated to the other except by proximity.)

Source: 2006/09/states_of_my_mi

Title: States of My Mind
Date: September 29, 2006

I once read the last 200 pages of Hardy's Jude the Obscure in a single hour. 
This extraordinary feat occurred in, I think, 1959 or 1960.

As a general rule, I'm not a speedy reader -- just about average, in fact.  But
for one splendid hour, I was able to read at four or five times my usual pace. 
I can't explain why except to say that I was so focused on Jude and Sue and
Arabella that the whole world outside of that book just disappeared.  Moreover,
it wasn't only that I read rapidly --I read with insight and with imagination. 
I felt that I was in touch not only with the novel but with the author himself
and that I could grasp and appreciate all of Hardy's contrivances and triumphs.

Thirty or so years later, I re-read Jude and I was astonished to find that my
recollection of the novel was superb -- much more detailed and more accurate
than of novels that I had recently read or re-read.  What a difference from
my usual plodding self!  What a joy it must be to be truly intelligent about
books!

It's obvious that my mind, and everyone's mind, must have much greater
capabilities than it ordinarily exhibits.  If only we knew how to access that
ability.

Three or four times in my life, at a concert or listening to music at home
I've felt myself jump to a higher level of understanding.  All of a sudden,
the form of the music -- even of complex music-- becomes crystal clear and the
inevitability of the next note becomes plain.  I seem to know what the composer
thought he was doing.  And then, after a few moments, I become self-conscious
and self-aware, the flood of insights wanes, and I decline to my usual, rather
pedestrian level of appreciation.

I also had one unique experience when I was between sleep and awake and a
tune was repeating itself in my head, and just like! that I started to create
interesting variations on the theme.  Composers sometimes say that they
transcribe music that they hear in their brains, and for a brief moment, it was
as though I myself was a composer.  But alack, after a few short moments, I
came to conscious realization of what was happening and I was roused from my
reverie;  creativity screeched to a halt.  I've never been able to revive
within me that particular symphony and song.

It's also happened that while I'm writing something, I enter what could be
called a trance state and the world seems to drop away.  It's then that I
can write four or five good pages in the same amount of time in which I would
usually grind out a hundred or so words.  It almost seems as though I engage a
part of my brain that's not ordinarily available.  Rimbaud once remarked that
"literature is my unconscious talking to your unconscious."  Maybe geniuses
are those who can achieve a level of concentration that allows them to delve
into inaccessible areas of the brain.  There's a story about Charles Dickens: 
it's said that he wrote the death scene of Little Nell in the midst of a crowded
party and that while he was plying his quill, tears were running down his face
and that he was totally oblivious to the noise around him.  He was there, in
the room, but in another sense, he wasn't there.

It happened to me two or three times that I was speaking to a group when all of
a sudden I became aware that I was constructing elegant and artistic paragraph-
length sentences -- that my vocabulary had enlarged and that my metaphors
were apt and expressive.  I can even remember admiring my sudden burst of
eloquence-- as though I was simultaneously both performer and observer.  But
then, after a few moments, the synaptic connections that transformed me into an
accomplished orator short-circuited and my supernova sentences reverted to mere
competence.  Wouldn't in be wonderful to be effortlessly eloquent!  One can
only lament.  But to look on the bright side -- I'm fortunate to have had a few
grand moments.  Even Kekule only dreamed his benzene rings into existence one
single time.

Source: 2006/10/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  My Antonia
Date: October 02, 2006

During the 1950s, I spent four long years treading water at Erasmus Hall, a
jam- packed public high school at the bepigeoned corner of Flatbush and Church
avenues.  Among the required books in our overcrowded 11th grade English class
was Willa Cather's prairie novel My Antonia.

I've just returned to My Antonia after an interval of fifty years.  It's an
excellent novel, though I confess with shame that I remembered very little
of it.  I managed to retain a bit of the Nebraska atmosphere and emotion
-- the empty, roadless steppe, the harsh winters, the sod houses, and the
spirit of the indomitable settlers.  I had absolutely zero recollection of the
novel's details and not so much as a glimmer of the story.  But then, there
isn't much in the way of plot -- simply the history of narrator Jim Burden's
socially confused and sexually troubled response to the "Bohemian" immigrant
Antonia Shimerda, a vibrant girl (and later a woman) two or three years older
than he.  I remembered Antonia herself -- wild, willful, determined, and
ultimately triumphant -- but I hadn't even a trace memory of Jim.  Perhaps it's
because Antonia remains in Nebraska where she tames her prairie acres and also
births and nurtures uncountable children, while Jim, burdened with advantages
and a middle-class education, leaves Black Hawk to become a lawyer for the
railroad (in effect, an antagonist of the smallholding farmer) and, if I've read
correctly, remains unmarried and childless, a rueful observer rather than an
actor in the great pioneer epic.

I'm also astonished that I had no recollection of buxom, eager Lena Lingard,
who teaches Jim about sex.  Was I so virginal and naive that I was unable to
construe Cather's circumlocutions?

I didn't remember, and surely didn't appreciate, that My Antonia is a lovely,
evocatively written book, extremely economical and at the same time rich in
telling detail.

When I read My Antonia for the first time, I hadn't encountered a plot of grass
larger than the outfield at Ebbets Field (297 feet down the right field foul
line), so "prairie" was a concept I had to take on faith. Now that I've been to
Willa Cather country many times -- not yet to Red Cloud itself but to Hastings,
where the author spent her adolescence  -- My Antonia no longer seems quite
so extra-terrestrial.  Still, I wonder why the Italians and Irish and Jews
and 'Negroes' who populated Erasmus Hall were supplied with such books-- My
Antonia along with O. E. Rolvaag's no-longer-read Giants in the Earth, which is
a desperately grim story of Norwegian immigrants in the Dakotas. I felt, and
I think I was encouraged to feel, that they were the heroic, admirable, hard-
working truly American immigrants, while we (shopkeepers, telephone linesman,
garbage collectors, school-teachers) had somehow snuck in the easy, city way. 
Why weren't we asked to read books about us?  Weren't we just as genuine?

Midway through the novel, Jim takes a few seconds to meditate on the relations
between old families like his own (his grandparents came from Virginia) and
the Czechs and Scandinavians whom they looked down upon.  Conventional wisdom
was that "all foreigners were ignorant people who couldn't speak English." 
"But today," says Jim, speaking as a surrogate Willa Cather herself, "the
best that a harassed Black Hawk merchant can hope for is to sell provisions
and farm machinery and automobiles to the rich farms where that first crop of
stalwart Bohemian and Scandinavian girls are now the mistresses."   It's an
observation that applies not only to the economics of Nebraska in the 1880s,
but is perpetual to the American experience.  Immigrants work hard.  Is it
possible that today's anti-immigration frenzy is driven by the fear that the
present crop of brown-skinned newcomers will work so furiously that they'll
leave in the lurch the neo-nativists who seem to have contented themselves with
a lazy respectability?

Source: 2006/10/radio_baseball

Title: Radio Baseball
Date: October 08, 2006

Yesterday the Yankees were drubbed, absolutely demolished, by the Detroit
Tigers. Sent home packing. Their loss joyed my vindictive, Yankee-hating heart.

When I was a boy hanging out at the P. S. 217 schoolyard and learning about
life, there was no question but that the pin-striped Yankees were privileged
bland tea-sipping Republicans, while the Brooklyn Dodgers were a bunch of
upstart and underachieving heroes to whom we neighborhood kids could relate;
 they were colorful, they were multicultural (before the letter), they were
Democrats, and they were ours.

I watched this week's games on the TV and savored not only the outcome, but all
the pealing bells and slick technological whistles that modern TV can offer: the
multiple replays, the ball-tracking systems that allow the viewer to inspect
both the pitcher's grip and his release and also the spin he puts on the ball. 
I could count the number of rotations on Kenny Rogers' lovely curve.

Although TV is amazingly informative, in my heart I prefer baseball on the radio
-- the radio of my youth, that is. In those days, baseball was radio and radio
was baseball. It's no wonder that baseball was the nation's game -- and it's
only game -- when radio was the dominant medium.

I love the perennial rhythms of radio baseball: "Steps to the plate... digs
in... closed stance... takes a few practice swings.... steps up on the rubber...
round comes the right arm...  slider low and outside....  checks the runner
on first...  looks down for the sign...  the pitch... high fly to left... 
settles under it... two gone in the third...."  It's an enduring, comforting
sound.

Radio baseball as I remember it transformed the players into larger-than-life
figures. It romanticized them. Radio baseball was a never-ending oral epic,
Homeric in dimension. TV, with all its wealth of detail, turns the players
into ordinary mortals; it makes them too familiar, too common. It plucks out
the heart of the mystery. It's impossible to believe that these young men
with their stringy beards and their horrid tattoos and their acneed faces are
reincarnations of the bronze-age superheroes of my childhood. If an announcer
were honestly recording what the TV sees, it would be, "steps up to the plate...
digs in...  adjusts his nuts...  steps out of the box... spits a huge goober
into the dirt...  now he's really excavating his left nostril."

Radio was reverent; television is intrusive.

Radio baseball was noble, and radio listeners were the better for listening to
it. Radio baseball brought us together. On East 9 Street, where I grew up, there
was very little in common among the Petrantos, the Burkes, the Bernsteins, the
Constantinos, the Pynns, the Rhodins, and the Meinekes who populated the block 
-- except that we could all talk about Cox, Reese, Snider, Robinson, Campanella.
I have a strong memory of riding my Ivor Johnson (later my Raleigh three-speed)
on a hot summer evening when there were so many people sitting on their porches,
or on their stoops, or on the fire escapes listening to Red Barber and Connie
Desmond that I could bike for many a mile and not miss a single pitch. Radio
baseball turned us into a community. Which is why we'll never, ever, forgive
that foul black-hearted traitor Walter O'Malley.

But I'm cheerful. It's autumn and the Republican Yankees have lost. It's a
favorable omen. Is it too much to hope that, inasmuch as the Yankees have lost
in October, the Democrats could win in November?

Source: 2006/10/another_variati

Title: Another Variation on the "Replacement Child" Theme
Date: October 12, 2006

In Charles Dickens' Dombey and Son (1848), which I've just re-read, Dombey's
treasured son Paul dies when his older sister, Florence, is about six years
old. Dombey has never liked his daughter Florence (he seems to blame her for
being a girl) and likes her less after he loses Paul. Dombey could transfer his
affection from his dead son to a possible "replacement," his living daughter.
But he shuns that very legitimate psychological option. Instead, Florence is
neglected, ignored, exiled, and eventually even struck by her hard-hearted
father. In real life, it's inevitable that Florence would become alienated,
bitter, and distorted. In Dickens' fairy-tale world her love for her father
endures and she remains cheerful and optimistic. Although she experiences a
truly horrible childhood, she suffers no permanent psychological deficit.
Eventually, she reconciles with her father, forgives him (sic!) and produces
two children (named Paul and Florence, of course).  Dombey, now chastened,
grandfathers these true replacement children.

It's a big, good novel, and Dickens makes us laugh and cry but sometimes
against our will and always in defiance of our knowledge of real--as opposed to
idealized--children. Dickens' optimism and his faith in the power of forgiveness
are wonderful but utterly otherworldly. Replacements, even quasi-replacements
such as Florence, rarely fare so well.

Source: 2006/10/every_american_

Title: Hosseini's The Kite Runner
Date: October 13, 2006

Every American should read Khaled Hosseini's The Kite Runner (Riverhead, 2003)
-- but for its political relevance, not its literary achievement. The novel is
set in Afghanistan, which is one of the few countries where recent American
foreign policy hasn't been entirely incompetent and disgraceful, so to read it
feels reassuring and even patriotic. Inasmuch as we're engaged in a never ending
war in Afghanistan, every one of our fellow citizens should have an idea why
we're there and what we're doing. It's not at all obvious -- Afghanistan doesn't
have a single drop of oil.  Americans should know how bad the Taliban was and
might become again, and also why we should remain vigilant against any rabid
fundamentalist theology--even ones that are near and more domestic than Islam.

In The Kite Runner, the conflict between Afghanistan's dominant Pashtuns and the
exploited Hazaras reminds us that there are countries that are far more absurdly
tribal than our own.

Even though I learned a great deal from this novel, I feel that as a work of
art, The Kite Runner is profoundly disappointing. It came highly recommended to
me and I set out to fall in love, couldn't.  It's an overpraised work. It's
advertised as written in "hard, spare prose" (I'm quoting from the back-cover
blurb), but in fact it's written in prose without any style at all -- and worse
still, every paragraph or so there's a sentence that must make a discriminating
reader cringe. The novel is very weak in characterization: aside from the
autobiographical narrator, there's only one figure of any dimension --Baba--
and all the rest are flat as pancakes. The novelist is particularly bad with
women, who are never more than wallpaper. The child Sohrab, in whom so much is
invested, speaks an idiom that no living child has ever spoken. Has the author
ever had a conversation with a real boy  The plot is filled with obvious
contrivances, artificial cliff-hangers, and (goodness gracious!) a climactic
fist-fight. And while I appreciate the author's love of his native country, it
doesn't seem at all honest to attribute Afghani problems to "Arabs, Chechens,
and Pakistanis." In this novel, the Taliban is represented by a character who
is half-German, a sociopathic admirer of Hitler, and (we eventually discover)
a pervert who preys on little boys. He's a grotesque villain who seems to have
wandered into an ostensibly serious novel from a James Bond melodrama. Why can't
the author face the fact that the the Taliban are home-grown Afghani fascists?
He would have given us a stronger novel if he had done so.

Source: 2006/10/an_east_9th_str

Title: An East 9th Street Memory
Date: October 15, 2006

It was an entirely different world -- East 9th Street in the old days. Sometimes
it seems so long gone that I find it hard to believe it even though I was there:
the last horse-drawn vegetable trucks and milk-wagons in America, an "old-
clothes man" shouting his cry in the street, an itinerant knife-sharpener with
his pushcart. On the street, a few, very few, rusting 1930s automobiles (it was
the war, and all the factories were turning out tanks). And me, in first grade,
wearing hand-me-down knickerbockers with long socks as if I were some turn-of-
the-century waif.

Next door to us was a two-family house. On the first floor, the very ancient
Mr. and Mrs. Pynn, who tended their gladioluses in the tiny backyard. He was
a retired merchant marine. (How did an old Cornish sailor come to live in our
neighborhood?)  On the second floor were the Pynn's tenants the Rhodins, Thor
and Pearl, who were at least a generation or so older than my parents and who
had three adult children (Thor Jr, Yammie [actually Hjalmar] and Peggy) none of
whom I ever met and whose existence I was aware only because Mrs. Rhodin would
boast of their exploits -- Thor Jr. was a physicist who, she said, worked on The
Bomb. The Rhodins were very quiet people. He, a tall, thin, aloof man who never
spoke, was either unemployed or retired;  he emerged from the house twice a day
to walk his poodle. Mrs. Rhodin "went to business," as the saying was in the
neighborhood.

One hot summer day, I was reading in the back bedroom. Windows (ours and the
Rhodins) were wide open. Across the narrow driveway, I heard Mrs. Rhodin launch
into a furious tirade. All the promises Mr. Rhodin had made to her. How little
he had accomplished. The kind of place they lived in. Stuck in Brooklyn. She
supported him while he lazed around at home. And other complaints that I
couldn't understand or don't remember -- but there could be no doubt about her
fury. Her litany of objections was loud and it seemed to go on for hours. A one-
way street, though; I never heard Mr. Rhodin's voice.  Stunned, I shamelessly
eavesdropped.

Was it days, or weeks, or months later that Mr. Rhodin was run over by a bus on
18th Avenue and instantly killed?

Was there a connection between the tirade and the accident? And was it an
accident?  Even in my childish naivete, I thought suicide. And because I knew
Pearl and Thor's secrets, I felt as though I were a bit of an accomplice.

Source: 2006/10/two_erotic_poem

Title: Two Erotic Poems
Date: October 20, 2006

Here are two excellent poems, of different eras and origins, that are at heart
surprisingly similar. The first, "Politics," written in the pre-World War 30s,
is by W. B. Yeats.

How can I, that girl standing there,

My attention fix

On Roman or on Russian

Or on Spanish politics?

Yet here's a traveled man that knows

What he talks about,

And there's a politician

That has read and thought.

And maybe what they say is true

Of war and war's alarms,

But O that I were young again

And held her in my arms!

This lovely verse restates a perennial literary theme: the conflict between
public and personal, or, between the life of duty and the life of pleasure. The
speaker of the poem, whoever he is, withdraws from a troubling weary political
conversation into a succinctly limned but very concrete and nostalgic sexual
fantasy. The anxieties heaped up in the first ten lines are overpowered by the
buoyancy of the concluding two. The hinge of the poem is the daring "But O" --
"O" being the most dangerous syllable in poetry, which, when wrongly used, can
be a sentimental disaster, but when discreetly employed, as here, condenses
into one moan an outburst of genuine feeling that overwhelms a stultifying
social ritual. For a pleasing moment, the speaker, powered by that great "O,"
withdraws from politics to enjoy, at least in his imagination, the pleasures and
consolations of sex.  I

Here's another poem -- a song, actually -- quoted first in sixteenth-century
manuscript version and then modernized.

Westron wynde when wyll thow blow

The smalle rayne down can rain

Cryst if my love were in my Armys

And I in my bed Agayne.

(And now the modernized version.)

Western wind, when wilt thou blow

The small rain down can rain?

Christ, that my love were in my arms

And I in my bed again.

In this anonymous quatrain, it's not politics but the cruel world itself that
is so discomforting. It's winter, and the singer waits for the western wind
that is the harbinger of spring. "Small rain" is not an idiom that is still in
use;  nowadays we say "light rain" -- the meaning is something like "April
showers."  In the traditional world that we have lost, "small rain" might even
have had just a touch of biblical resonance: "as the small rain upon the tender
herb, and as the showers upon the grass." The "small rain," when it will at last
come, will bring an end to harsh sterile winter and signal the start of fertile
spring. To paraphrase the first two lines: "when will the western wind bring in
the showers that will cause the earth once more to bloom?"  And then the hinge
expletive "Christ" (paralleling Yeats's 'O' but shockingly blasphemous) which
precipitates a potent sexual fantasy: in his warm, no longer wet wintry bed, the
speaker can shower sex upon his beloved.

Four exquisite, unmatchable lines of erotic poetry that are, miraculously, even
more spare and resonant than Yeats's.

Source: 2006/10/a_recurring_vio

Title: A Recurring, Violent Nightmare
Date: October 22, 2006

I wish I had pleasant dreams but I only have nightmares. Here's one of them.
Beginning with early adolescence and continuing to this day, I've had a
recurring dream in which I've murdered someone--I don't know whom. The victim is
always an unidentifiable male, and his death is always violent. Ordinarily, I
beat him to a bloody pulp with a shovel. I have problems disposing of the gory
body, but usually I bury it next to the neglected garage that lay behind our
house on East 9 Street in Flatbush where I lived my first seventeen years. It's
an anguishing dream not because I've killed someone, but because I've failed to
conceal the body properly and because I'm going to be arrested and punished.
It's amoral  -- I don't feel guilty that I'm a murderer -- just embarrassed
because I'm incompetent. It's a very realistic nightmare. A couple of times it's
been so vivid to me that even after I was wide-awake, it took me ten or fifteen
seconds to realize that I was not being hunted by the police and that I could
proceed normally with my life.

I don't know why I should be so oppressed with this fantasy. In the daylight
hours, I'm your run-of-the-mill peaceful person. Never killed anyone.

Imagine my surprise when I read (and studied the illustrations of) J. M.
DeMatteis's 100% autobiographical "graphic novel" Brooklyn Dreams (Paradox,
2003) and discovered that my nightmare is not entirely my own. DeMatteis suffers
from exactly the same recurring dream. "I remember the body -- buried out behind
my apartment building... or maybe stuffed in a trash can across the street.... 
Some poor, innocent schmuck I've either hacked up with a machete... or machine-
gunned with Cagney-like ferocity... or maybe just kicked down a flight of
stairs."  DeMatteis labors under the guilt that's provoked by this dream, and,
like me, he can't explain it except to speculate that his life is a nightmare
from which he's trying to awake.  But here's what's so fascinating to me:
DeMatteis is a product of the exact same Brooklyn neighborhood as I (see map). 
He grew up at the corner of Ocean and Foster, and he hung out at Newkirk Plaza,
a commercial island that would nowadays be called a shopping center, where I
endured painful haircuts, carried my mother's dry cleaning back and forth, and
entered and exited the BMT subway.  Was there something about Flatbush, or,
more particularly, something about "the Plaza" that made us killers in our
dreams. Yes, I rather think there was.

Is it significant that DeMatteis is a kind of replacement child? He is the
survivor of a pair of fraternal twins. His potential sibling was spontaneously
aborted -- although DeMatties speculates, that, prescient about life's
forthcoming difficulties, he might have "jumped." DeMatties' mother was about to
be "scraped" when the doctor had second thoughts. In Brooklyn Dreams, DeMatteis
describes his mother's and father's hysterical, debilitating and inconsistent
protectiveness -- traits often discovered in parents who haven't properly
grieved the loss of a child.

Is it possible that the person whom DeMatteis thinks he murdered is, on some
level, the unborn twin?

And so we have still another variation of the replacement child syndrome.

Source: 2006/10/our_local_newsp

Title: Death and Dying in Boulder, Colorado
Date: October 22, 2006

Our local newspaper, the Boulder Daily Camera, has announced a new policy. No
longer will obituaries be considered news. They've been turned over to the
classifieds and will be written by friends or relatives of the deceased and
placed by funeral homes. Bottom line: deaths are now an opportunity for revenue
enhancement.

I'd always taken it for granted that keeping track of who's born, who's married,
and especially who dies constitutes a considerable part of the mission of a
local paper. Such events are bread-and-butter matters -- part of the soul of the
community.

The Daily Camera is certainly not where we find out what's happening in the big
world -- it's woefully inadequate in that regard, although it does pick up and
truncate a few pieces off the wire. The Camera's sole reason for being is that
it covers local news, and by doing so allows Boulder's citizens to feel that
they have something in common.

But in fact the Camera only masquerades as a local paper. It's a holding of
the folksy-titled Prairie Mountain Publishing, which is a joint venture of E.
W. Scripps Co., the newspaper conglomerate, and the MediaNews Group (MediaNews
itself owns the Denver Post and four other Colorado papers;  Prairie Mountain
also owns the Colorado Daily). There's nothing local about the Camera and
there's no reason for its absentee owners to care two cents worth who lives
or dies in Newlands or South Boulder or Wonderland Hills. The Camera's job is
to extract as much money as possible from Boulder and to forward the cash to
Prairie Mountain Publishing.

The Prairie Mountain overlords have placed a new publisher, Al Manzi, at the
Camera; Manzi is a corporate lifer. I'm reliably informed that he came with
specific instructions to up the Camera's profits.

And so, obituaries are now on a pay-to-play basis.

How is it that there have been absolutely no complaints about the new policy? 
Boulder is a contentious, argumentative city.  It would be reasonable to expect
that the Camera's letters-to-the-editor columns would be saturated with protest,
but there's been nary a word. Why?  Because Manzi has instructed the editorial
staff not to publish any letters that protest the new policy. It's good to be
the publisher.

Here are some proposals for Al Manzi.  Why stop with obituaries?  Or with
wedding and anniversary announcements, which are obviously fair game. Letters
to the editor: why not?  Why should a newspaper give free space to community
opinion. Let those who can pay, pay. And editorials. Why should there be
editorials when there can be advertorials?

Here's a phrase to remember:  "revenue center."

In today's paper, there's an announcement that the Camera's editor, Sue Deans,
who has local roots, has resigned. Could it be that her departure is related to
Manzi's policy changes?  Would anyone be astonished to discover so?

Source: 2006/10/on_foley_and_hy

Title: On Foley, Rascal Beadles, and "Hypocrisy"
Date: October 23, 2006

It's the scandal of the month that Republican Representative Mark Foley
solicited sex from adolescent male congressional pages in the same years that
he headed the House Caucus on Missing and Exploited Children and made his
reputation for his work on legislation targeting sexual predators.

Foley has been universally condemned for his "hypocrisy," as well he should be.
It's especially piquant that his castigation of a much-reviled-by-moralists
former president has resurfaced to embarrass him and to amuse the rest of
us: "It's vile. It's more sad than anything else, to see someone with such
potential throw it all down the drain because of a sexual addiction." What kind
of rationalizing maneuvers were going in the Foley mind when the Congressman
uttered these words about Bill Clinton?

Foley's "hypocrisy" is anything but unique.  Shakespeare nailed the phenomenon
centuries ago. In one of his great wisdom-in-madness moments, King Lear sees
beneath the surface: "Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!/ Why dost thou
lash that whore? Strip thine own back;/ Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that
kind/ For which thou whipp'st her."

Every few weeks or so, it's discovered that one of our very own American beadles
is enthralled by the exact sin against which he inveighs. There's the anti-
pornography campaigner who has accumulated some unusual apparatus in his clammy
basement; the anti-vice TV preacher caught with a shady lady in a by-the-hour
motel on the Memphis strip;  the anti-gay state legislator photographed dancing
in a downtown bar that caters only to men; the radio talk-show host who wants
to send drug-users up the river for life but is himself addicted to hillbilly
heroin; the flabby propagandist for virtues who pulls all-nighters at Atlantic
City blackjack tables.  ll of them are hypocrites, I suppose, but in my view
"hypocrisy" is a label that has no explanatory value.

It's not as though people set out to become hypocrites. It's not an aspiration
or a chosen career path. There's no Hypocrisy 101.

I'm not an anti-vice campaigner or a psychologist and have no particular claim
to expertise in this area, but I don't believe that people like Foley are
cloven-footed sociopaths.

Nor do I hold to the theory that it's simply protective coloration: "if I scream
loud enough no one will suspect me." That shabby dodge has long since worn
through; who else do we suspect nowadays if not the loudest shouters?

I think the migration to hypocrisy must be very gradual. The Foleys of this
world are driven by the flesh. Their vice becomes their obsession. I believe
that they try to turn that obsession, that vice, in a positive direction. 
Let's say a person is fascinated by adolescent boys;  he can then take on the
cause of sexual exploitation and he can manage his compulsion in a socially
acceptable manner. He can study it, observe it, catalog it; he can stay in
close touch with the temptation but not succumb to it; he can in fact turn his
vice into virtue. It's an excellent game plan.  It's a healthy compensatory
reaction.

I'm sure that there are anti-vice campaigners who employ such tactics
successfully. But there are others who, in moments of weakness, do succumb.
Now they're in a tricky psychological pickle.  Who better to appreciate the
damage to adolescents than the person who has made a professional study of the
outcomes?  So now Foley and the others know in their hearts that they are
truly hateful. Perhaps they persuade themselves that their power makes them
invulnerable. Meanwhile, they redouble their efforts to help the exploited;
they pass legislation and start foundations.  And so the gulf between their
professed beliefs and their private practices becomes deeper and deeper. Good
deeds and evil deeds become inextricably entwined.

In the story, Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (a child-molester) inhabited the same body.

I think that what must happen next is that self-loathing kicks in, big time.
And as we all know, self-loathing and self-betrayal are twinborn. So the Foleys
among us cooperate in their detection.  They engage in riskier and riskier
behavior until they are exposed. Because, in fact, they want to be exposed. As
Lear says, they "strip [their] own back[s]."  Because once they're exposed
and the punishment commences, they can then set out on the path of redemption,
which, I'm absolutely convinced, they crave as much or more than they crave the
pleasure of their vice.

When La Rochefoucauld said that "hypocrisy is the tribute that vice pays to
virtue," he acknowledged that the term "hypocrisy" did not explain anything--
that it's an incidental by-product of human frailty.

Source: 2006/10/book_report_fic

Title: Book Report:  Fiction by Michael Chabon
Date: October 24, 2006

I liked the film Wonder Boys (2000) so very much that I set out to read all
of Michael Chabon's writing. Here's my interim report. I couldn't finish The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh (William Morrow, 1988). The book is reported to have
sold well and it has been widely praised, but, I'm sorry, I thought it was
precious juvenilia and should never have been published. I do, however, love
the title. A Model World (1991) and Werewolves in Their Youth (Random House,
1999) are collections of short stories. I found them both mighty insubstantial,
and I confess to wearying of the little boy whose father left the family (a
far-too- frequently-repeated motif). Wonder Boys (1995) is a fine, complicated,
clever, satisfying novel.  Grady Tripp, Terry Crabtree, and James Leer are all
memorable creations. The Passover service (omitted in the film) is top-flight
-- comic and moving at the same time. The story is fast, funny, and original --
even richer than the fine, little-known movie.

I respected more than I loved the pullet-surprise winning Amazing Adventures of
Kavalier and Clay (Random House, 2000). It's engaging but overcrowded. While
reading it, I was too conscious of the artifice and too aware of the novel's
debts: Nabokov, a pinch of Pynchon, Doctorow, etc. Chabon's a great storyteller
with a bright future. So far, he's doesn't have the heft of Bellow or the
fluency of Roth, but he's up there in the big leagues. I'm hoping Summerland and
The Final Solution are as good as the novels I've read so far. It's going to be
fun to follow Chabon's career. He's a talented guy.

October 25. Today I read the novella The Final Solution (Harper Collins, 2004).
It's a snazzy mystery. Chabon returns to his infatuation with mythic figures;
he also re-creates the hero-sidekick relationship that is an obsession of AAKC
-- this time its S. Holmes and Linus Steinman.  A very entertaining story,
although sometimes I worried that I was reading a filmscript-in potentia. 
Perhaps I'm too suspicious: not many directors are jumping to cast a parrot in
the lead role.

October 30.  I read forty or so pages of Summerland (Miramax, 2002). Two words:
"teen" and "fantasy." Not at all my cup of tea.  I hope that Chabon doesn't
continue to indulge himself with such trivialities. He's too good for this
stuff.

Michael: get back to work!  Get serious!

Source: 2006/10/occupations_not

Title: Occupations Not For Me
Date: October 30, 2006

Here are some career paths that it's just as well I didn't tread.

1.  Taxi driver in a large city (especially a city that's not on a grid, such as Boston or London. Even the DC-diagonals drive me nuts). I've earlier written about my incapacitating directional disability, but I neglected to mention that I tend to get into a bit of a panic when I'm lost --  I start driving much too fast and far too waywardly. So, dear friends, imagine me a befuddled cabbie, sweating super-profusely, while the fares in back scream bloody murder when I take the exact wrong turn for the fourth consecutive time. It would be a freakin' nightmare. Related occupations that won't work: tour guide, wilderness guide, tracker.

2.  Dog-groomer. I've hinted at my lack of affection for doggies before. I just don't think I'd do a good job blow-drying Fido or brushing Fifi's teeth. (Incidentally, I'm joined in my prejudice against curs by gentle Will himself, whose references to canines are uniformly unfriendly: the superbly wicked sisters in King Lear, for example, are "dog-hearted daughters.")

3.  Trapeze artist. I'm terrified of heights and I have absolutely no sense of rhythm. Imagine me launching myself at just the right moment to catch my partner by the ankles. Related opportunity for ignominious failure: dance instructor.

4.  Surgeon.  I'm far too squeamish to be poking around in someone's innards.  Even channel surfing has become a dangerous pastime since we accidentally acquired the live surgery channel.  Motto:  "all gore, all the time."  I have to keep clicking that remote lest I accidentally pause at an open-heart moment. The FCC should mandate a warning and a five-second delay:  "Caution:  palpitating inner organs on view shortly."

5.  Hostage.  Chained to a bed somewhere in the 'stans wouldn't work for me. I must have my oatmeal every morning at 7 a.m., and I need to move my bowels shortly afterward. Moreover, if I don't eat lunch right on time, I get wicked headaches. Not to mention that I don't function well in rooms that are either too hot or too cold or not well ventilated, and which are peopled with chain-smoking guards. On the whole, I'd be a mighty cranky hostage.

Source: 2006/11/shakespeare_and

Title: Shakespeare and Dogs
Date: November 01, 2006

In a recent post, I casually mentioned that William Shakespeare was not fond
of dogs and I offered as evidence the fact that the two villainous sisters in
King Lear are called "dog-hearted daughters." Not convincing, says one of my
readers. Is that so? Well, let me offer further evidence of dog-heartedness.
Shakespeare's first true villain, Richard of Gloucester, is metaphorically
speaking, a dog. According to the legend, which the character himself embraces
and flaunts, Richard was born with a full set of teeth "which plainly signified/
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog." Not a tractable or ingratiating
dog either, but one who is both treacherous and poisonous: "when he fawns, he
bites; and when he bites,/ His venom tooth will rankle to the death." At the
end of Richard III, when Richard is killed at the climactic battle of Bosworth
Field, his heroic Tudor successor Henry Richmond proclaims victory in these
words: "God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,/ The day is ours, the
bloody dog is dead."  So here's a pretty pack of hounds: Goneril, Regan, and
Richard of Gloucester. And yet one more villain -- Iago in Othello: "O damn'd
Iago. O inhuman dog."

In the Shakespearian universe, villains are regularly described as dogs, but
dogs are never, ever, characterized as loyal, or affectionate, or helpful.
They're anything but our newspaper-fetching friends.  On the contrary,
dogs are "base," "unmanner'd," "thievish," "mangy," "hellish," "whoreson,"
"coward," "rascal," and "bloody." Shakespeare often uses the dysphemism
"cur" for dog. Curs are "mongrel," "cruel-hearted," "o'erweening," "whoreson
indistinguishable," and "venom-mouth'd." Hounds, highly regarded by some
for their hunting ability, are "false" or "fell and cruel." Both Richard of
Gloucester and Macbeth are "hell-hounds." Shakespeare's dogs are regularly
associated with disorder, violence and evil;  everyone knows Mark Anthony's
"Cry 'havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war."

Shakespeare draws upon dogs when he wants to describe an uncivilized and wild
world. Henry IV fears what England will become when his undisciplined son
succeeds him: "For the fifth Harry from curb'd license plucks/ The muzzle of
restraint, and the wild dog/ Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent." Dogs
are untrustworthy, because they are "easily won to fawn on any man." "They
turn... As dogs upon their masters." When the conspirators murdered Caesar, they
"fawn'd like hounds,/  And bowed like bondsmen, kissing Caesar's feet;/ Whilst
damned Casca, like a cur, behind/ Struck Caesar on the neck." Dogs are not only
disloyal, they're disgusting as well. In The Second Part of King Henry the
Fourth, Archbishop Scroop complains that the common people are no more loyal to
Henry than they were to his predecessor Richard II. "So, thou (i.e. the people)
common dog, did'st thou disgorge/ Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard./ And
thou would'st eat thy dead vomit up,/ And howl'st to find it."

Shakespeare knew his dogs and had their names at his finger tips. Macbeth runs
through a catalog:  "hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs/ Shoughs,
water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept/ All by the name of dogs." Mad Edgar, in
Lear, makes a similar list: "Be thy mouth or black or white,/ Tooth that poisons
if it bite;/ Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim./ Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,/
Bobtail tyke or trundle tail." Shakespeare had a particular and peculiar dislike
of fawning dogs, whom (as was first noticed by Walter Whiter in 1794) he lumps
together with (strange as it seems) candy or sweets, and images of melting.
When Hotspur thinks back to an early encounter with the future King Henry IV,
he remembers "Why, what a candy deal of courtesy, this fawning greyhound then
did proffer me." In Anthony and Cleopatra, Anthony realizes that his followers
are abandoning him; he laments that "the hearts/ That spaniel'd me at heels,
to whom I gave/ Their wishes, do discandy, Melt their sweets/ On blossoming
Caesar; and this pine is bark'd/ That overtopp'd them all." Flattering dogs and
sweets are bound so closely in Shakespeare's subconscious that sometimes the dog
is implicit rather than explicit. Hamlet to Horatio: "Why should the poor be
flattered./ No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,/ And crook the pregnant
hinges of the knee,/ Where thrift  [i.e. advantage] may follow fawning." A
reader who is familiar with Shakespeare's imagination can detect the ghost of a
fawning spaniel behind that "candied tongue." The ghost of a ghost is there also
in King Lear, where Lear, in his madness, imagines that he surrounded by a pack
of hounds: "The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they
bark at me."

Did Shakespeare suffer some traumatic childhood event involving dogs and
candy? It has been so suspected?  Whether yea nor nay, it's more than clear
that Shakespeare's loathing of dogs was not of the surface; it was a deep and
elemental revulsion.

Source: 2006/11/what_we_heard_i

Title: What We Heard in the Fifties
Date: November 06, 2006

Regular readers (and even stray internet pilgrims) know that Dr. M. has composed
a series of entries called What We Read in the Fifties, in which he's revisited
books that were noteworthy or notorious during the days of his youth. It's been
a rewarding exercise, at least for him. Some of the books have been canonical
novels that were required reading in English class at Erasmus Hall High School,
some have been pop best-sellers which his more earnest teachers would have
scorned, and some have been cheap sensational paperbacks passed under the desk
from hand to grimy pubescent hand.

In the years that have passed since I first read these books, rivers have
changed course, glaciers have melted, and American society has altered almost
beyond recognition -- and yet the books have remained exactly the same. Reading
them has been an exercise in nostalgia and a test of memory, and also an
unwelcome insight into the incalculable callowness of adolescence. And yet, Dr.
Metablog has found readers -- or, at least, he thinks he has, for in May and
in December, when high school students all over America, yea, even across the
waters, write their assigned term papers on Lord of the Flies or The Catcher
in the Rye, blague-traffic spikes, and the dissenting views offered in these
essaylets are plagiarized and offered to a new generation of English teachers,
who reward them with grades of D or F.

I fear, however, that my readers might have gathered an erroneous impression of
1950s Flatbushian youth -- that they might have been literate or intellectual.
Let me clear my conscience and confess that for every hour that I spent reading
books that had actual bindings, I spent ten hours reading comic books and an
equal measure with my ear to the radio. It was the comics that taught me how to
read; I was well along in years before I came to realize that there were such
things as lower-case letters and that there could be sentences that didn't end
with exclamation points! In my neighborhood, super-heroes (Batman, the Flash,
Green Lantern, Wonder Woman) were as common as squirrels or starlings. But radio
-- radio serials-- affected us even more than the comics. Radio stimulated the
imagination, took us to worlds far way, presented us with alternative realities.
Members of my age-cohort will not forget the glories of radio:Jack Armstrong,
the All-American boy, who trotted the globe in support of native ideals and
Wheaties; Bobbie Benson, the youth who inherited the B-Bar-B ranch in the Big
Bend country, and who, along with Tex, Windy, and Harka, triumphed daily over
snakes, droughts, famines and outlaws; the Shadow, who had the power to "cloud
men's minds so they cannot see him," and who taught us, every day, that "the
weed of crime bears bitter fruit"; Sergeant Preston of the Northwest Mounted,
who fought crime and bad guys in the Yukon with horse and dog ("Well, King,
this case is closed"); and the Lone Ranger, who with the aid of Tonto and the
"thundering hoof beats of the great horse Silver" and with the marvelous voices
of exotic Detroit's Fred Foy and Brace Beemer, created an enduring mythology of
a spacious but vague and unlocatable west.

Radio gave scope to the listener's imagination. When television came along, and
these programs were translated into a visual form, they were all inevitably
diminished. It's no wonder that the great epics (Gilgamesh, the Odyssey and
Iliad, Beowulf, the Icelandic sagas) are oral creations. The spoken word can
cast spells that are beyond the capacity of visual forms. When it comes to
heroes, a single word is worth a thousand pictures.

Radio prepared me for Shakespeare. It's a fact that when Londoners crossed the
Thames to attend the Globe, they did not go to "see" a play; they went to "hear"
a play. There's a world of difference between seeing and hearing. When we "see"
a movie, 90% of the information comes to us through the eye. In a Shakespeare
play, it's exactly the opposite -- 90%, or more, of the information comes to
us by way of the ear -- which is why recordings of Shakespeare's plays can be
so entirely successful and so true to the original intent. And because the
plays are primarily oral, with their big speeches and complicated rhetorical
patterning and brilliant displays of verbal acuity, they can also be larger-
than-life -- and they can be heroic. Shakespeare's plays are closer to radio
than they are to any other modern literary form. Those of us who grew up with
radio bring to Shakespeare an intuitive understanding of oral forms that precede
television, film, and even precede the theater itself  -- especially decadent
modern theater with its compulsive and distracting visual distortions.

Source: 2006/11/flying_the_flag

Title: Flying the Flag
Date: November 09, 2006

Yesterday, we dug out our grand old American flag and flew it from the holder
that I had improvised after 9/11. We flew it to celebrate two great changes: a)
the Democratic triumph in Tuesday's election, which restored a bit of our faith
in representative government, and b) the end of the arrogant reign of Donald
Rumsfeld, the principal mover (except for the cowboy-in-chief himself) of this
foolish, disastrous adventurism in the Middle East. We're hoping for a return to
common sense in America, but we're not entirely optimistic  -- the guy who's
in charge doesn't read, can't admit he's ever made a mistake, and takes his
marching orders from a) Rove, b) his gut, and c) his narrow, parochial version
of the great signifier in the sky  -- in what order of priority no one knows.

Rumsfeld should have been out on his ass years ago. He had lost the respect of
the soldiers, certainly of the generals, the congress, and, as we now know from
the election results, of ordinary Americans everywhere. However, until yesterday
he could still patronize and mystify the journalists, and he could still issue
instructions to those beneath him in the chain of command.  And generals obey
even when they despise the person issuing the orders.

In 1606, Shakespeare described the psychological relations between the generals
and their civilian commander. Of Macbeth, Angus says that "Those he commands
move only in command,/ Nothing in love." That is, they do what they're told, but
they hate doing it. Here's the full transcript of Angus's remarks: "Now does
[Macbeth] feel/ His secret murders sticking on his hands;/ Now minutely revolts
upbraid his faith-breach;/ Those he commands move only in command,/ Nothing in
love: Now does he feel his title/ Hang loose upon him, like a giant's robe/ Upon
a dwarfish thief."

It's hopeless to expect that Rumsfeld would recognize that the mantle of
Secretary of Defense hung upon him as Angus describes Macbeth's (or, as does, a
fortiori, the presidential mantle upon its own wearer) -- there's not sufficient
insight or perspective or self-knowledge around the White House these days. But
we know exactly what Angus meant, and we know that some of our so-called leaders
are nothing more than dwarfish thiefs.

("Minutely" means "every minute";  "Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-
breach" means "every minute a revolt [by one of his former followers] pays
Macbeth back for his own breach of faith, i.e. assassinating Duncan.)

Source: 2006/11/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  All the King's Men
Date: November 13, 2006

I've now re-read Robert Penn Warren's All the King's Men (1946), a novel that I
hadn't looked at since the early 1950s. Once again memory has played its tricks.
My fifty-year-old afterimage does not correspond to reality. The book that I
thought I remembered focused on Willie Stark (Huey Long) -- his ascent to power,
his anti-establishment politics, his ruthlessness, and his assassination. 
Willie Stark does in fact appear in the book that I re-read, but he's not
the central figure -- not even close. It's a novel about Jack Burden, press-
secretary and chief blackmailer for Stark, and about the various spokes of
Burden's wheel: his semi-aristocratic mother, his lawyer-turned-religious-
fanatic father, the apparently upstanding judge who was his mother's lover,
his childhood sweetheart Anne Stanton and her doctor brother, and also Sadie
Burke, the Boss's secretary-girlfriend-political guru, and of course about Stark
himself.  Perhaps I misremembered because the Willie Stark parts of the novel
are so strong, or perhaps my memory was filtered through the 1949 Robert Rossen
film. Even half a century later, it's hard to read the book without seeing
Broderick Crawford and Mercedes McCambridge in the mind's eye. (The film is now
in the Netflix queue, so I'll revisit it shortly.)

It's a good book, well worth the prizes and the accolades. For my money, there
could have been more politics and more Louisiana and less young-man-searching-
for-his-identity. It's a big, as they say, "sprawling" novel; sometimes the
sprawl works, but at other times -- the long flashback in which adolescent Jack
woos adolescent Anne, for example -- an editor's scissors would have done the
novel a world of good. The prose is mannered and affected and derivative: hunks
of Thomas Wolfe, a dollop here and there of Faulkner, along with extra-large
helpings of Chandler or Hammett. But it's nevertheless strong writing.

Melodramatic?  Yes, indeed: murders and suicides, betrayals and reversals,
mysteries and exposures. But at the core, a genuine curiosity about America
and its southland. All the King's Men persuasively creates a culture in which
genuine goodness is mere namby-pamby and in which ruthlessness has become
reasonable. To succeed in such a world, Jack Burden and Willie Stark become as
corrupt as the world around them.

The Huey Long material is excellent groundwork for a novel. Warren dresses it
up with paragraph after paragraph of murky philosophizing. I confess that I
didn't make the effort to absorb the meditations -- they seemed to be the usual
southern stuff about religion and about the weight of history. I think that
readers are supposed to learn that "if you could not accept the past and its
burden there was no future, for without the one there cannot be the other, and
... if you could accept the past you might hope for the future, for only out of
the past can you make the future."  But if such a platitude is the best that
Warren can do, it's best to skip the tepid philosophy and stick with the rich
and abundant storytelling.

Source: 2006/11/mosquito_sex

Title: Mosquito Sex
Date: November 15, 2006

Sexnews from the mosquitosphere: "if larvae of Aedes stimulans are raised at
75F, about half become males and half become females. But if they are raised at
84F, only 9F higher, they all become almost complete females."  Almost complete
females?  What's the meaning of "almost complete?"  Either they're male, or
they're female.  Doesn't the good book say that "male and female created he
them?"

Here's the surprising scoop. "Larvae that would have become males lack the big
bushy antennae of the normal male and have mouth parts and external genitalia
that are indistinguishable from those of a "real" female. Furthermore,
"feminized" males have no testicles or other internal male organs of
reproduction, but they do have ovaries and other internal female organs of
reproduction. Some feminized males have even mated with normal males and been
inseminated, but they laid no eggs."

All this mosquito sex science comes from entomologist Gilbert Waldbauer, author
of A Walk Around the Pond (Cambridge [Harvard], 2006).

Professor Waldbauer claims to love his insects but he is unmoved by the plight
of the 84F feminized males. Can there be sadder words in Aedes households all
over the warming earth than "they laid no eggs?"  It's poignant, perhaps even
tragic.

How do the mosquitoes themselves feel about attenuated antennae and awkward
genitalia?  If Waldbauer had looked with a more compassionate eye, he would
have noticed that "normal" males of the 75F variety wave their big bushy
antennae and point and laugh at the feeble mini-antennae of the wannabe females.
He would also have noticed that wannabe females are stigmatized and often
depressed because they are so frequently picked on by "normal" males, who
regularly direct loud, scornful, threatening whines at the antennae-impaired.

There's a crisis of values in mosquitoland. Many "normal" males are
fundamentally convinced that the wannabes have made a conscious choice to mimic
females and that water temperature has absolutely nothing to do with it. Some
among the "normal" males -- the more enlightened -- propose that with the right
kind of counseling and prayer, the mimics can be reclaimed. But other "normal"
males hate, simply hate, the males who consort with the feminized wannabes. They
condemn as unnatural all intercourse between the normal and the feminized, and
they proclaim the actual act of insemination to be the work of the devil.

I myself wonder why the "normal" males get themselves into such a twist.  I'm
tempted to think that they protest too much -- that they themselves secretly
lust after the feminized males.

I'll ask the expert, Professor Waldbauer. If he doesn't know, I'll get a second
opinion. Perhaps the Rev. Ted Haggard would like to share his insights.

Source: 2006/11/and_speaking_of

Title: And Speaking of Mosquitoes...
Date: November 16, 2006

Once upon a time I had a foolproof system for clearing a bedroom of
mosquitoes.  Close the door, turn on a light, stick the left arm out of the
bedclothes, keep track of the mosquitoes by their whine, and then, as soon as
one lands on the exposed skin, smack it with the right hand.  After a few
minutes, turn out the light, sleep tight. Used to work wonders.

The system doesn't work any more?  Why?  Because my antiquated ears no longer
register high-pitched sounds. I can't hear mosquitoes until one of them pecks on
my eardrum.  I'm vulnerable to sneak attack.

It's bad: all mosquitoes are now stealth mosquitoes. It's good: I'll never again
be troubled by that nasty whine.

Source: 2006/11/our_strange_sla-1

Title: "A Strange Slavery to Beauty"
Date: November 22, 2006

On September 6, 1664, Sam Pepys purchased for his young wife a pair of gloves
trimmed with yellow ribbon. At 20 shillings, he knew that he overpaid but
he was not at all sorry, because Doll, the 'Change woman from whom he made
the purchase was "so pretty, that, God forgive me! I could not think it too
much -- which is a strange slavery that I stand in to beauty, that I value
nothing near it."  Pepys, God forgive him, was not only enthralled by handsome
women, but was attentive to beauty in all its manifestations.  He loved plays
and performances, paintings and prints and architecture, as well as music,
especially songs and ballads.  Pepys's life was ruled by his "strange slavery
to beauty."

But why should he have described his fascination as "strange?"  If there is a
single trait that distinguishes not just Pepys but human beings as a species,
it is an irrepressible love of things beautiful.  For every one of their
senses, humans have created an appropriate form of art. Hearing?  Music and
song.  Sight? drawing and painting and sculpture and film. Taste? elaborate
cookery. Motion?  the dance.  Speech and language?  literature from lyric
to epic to novel.  Moreover, there's scarcely a substance that human beings
have encountered in their time on the planet that they haven't transformed
into something harmonious and elegant.  At first, bone and stone and fur; and
then wood and metal and cloth and clay.  Occasionally, some anthropologist
will emerge from his laboratory with a theory that the fundamental human trait
is  -- you name it -- aggressiveness, or territoriality, or the ability to
play games, or an interest in the future, or the capacity for bonding into
societies.  Such theories have a bit of truth, but they overlook the obvious. 
The essence of humanity, in my view, is the drive to create and to appreciate
beauty.  Pepys' "strange slavery" is not a bit strange;  it's universal.

As for myself, I believe that I can remember the exact day, hour and minute when
I was first struck by beauty.  My moment of ascension occurred in a garden.  I
must have been twelve or thirteen years old (and therefore not fully human). 
One spring day I tagged along with a gang of schoolyard savages to the Zoo
to see if we could get ourselves into a little trouble.  So there we were,
running about, screaming and hiding and throwing stones at each other and clods
of dirt at the respectable zoo patrons. Someone must have called the cops,
because the next thing I knew we had all scattered and I was running as fast
as I could.  In those days I was small and spry and any fence that I couldn't
squeeze through I could certainly clamber over.  And what's a little barbed
wire to a frightened urchin?  Separated from my cohort, I became completely
lost.  Eventually, I found myself in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden which was then
as now adjacent to the zoo.  I climbed over one or two more fences and entered
(not by a gate, but surreptitiously) the famous, mature, refined Japanese Garden
-- one of the great artistic achievements in all of America.  I was dazzled in
all my senses-- it was a true epiphany.  I particularly remember the red cut
leaf maples and the wisteria.  Of course I was too ignorant to know that it was
wisteria;  I only knew that I was surrounded by magnificent cascades of blue
flowers in abundant bloom.

Here are some pictures of the garden.  Just take a look, and then try to
imagine an uncivilized pre-adolescent, a scared, sweaty, ragtag child, a product
of concrete schoolyards and filthy subways stumbling upon such a amenable place.

What good fortune it was to have vaulted that one last fence!

I think that I've spent the rest of my life trying to get back to that
garden -- or, more accurately, I've spent it trying to recreate and to re-live
the aesthetic explosion that I experienced at that epiphanic moment.  When
I travel. I make it a point to visit the world-famous gardens, and when I'm
at home I work on my own landscape.  But it's not just gardens -- the most
ephemeral of art forms --to which I stand in strange slavery.  I've found
the aesthetic shiver in other places.  Poetry, Shakespeare in particular,
is always at hand.  Is there a civilized soul who can read "Do not laugh at
me;/ For (as I am a man) I think this lady/ To be my child, Cordelia" without
dropping a pleasurable tear.  The Winter's Tale, which is the finest play in
the history of this or any other universe, is a fountain of delights, especially
Perdita's "I was not much afeard; for once or twice/ I was about to speak and
tell him plainly,/ The selfsame sun that shines upon his court/ Hides not his
visage from our cottage but/ Looks on alike" -- a sentiment which may be the
most genuinely democratic in thirty-eight otherwise monarchist dramas.  Visual
arts also are a constant source of pure delight;  in a gallery of Rembrandts
at the Metropolitan Museum I was once so ecstatic that my heart began to beat
uncontrollably.  And in Helsinki, I had a moment of pure architectural joy at
the Church of the Rock -- the most beautiful and holy of buildings.

But of all art forms, it's music that is most reliably transcendent.  My tastes
have evolved over the years:  Dvorak and Mahler are in the past but Beethoven's
great fugue still sets my spine on edge and so does the long harpsichord solo in
Bach's Fifth Brandenburg.  Recordings usually (but not always) work better than
live performances.  When I'm in the right mood, I play the shivery passages
again and again.  Nowadays the single most lovely piece of music is the great
chaconne from Bach's second violin partita.  Hilary Hahn's performance is my
favorite, but the chaconne is almost as exciting in Celadonio Romero's guitar
transcription and in the Brahms piano version (for virtuoso left hand only). 
The chaconne does all that music can do, and it does it in fifteen unaccompanied
minutes.

It's not just classical music.  I'm also strangely enslaved to what is now
called "golden era gospel" -- the singing of the "Heavenly Gospel Singers" and
the "Harmonizing Four" and Clara Ward and Brother Joe May and Dorothy Love
Coates and the "Swan Silvertones" and the "Five Blind Boys of Alabama." A
small sample of some of my many, many favorites:  Mahalia Jackson's long live
version of "How I Got Over"; the "Roberta Martin Singers"' "Standing on the
Promises"; Sister Rosetta Tharpe and Marie Knight singing "Beams of Heaven"; the
"Sensational Nightingales" "Brightly Beams";  perhaps the best of the best: 
Professor J. Earle Hines, "God Be With You."  In such great music resides the
aesthetic ecstasy, that, when we open ourselves to it, makes us most completely
human.

Source: 2006/11/november_22

Title: November 22
Date: November 23, 2006

On November 22, 1963, we were living in a small third-floor walkup on Irving
Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  It was in the afternoon.  Some high
schools students (Cambridge High and Latin was just around the corner) were
walking by.  One of them shouted to another, "Kennedy's been shot.  In
Dallas."   I immediately thought "this is bad.  That kid shouldn't know that
Kennedy's in Dallas."  So we turned on the radio.  And began to grieve.

I don't think that this country's ever regained its balance.  Jack, and then
Bobbie and Martin Luther King  -- the heroes of the left taken out, one by one,
by assassins.  Without the murders, we'd never have had Nixon and Reagan and
Cheney and Bush and Rumsfeld.

If we ever can get the United States on track again, then, only then, can we
cease to grieve.

Source: 2006/11/my_favorite_inv

Title: My Favorite Inventions
Date: November 27, 2006

Life has certainly changed since I was growing up in the 1940s and 1950s.  Here
are some of the key inventions that have made life better for me and for all
sentient Americans.

1)  the retractable vacuum cleaner cord. Truly one heck of an improvement. 
Just step on the little lever, and the cord comes flying back into the
machine.  It used to be, I'd waste minutes tying the thing up only to watch it
immediately unravel.

2)  fitted sheets.  Just snap them on and have done with it.  Perhaps the
greatest improvement in standard of living in my lifetime.  No more folding
under and then waking up in the middle of the night sleeping on the mattress
tufts.

3)  the bungee cord.  A stroke of true genius.  For packing the top of the
car, an unparalleled innovation.  And nowadays, I keep a pair of them strapped
to the lawn-tractor cart.  I use the bungee cords to double the load that I can
carry in one trip.

4)  luggage wheels.  Pull instead of carrying.  What a concept!!  Luggage,
marooned for centuries in the paleolithic, finally discovers the wheel (and just
in time to save my shoulders).

5) the mute button. Just a flick of the thumb and the commercial voice
disappears.  A godsend.

That's my top five.  Any other suggestions out there in the blogworld will be
sincerely appreciated.

November 30.  I'm so chagrined.  I've forgotten the most remarkable invention
of the last several decades:  duct tape.  In our household, duct tape holds
together more items than gravity.

Source: 2006/11/violence_in_my_

Title: Violence in My Life
Date: November 28, 2006

A few weeks ago, I wrote about my violent nightmares.  And now I shall unclasp
a secret book and write about real-life violence in my life -- to be exact,
about a murder and an attempted murder.

In the middle-1970s, I exchanged jobs, homes and automobiles with a faculty
member of a university in England.  I will call this person by the fabricated
name of Maurice Shaper.  Although I certainly profited from teaching in a new
setting, and I loved the city in southeastern England in which we lived, Mr.
Shaper himself was a disaster.  He missed half of his classes and was cruel to
my students when he did present himself.  He fled town early, leaving behind
stacks of unread papers, distressed students who had not received grades or
credit for the work, and a mess that took me a full year to resolve.  Moreover,
Mr. Shaper, who had a friend on the west coast and was commuting 1200 miles
bi- weekly, put 60,000 miles on my Dodge station wagon before smashing it into
another vehicle on a rainy California road.  Within an hour of our arrival
home, we were greeted with a summons and a lawsuit -- as owners of the car we
were liable -- from the occupants of the maimed vehicle. It was a lawsuit that
took a number of years to run its expensive course.  In short, I must admit
that I nursed more than a little antagonism to Mr. Shaper.  Anger, I'd say, but
something less than murderous rage.

Some five years later I returned to England.  The morning after I arrived,
I was standing on the steps of the British Museum in Bloomsbury waiting for
the building to open when an acquaintance came up to me with a newspaper. 
"Have you seen this?" he asked, and showed me an item in The Times. "University
Lecturer Murdered."   And sure enough, Mr. Maurice Shaper had been killed
in his own home -- the home in which I had lived for a year.  Although it
didn't say so in the newspaper, I was later informed that he had been in the
habit of picking up young men on the Dover Road and bringing them home.  He
must have misjudged his quarry, because he had been slashed in the neck with a
broken liquor bottle and had bled to death in his bathroom.  His Peugeot and
his camera and a few other items had been stolen and the presumed murderer had
disappeared.  What was so odd was that he had been killed just a few hours
after I arrived at Heathrow.

That's the murder;  now the attempted murder.

In my second year at college, I had a roommate (let us call him Peter Dickerman)
with whom I was in perpetual conflict.  I'm not generally short-tempered, but
once, I was so angry at him that I actually picked up a carving knife and waved
it in his direction.  Eventually we came to a truce of sorts;  although we
inhabited the same rooms, we didn't speak to each other for the last months of
the semester.  Mr. Dickerman then went his way and I went mine.

Thirty years later, I was in Washington DC for a couple of weeks doing some
reading at a specialized library when I read in the Washington Post that someone
had attempted to murder a northern Virginia psychologist.  The victim, Peter
Dickerman, had received a letter-bomb in the mail.  He had opened it, there
was an explosion, and he was burned over 60% of his body.  The story was a
sensation for a few days but gradually faded from view.  It's my understanding
that Dickerman did not die.  (I've now googled him under his real name and I
see that he's still practicing psychiatry in Virginia.)

So two times in my life, a person with whom I've been in serious conflict has
been violently attacked.  And both times, I've been close at hand.  A little
creepy, isn't it?

The man who murdered Maurice Shaper was arrested and convicted.  The identity
of the person who mailed the letter bomb to Peter Dickerman is unknown to me.

Source: 2006/12/among_the_strul

Title: Among the Struldbrugs
Date: December 02, 2006

In the little read Book III of Swift's Gulliver's Travels, Lemuel Gulliver finds
himself on the island of Luggnagg, where there is a group of people called
Struldbrugs who are "blessed" with eternal life.  On hearing of Struldbrugs,
Gulliver waxes ecstatic:  "happiest, beyond all comparison, are those excellent
STRULDBRUGS, who, being born exempt from that universal calamity of human
nature, have their minds free and disengaged, without the weight and depression
of spirits caused by the continual apprehensions of death!"  Gulliver is soon
disabused of his enthusiasm.  He learns that after an allotted number of years
have passed, the Struldbrugs are declared legally dead, but that they continue
to grow older, feebler, and more wretched.  It's hard to know whether Swift
points his satire at human optimism or whether he is simply repulsed by extreme
old age.

In any case, we've been spending much time at the nursing home lately,
visiting the Aged P (I'm using the euphemism adopted by John Wemmick in Great
Expectations).  Friends, you don't have to voyage to Luggnagg to learn that
it's possible to live far too long;  the evidence is close at hand.  Let's try
to remember to get the heck out of here while the going's good -- before we too
are metamorphosized into a bunch of Struldbrugs.

Source: 2006/12/some_stretchers

Title: Some Stretchers
Date: December 06, 2006

We're in Washington visiting our four-year-old granddaughter (and her parents,
of course).  This morning I walked the little girl to her Montessori
pre-school. As we passed some dormant rhododendrons, the grand-daughter told
me that she saw a "very large antelope" resting under the bushes.  I like her
style -- not a dog, or even a deer -- an antelope!  And a very large one to
boot.  I love her sincerity, and I love it that she's still young enough to
live in the imagination.  What a gift!

Here are some other "stretchers"  -- Huck Finn's word  -- that she's told me
during this visit.  That she once ate thirteen bananas in a row.  That her
mother and her grandmother had just gone to the Antarctic.  That she had six
brothers and eleven sisters.  That the cheese that she was eating was made
entirely of "green slimy boogers."  That she had just pooped on her cat.  That
she built the neighbor's new picket fence.  "You did?  How did you do it?" 
 "With power tools."   That she had eaten a whole meal of eyeballs.

Well, she'll have to live in the world of hard facts soon enough.  Everyone
must, even those of our leaders who would prefer to reject the "reality-based" 
universe.  I say, let her enjoy the fantasy just as long as she is able.

Source: 2006/12/the_p_s_217_ass

Title: The P. S. 217 "Assembly"
Date: December 08, 2006

During the 1940s and early 1950s, when I was a pupil at P. S. 217, the school
auditorium was given over to formal weekly "assemblies." Boys were required
to wear white shirts and green ties (girls had a specified outfit as well, but
in those days I was so unconscious of a) girls and b) their costumes that I'm
darned if I can remember what was worn by the young ladies). Before entering
the auditorium, classes lined up in "size places." P. S. 217 was particularly
strong on "size places" -- a point of particular humiliation for me, because I
was, as WS says about R of G, "so long a-growing, and so leisurely" that I was
by far the smallest child in every class from first grade to eighth. After we
found our assigned seats (boys in one row, girls in the next), our principal
Miss Bildersee, a formidable and incredibly ancient woman with nostrils so huge
and distended that an agile boy could go spelunking in them, would perform
the mandatory reading from the Bible. Blessings on her fond old heart, Miss
Bildersee regularly choose melodious passages from the book of Psalms. I was
particularly struck by the eloquence of "Blessed is the man that walketh not in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in
the seat of the scornful," with its abrupt counterbalancing antistrophe: "the
ungodly are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away." After
the Bible reading and some announcements, there was usually a performance of
some sort. Choral readings, the oddest of art forms, were far too frequent.
I remember that I was once a member of a sextet of quavering sopranos who
memorized and recited the patriotic World War I poem "In Flanders Fields." What
in the world was a second-grader supposed to make of "We are the Dead. Short
days ago/ We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,/Loved and were loved, and now we
lie/In Flanders fields./Take up our quarrel with the foe:/To you from failing
hands we throw/The torch; be yours to hold it high./If ye break faith with us
who die/ We shall not sleep, though poppies grow/ In Flanders fields." (Such
poppycock was received as true literary greatness. It would have been beyond
utopian imagination that our teachers would have known or introduced us to
the distinguished WWI poetry of Wilfred Owen or Isaac Rosenberg or Siegfried
Sassoon or Edward Thomas.) Then our music specialist Mrs. Georgia Keiselbach
would sit down at the piano and teach us songs, some of them also left over from
the first World War:  "Keep the home-fires burning,/ While your hearts are
yearning,/ Though your lads are far away/ They dream of home;/ There's a silver
lining/Through the dark cloud shining,/Turn the dark cloud inside out,/Till the
boys come home." And also: "Give me some men who are stout-hearted men/ Who
will fight for the right they adore... Shoulder to shoulder, and bolder and
bolder."  And: "Tramp, tramp, tramp along the highway/Tramp, tramp, tramp, the
road is free...  We're planters and Canucks/ Virginians and Kentucks/Captain
Dick's own Infantry/ Captain Dick's own Infantry," which I now know to have
come from Victor Herbert's Naughty Marietta (1910) and which provoked a great
deal of surreptitious tittering because it had the word "dick" in it. In
those unenlightened days we sang very many overtly religious songs: "White
Christmas" and "Silent Night" and "Easter Parade." I much admired the tune
of "The First Noel" but I had no idea what was meant by "born is the king of
Israel" -- the only Israel I knew of was a recently-founded democracy. I
loved the Thanksgiving hymn "We gather together to ask the Lord's blessing;/
He chastens and hastens His will to make known;/ The wicked oppressing now
cease from distressing,/ Sing praises to His name; He forgets not his own" and
many more stanzas, none of which I could parse or understand (still can't, in
fact!). Another Thanksgiving song: "Over the river and through the woods/
To grandmother's house we go/The horse knows the way/To carry the sleigh...,"
which I found to be curiously disorienting because my particular grandmother
lived in a tiny third-floor walkup on noisy and sweaty Coney Island Avenue. We
sang the immensely mysterious Lord's Prayer (in the Schubert setting, I later
discovered). Why did we so?  Were the heathens and Jews among us expected to
convert on the spot? I much preferred the patriotic songs, although even they
too were permeated with inexplicable theology. We were fervent jingos.   Not
one, but two full stanzas of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic": "In the beauty
of the lilies, Christ was born across the sea,/With a glory in His bosom, that
transfigures you and me/ As he died to make men holy, let us die to make men
free,/ For God is marching on." And two stanzas also of "The Star-Spangled
Banner": "Oh! thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand/ Between their loved
home and the war's desolation!/ Blessed with victory and peace, may the heav'n
rescued land/ Praise the Power that hath made and preserv'd us a nation./Then
conquer we must, when our cause it is just,/ And this be our motto: 'In God
is our trust.'" I preferred the rousing "O Columbia! the gem of the ocean,/
The home of the brave and the free,/ The shrine of each patriot's devotion,/ A
world offers homage to thee" and "God Bless America" as well as the jingoist
exceptionalism and cluttered syntax of "Our father's God, to thee/ Author of
liberty/ To thee we sing./  Long may our land be bright/ With freedom's holy
light;/ Protect us by thy might/ Great God our King."

Here's a song we were distinctly not taught and did not sing: "This land is your
land, this land is my land/ From California, to the New York Island./ From
the redwood forest, to the Gulf Stream waters/ This land was made for you and
me." We especially did not sing: "In the squares of the city  -- in the
shadow of the steeple/  Near the relief office -- I see my people/ And some
are grumblin' and some are wonderin' /If this land's still made for you and me."

December 17.  I now remember that we sang musical settings to two familiar
poems. The first, Emma Lazarus's inscription on the Statue of Liberty: "Give
me your tired, your poor/ Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free/ The
wretched refuse of your teeming shore." Hey, that's my grandparents you're
calling "wretched refuse." The second, Joyce Kilmer's horrid "Trees": "I think
that I shall never see/  A poem lovely as a tree...  A tree who's hungry mouth
is pressed/ Against the earth's sweet-flowing breast" etc.  This song was only
palatable because it allowed us to say the word "breast" out loud.

(Thanks to Steve and to Barry, graduates of P. S. 217, for jogging my memory; 
thanks also to David [P. S. 102].

Graduates of P. S. 217 who happen to stumble onto this site: feel free to add
comments or to forward this post to classmates with whom you might be in touch.)

Source: 2006/12/the_profoundly_

Title: Xmas Thoughts
Date: December 09, 2006

If the profoundly religious seventeenth-century founders of our country had a
single favorite Biblical moment, it might be where the Lord (speaking through
His prophet Amos) severely condemned the vanity of holidays. "I hate," said
the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies."  The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined against the attempt
to placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical concern in Amos'
time).  "Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not
accept them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts." 
Nor did He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but He went on to condemn
all musical tributes as well.  Nor more chants, glees or carols: "Take thou
away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy
viols."  Our Puritan forefathers interpreted these lines correctly; they
recognized that the Lord opposed not only ritual sacrifice and music but all
formal observance and rote piety. The Ancient of Days made it abundantly clear
that what moved him was not empty ceremony but genuine morality.  HIs solution:
"let justice run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream."  Taking
these uncompromising sentences as their guide, our founders dug in their heels
against the ostentatious celebration of of all holidays, especially Christmas.

Would they not have been reduced to angry and impotent sobs by the grotesque
consumerism -- the burnt offerings and squeaking timbrels  -- that in 2006
substitute for justice and righteousness?  Could there be anything more
loathsome either to Amos or to our devout ancestors than "Silent Night" at a
shopping mall?

Ah for a twenty-first century Amos!

Further observations on the "holiday season" can be found here.

Source: 2006/12/some_shops

Title: Some Shops
Date: December 16, 2006

We're just back from a week in Greenwich Village. Here are some of the stores
that were within two or three blocks of our temporary residence: "Beasty Feast
Pet Food Supplies"; "Cherry Boxx" (sex toys and outfits); "Golden Rule Wine and
Liquor"; "Henrietta Hudson Bar and Girl"; "Badlands Entertainment" (xxx videos);
"Condomania" -- all kinds of condoms and related gear; "Suds Cafe" (a laundromat
and espresso bar); a shop that specializes in "eyebrow threading"; the "Sports
Cap and Hat Store"; "Man + Plus" (which I read as Man plus plus); "Yuki's
Chinese Restaurant" (bad corporate name); "Birthday Suit" (bachelorette-fetish,
the sign clarified); the "Why Not Men's Spa"; "Pet Portraits"; "Doodle-Doos"
(a children's hair salon); "Kid's RX" (children's prescription drugs); and
"Cowgirl" -- I couldn't recognize anything in the cowgirl stock, certainly
nothing that would home on the range; also, an admirable piece of commercial
hyperbole: "Splendid Dry Cleaners." In addition, a truck bearing the name "Dr.
Playground" -- mobile playground repairs, I would suppose. All in all, quite a
remarkable display of capitalist initiative.

Source: 2006/12/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Ivanhoe
Date: December 19, 2006

For an entire lifetime I've had a ghastly relationship with Sir Walter Scott.
Ivanhoe was a mandatory book in the Erasmus Hall High School English curriculum
and I remember reading the novel with painful indifference. It's entirely
possible that I didn't persevere to the final pages but instead relied upon
the 1952 film. At various times I've made an effort to read novels by Sir
Walter, but time and again I've foundered. Twenty or so years ago, Old Mortality
and Redgauntlet were being trumpeted by academic critics, and I gave each
novel a fair trial, but, after a chapter or two, ran aground on the sandbar
of dullness. As part of my project of re-reading books that were popular or
required in the 1950s, I tackled Ivanhoe again, and I can report that this time
I read it to the very last drop -- but what a colossal effort! I never "got
into" it but read it in gobbets of five or six pages at a time before succumbing
to boredom or sleep. I deserve the 2006 Bulwer-Lytton Prize for Drudgery.

Why did our elders judge Ivanhoe to be suitable for 10th graders? The plot
plods, the characters are unidimensional cliches, and there's a total want of
suspense. The dialogue is ludicrous. It reminds me of what Jonson said about
Spenser--that "in affecting the ancients, he writ no language." But in point of
fact, Scott does write a language--he writes bad Blackadderese. "Fear not, my
lord. I must speak with you in private, before you mount your palfrey." "Have
patience, sir. I might retort your accusation, and blame the inconsiderate
levity which foiled my design."  "A truce with your raillery, sir knight." 
"If thou refusest my fair proffer, the provost of the lists shall cut thy bow-
string, break thy bow and arrows and expel thee from the presence as a faint-
hearted craven." And on and on for four hundred mucilaginous pages.

There's another roadblock to empathetic reading. Ivanhoe features a Jewish
money-lender named Isaac who's a walking inventory of stereotypes: he's
usurious, greedy, faint-hearted, fawning, and although he claims poverty, is
secretly rolling in shekels. He sums up all the worst aspects of both Shylock
and Fagin. But Scott thinks we should forgive Isaac even though he's such a
miserable human being, and by asking us to do so, he somehow manages to make
tolerance even more offensive than bigotry itself.In addition, Isaac has an
impossibly beauteous and virtuous daughter named Rebecca. Yes, it's a miracle,
says Scott, but there are Jews (or at least Jewesses) who are not money-grubbing
villains. Thanks a lot, Sir Walter.

Why was Ivanhoe high-school fare?  Beats the heck out of me. And it makes me
angry to think that this bad book was thrust down our throats. Let's put those
upstart immigrants in their place, is what they were saying. Was it malevolent
or merely unconscious? Difficult to ascertain, but after slogging through
Ivanhoe, I'm not in a forgiving mood.

January 7.  I've now watched the 1952 Ivanhoe with Elizabeth Taylor as Jessica,
an aging Robert Taylor as Ivanhoe, and an aging Joan Fontaine as Rowena. It's a
bit dated and it occasionally anticipates Monty Python and the Holy Grail, but
it's not half bad. The writer, who had the wonderful name of Aeneas McKenzie,
discarded the novel, started from scratch, and composed a screenplay that has
action and adventure and romance and every once in a while borrows an incident
from Sir Walter Scott. A good strategy, in my view.

Source: 2006/12/frost

Title: Frost
Date: December 22, 2006

When I lived in Cambridge in the first years of the 1960s, it was not unusual
to encounter, on a warm winter afternoon, the poet Robert Frost walking slowly
along Massachusetts Avenue. I'd watch him as he strolled over to Plympton Street
and to the Grolier -- which was then as now, I imagine, the only all-poetry
bookstore in America. One day I crept behind him to the shop and sat in a
secluded corner, studying him as he browsed the shelf of new arrivals. With his
leathery old skin and unruly iridescent white hair, he was an iconic figure --
famous not only among friends of poetry but among readers of Life and Collier's
and The Saturday Evening Post. When he "said" his poems at Sanders Theater
(in late 1961 or 1962), he filled every seat and every standpoint of a large
auditorium. He was an honest-to-goodness celebrity, a presence, a man who had
created a body of work and had earned a reputation that no poet or cultural
figure today can rival.

At JFK's inauguration in January of 1961, Frost commanded a national television
audience. He started to read the poem he had composed for the occasion, but his
87-year-old eyes were blinded by the bright sunlight and he couldn't continue.
There was a moment of embarrassment, and I remember cringing in sympathy with
his struggle. But then he gathered himself and recited from memory, in a
rejuvenated voice, "The Gift Outright." "She was our land more than a hundred
years/ Before we were her people." It's an almost mystical but grandly patriotic
poem about rude, unlettered colonials transforming themselves into a Nation.
"Such as we were we gave ourselves outright.../ To the land vaguely realizing
westward,/ But still unstoried, artless, unenhanced, / Such as she was, such as
she would become."

Frost died in January of 1963, just ten months before our young president
was shot. It's almost impossible now to reconstruct the effervescence of the
Kennedy years -- a brief exciting moment between the lukewarm bland Eisenhower
administration and the interminable nightmare of Vietnam. Frost's "Dedication,"
the poem that he couldn't read at the inaugural, is not his best work, but its
last lines catch the spirit of the time. The poet took his inspiration from the
Rome of Augustus and of Horace, Virgil, and Ovid. "It is no miracle the mood is
high," he wrote.  "It makes the prophet in us all presage/ The glory of the
next Augustan age/ Of a power leading from its strength and pride,/ Of young
ambition eager to be tried,/ Firm in our free beliefs without dismay,/ In any
game the nations want to play./ A golden age of poetry and power/ Of which this
noonday's the beginning hour." Frost proved to be a better poet than a prophet.
Instead of a golden age of poetry and power, we've had, after the three horrible
murders, a parade of fools: first the crook, then the senile puppet, then the
congressional fellatio hunters, and now the smirking, dangerous dunce.

Like the nation, I too am in steep decline. It used to be that I could memorize
short poems with ease. Nowadays, it's a titanic effort of will. To forestall
hardening of the mind, and in a desperate effort to keep my brain supple, I
decided to memorize Frost's "Birches." It's when you learn a poem by heart
that you truly appreciate it, and so I can now say with absolute confidence
and authority that "Birches" is a poem not just for the age, but for all time.
In point of fact, I've been bothering myself about how Frost will fare in
civilizations as far into the future as Virgil and Horace are in our past. Will
students of poetry be able to grasp the subtlety of "Birches?" The story, the
plot itself, will pose no problem. Frost knows that birches are bent to the
ground by ice-storms, but he would fancifully "prefer to have some boy bend
them/ As he went out and in to fetch the cows." For the "boy," tree-climbing is
a high art: "He always kept his poise/ To the top branches, climbing carefully/
With the same pains you use to fill a cup/ Up to the brim, and even above the
brim." Frost then shifts perspective, and the fantasy that birches are bent not
by ice-storms but by athletic youngsters transforms into a memory, a truth: "So
was I once myself a swinger of birches;/ And so I dream of going back to be." He
closes the poem with a vision in which he leaves the real world and starts life
anew: "I'd like to go by climbing a birch tree,/ And climb black branches up a
snow-white trunk/ Toward heaven, till the tree could bear no more,/ But dipped
its top and set me down again." Even though our descendants will read the poem
in an extinct language and in an edition encrusted with explanatory footnotes,
I'm sure that they'll understand its outline. (I imagine too that some future
scholar will make his career by explicating the line "A boy too far from town to
learn baseball.") But will anyone in 4006 A.D. be sufficiently conversant with
everyday twentieth-century American English to recognize the skill with which
Frost masks his deep insights into the relationship between the material and
the eternal with art-that-hides-art colloquialisms? Or appreciate to the full
the sly understatement of "one could do worse than be a swinger of birches?"
The beauty and the profundity of "Birches" tease us who share Frost's language.
What a challenge the poem will be eighty generations down the road! Moreover,
Is there even the remotest possibility that our successors will be equipped to
grasp how much of Roman poetry (Ovid especially) Frost distills into "I'd like
to get away from earth awhile/ And then come back to it and begin over./ May no
fate willfully misunderstand me/ And half grant what I wish and snatch me away/
Not to return." Frost possessed the genius to keep us in touch with our past and
to connect us to our future.

I wish that I had talked to Robert Frost that winter day when he was trudging
on. "How are you, Mr. Frost," I might have asked. Perhaps he would have smiled
or said "Nice day."

That would have been a good thing to recall.

Source: 2006/12/haircuts_a_hist

Title: Haircuts:  A History
Date: December 26, 2006

When I was a child, haircuts were perpetrated at Joe's Barber Shop on Coney
Island Avenue. It was a pleasant place: there were wall-to-wall mirrors on
either side of Joe Montuori's shop, and a boy sitting in the chair could lose
himself in the infinitely-regressing images. Joe always had a friend or two in
the shop with whom he spoke incomprehensible rapid-fire Italian. The haircutting
itself was an ordeal. Joe charged 75 cents a head, but my mother had driven a
bargain: three haircuts (myself and my two brothers) for $1.80. Joe revenged
himself on me by a) working the electric buzzer as rapidly as possible, and b)
frequently re-arranging the angle of my head with a blow from the heel of his
hand. Back home, my mother would sigh and say, "Turn around.  Let's see what he
did to you this time."

I've not big on personal adornment, and, perhaps because of my early hair
experiences, I've never been comfortable in the barber's seat. As soon as the
cloth is fastened around my neck I feel hogtied and hopeless. "What are they
going to do to me today?" Once, on the west side of Manhattan, in the late
1960s, when my hair was rather long (it seems absurd that you could signal
your opposition to the war in Vietnam by letting your hair grow, but such was
the case), I walked into a shop and asked the barber to "leave it long." He
immediately transformed me into a rabid supporter of carpet-bombing. Also in New
York: when I naively wandered into a shop with a specialized clientele, a hair
technician employing a razor and a variety of gels and lotions turned me into
someone whose hair was giving off signals with which the rest of his body was
not in accord. In Hanover, New Hampshire, in an upstairs 'salon,' the barber
suddenly stopped work, drew back, studied me for fifteen or twenty seconds, and
asked, "Are you Jewish." I mumbled something about not really wanting to discuss
my ethnicity with him, whereupon he launched into a disquisition of which I
understood not much and remember less, except that that it involved prophecy,
the Book of Isaiah, and The Hatching of the Egg. He hauled out his heavily
annotated King James Version and pointed me to various passages underlined
in coded colors. As it happens, I'm more conversant than most people with
scripture, and so I can assert with moderate authority that his reading of the
Bible was -- how shall I say -- original. It took me an hour to extricate myself
from his insistent and wayward scholarship: fifteen minutes of hair-cutting and
forty-five minutes of exegetical enthusiasm.

For a decade or so, when our finances were perilous, my wife cut my hair. There
were some benefits (a guy could cop a feel while being ministered to) but I
must admit that although my good woman was earnest and effective, she never
fully mastered tonsorial technique. She had the habit of yanking upwards on the
strands with the scissors, with the result that each snip produced a stab of
pain -- although nothing more intense than might have been alleviated by the
injection of a dozen or score shots of novocaine directly into the scalp. And
then there were the ear nicks.

After a while, I returned hair responsibility to the world of commerce. I had
success for many years with Liz of Chicago Hair across town. Liz was good at
her work and respected my multiple cowlicks. But then she started to raise her
prices. When she reached $20, I would just hand her the Visa and ask her not
to tell me what she charged. When she went to $30, I retaliated by spacing the
haircuts further and further apart in order to keep my annual cost constant.
But when she broached the $40 barrier, the puritan in me rebelled. I started to
patronize the cheap ($14) barbershop across the street from the college. There's
a rotating staff and it's hit-and-miss: sometimes the results are acceptable,
sometimes disastrous.

When I come home from the expedition, my wife says, "Let's see what they've done
to you today."

And then she sighs.

Source: 2006/12/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Arrowsmith
Date: December 27, 2006

Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith, published in 1924 and now hopelessly dated, was
a mere thirty years old when we read it in Erasmus Hall High School English
classes. I must confess, once again, that I recall almost nothing from my 1950s
reading -- just a vague sense that I'd been there before. Nevertheless, the
novel wasn't a bad book to present to young people. Dr. Martin Arrowsmith is
a dedicated, humorless, idealistic, workaholic scientist who eludes both the
snares of commerce and also of love and family in a single-minded pursuit of the
knowledge that will save lives. Sinclair Lewis's America is repressive, vulgar,
materialistic, and unredeemed. Why not let high schoolers read a book with such
a manic, satirical spirit?  It might have done them a world of good -- though I
can't vouch that it did anything for me.

Dr. Arrowsmith has no time anything so frivolous as aesthetics -- and it's just
as well, for neither does his creator. Arrowsmith is shapeless in form and
crude in style. It's a sledgehammer of a book, as unsubtle as America at its
worst.

Query: were we informed that Sinclair Lewis was famous for having said that
"when fascism comes to America, it will be wrapped in the flag and carrying a
cross?"

Source: 2006/12/weve_had_two_ma

Title: O My Papa
Date: December 31, 2006

We've had two major snowfalls in the last week and the road crews haven't yet
found their way to our street. It's a knee-deep icy mess out there. Yesterday
one of my neighbors spun himself into quite a hole. He needed a push, so I
went outside to help. Even with my professional-grade ice-chopper, I had to
bang around for a while and the task took a lot longer than I had expected. 
Eventually, I had to resort to the old towel trick to gain enough traction to
release the vehicle. My neighbor said, "I'm embarrassed. You shouldn't be doing
this."  Which took me aback, of course. I replied, quite spontaneously, "It's
exactly what I should be doing."

And then I recalled one of my father's maxims: "Never omit an opportunity to do
a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed to accept a favor."

The old guy did lots of favors. When someone on East 9 Street had a problem or
got into a little trouble, my father acted as consigliere; as far as I know, he
never took a nickel for his trouble--though occasionally someone would drop off
a compensatory lasagna. In his last years, when he lived alone and his arthritis
was very bad, someone mowed his lawn and someone took in his garbage cans and
someone raked his leaves.

My father was the least materialistic person that I've encountered in an entire
lifetime. He didn't seem to need possessions. No car, no clothes beyond the
absolute minimum, no items of personal adornment. He didn't "shop." I was with
him once when bought a new hat: "See this. I want another one just like it." We
were in and out of the store in two minutes.

Although he lived in a world of weasels (he was a real-estate lawyer), he was
uncontaminated by what went on around him. He'd often tell me stories about the
various chicaneries by which people cheated each other--and every time he would
express the same astonishment at the fallibility of human nature. He knew of
public officials who were on the take, but he preferred to talk about the state
legislator who had a large sign on his desk that said, "NO GIFTS."

In one of our very last conversations, I asked him if he himself had ever done
anything illegal. He thought for a long time. "I don't know if you'd call
this exactly illegal. Do you remember the B-----s?  Rose was a widow and she
was dying of cancer, but she didn't know it. She was a teacher with two young
children and she had a benefit coming to her from the city. She made a very
bad decision--a lump sum instead of an annuity for her children. I went to
her school and substituted a new form for the one that she had filed. It was
technically a violation and I could have gotten into a lot of trouble." And then
he surprised me by quoting some Wordsworth--the lines from Tintern Abbey about
the "best portion of a good man's life,/ His little, nameless, unremembered
acts/ Of kindness and of love."

It's hard to believe that he's been dead for twenty years now. But I remember
him when we come around to the winter solstice (he was born on December 22,
1904)--and he's especially real to me when a neighbor lets me help him extricate
his car from a snowbank.