

================================================================================Source: 2021/01/hmt-how-many-today

Title: HMT? (How Many Today?)
Date: January 07, 2021

For two days, I kept track of the initials that I needed to know to make sense
of the world. Here they are, all familiar, no doubt: HOA,, MRI, IED, CNN, EPA,
FDA, DNA, OMB, ED, NBA, COVID, GPS, AWOL, PTSD, TCM, WTF, BPL, TIA, ETA, MST.
Just two days. IK that there's a part of the brain that stores nouns; I wonder
if humans will evolve to develop an area to store acronyms.

Source: 2021/01/a-scots-quair

Title: A Scots Quair
Date: January 12, 2021

I've given over the last week or ten days to Lewis Grassic Gibbon's A Scots
Quair and I'm very pleased to have done so. And I'm embarrassed that I've only
now read this strange brooding wondrous series of novels. How could I not have
known? For those equally as ignorant as I, the Quair is a trilogy -- Sunset Song
(1932), Cloud Howe (1933) and Grey Granite (1934). Together they tell the story
of Christine Guthrie from childhood -- about the turn of the century -- through
the years of the Great Depression. I can't remember reading a piece of fiction
that has so thoroughly engaged me, or encountering  a fictional character so
fully realized as Chris Guthrie Tavendale Colquhoun Ogilvie.

Here's a picture of Gibbon (birth name: James Leslie Mitchell) who died at age
34 from a botched surgery.

The novels do for the northeast corner of Scotland what Thomas Hardy did for
the southwest of England. Gibbon's corner of Scotland is traditional agrarian
society beset by doctrinaire religion, industrialization, war, and the Great
Depression. The novels range from extremely brutal to marvelously lyrical. They
are not without defect: sometimes too long, often too preachy. Occasionally, I
felt that I was being treated to a Scottish version of "orientalism": Scotism,
perhaps. The books want condensation, editing; sometimes I felt that I was
reading a first draft -- but Gibbon wrote fifteen books in seven years, so signs
of haste are inevitable. Gibbon might be called a local colorist or a social
realist, but he's much more. His feel for the landscape and for history is
unparalleled.

In subject matter and tone, A Scots Quair reminds me most of Halldor Laxness's
great Icelandic novel, Independent People. It's also like one of Hardy's Wessex
novels, but funnier, more playful, and yes, more sensual. There are stream-of-
consciousness speeches that recall Faulkner and passages that might have been
written by James Joyce (not the Joyce of Ulysses but the Joyce of Portrait).  A
much neglected masterpiece.

Source: 2021/01/the-dreaded-american-hug

Title: The "Dreaded American Hug"
Date: January 13, 2021

The coronavirus has been sorely inhibiting. It's no fun for me to keep a
distance from members of my family with whom I'm not podded up. But there's
a benefit, because for a year now I haven't had a single anxiety attack over
what a European acquaintance calls "the dreaded American hug."  My needs
for acknowledging friends and acquaintances have been well satisfied by an
occasional and discreet elbow bump.

I'm not a hugger either by nature or by training -- my family of origin was,
well, whatever is the diametrical opposite of "touchy?"

When did the hug creep into our lives? I suspect it had its origins in late 60s
early 70s counter-culture. At least in my social circles -- that is. For all
I know, the Brewsters might have regularly hugged the Bradfords back there in
Mayflower days. Although not without massive attacks of disabling guilt.

When males want to hug me, I tend to shrink backwards. I don't want to give
offense, so I offer as much hug as my hug-averse nature can tolerate. With
women it's much more difficult -- because of the bosom problem. Too quick an
embrace and you're unsociable, but one that lasts a second too long and you're a
pervert. The best solution, I've found, is the sideways hug -- just throw an arm
around the lady's shoulder and briefly touch your right ribcase to her left. And
then beat a retreat.

Let's bring back the straight-on traditional handshake. It's sensible and
proven. And for goodness sake, no kissing each other's cheeks "like them
foreigners do."

Source: 2021/01/tails

Title: Tails
Date: January 22, 2021

Most animals, mammals included, sport tails. As well they should. Tails are
truly excellent appendages -- essential equipment for survival in many cases.
Most primates have tails, but alas, the apes, our most immediate cousins, lack
these useful "limbs." Some random mutation, way back when, and zap, no more
tails. As a result, we humans live in a tragically diminished universe. And deep
down, we feel the loss -- it's a fact that humans have been desperately trying
to grow tails for countless millennia. Embryo after embryo puts his or her whole
heart into the effort. Tails are there, prominently, between day 31 to 37 of
the gestational process, but then they disappear -- leaving the poor embryo
dispirited and regretful. In mourning! How much happier a species we would be if
we could only wag.

Tails have many uses. For locomotion, obviously. We'd be much better tree and
monkey-bar climbers if we had good prehensile tails. We wouldn't be nearly so
earthbound. There would be fewer dangerous falls if we had tails -- they're
essential for balance. Just watch a cat or a squirrel. Plus a human with a tail
could grab on to something to keep himself upright. A tail can also be used for
defense. Grab the bad guy's arm with a good strong grasping tail. Think about
how much more interesting the martial arts or wrestling would be if were were
betailed. Imagine how useful a prehensile tail would be at a cocktail party;
both your hands are occupied spreading the green stuff on the cracker, so you
hold your wine glass with your tail.

Tails are also good communicators; they're expressive. Observe canis
domesticus: submission, aggression, defiance, excitement, puzzlement. Tails
would be important for parent child interactions. "Don''t you dare swish your
tail at me, young lady." If dogs can do it, why couldn't we do it better?

And also sexual activity. Imagine the possibilities.

Style: "how are you wearing your tail this year?" Billion dollar industries
revolve around haircare. Tailcare offers even greater possibilities. I'm sure
that the expense of tail grooming, tail coloring, tail enhancing, and tail
bejeweling could lift us out of most recessions. Tailcare would be one of the
major drivers of the economy.

Human life would have been infinitely richer.

Source: 2021/01/people-said-to-me

Title: Some Memorable Sentences That People Said to Me Long Years Ago
Date: January 28, 2021

My mother: "Stop slouching."  "Stop moping."  "Don't be a melamed."  (A
melamed is a pedant.)

My father: "If you lose your man, go directly to the front of the rim." "Keep
your hand on the man you're guarding. Keep your eye on the ball."  "Never be
embarrassed to accept a favor from a friend. Never omit an opportunity to do a
favor for a friend." "Don't forget to wash behind your ears."  "Anyone can make
money if they make it the sole business of their life to do so."  "When the
stock market is going up, everyone's a genius."

L Y Kaplan: "Give her a chance."

Harry Wedeck, a teacher at Erasmus Hall: "Read biographies."

Clara Gerstner (librarian, dying of cancer): "Get the most out of life."

David Novarr (revered teacher at Cornell): "You have to outwork the
competition."

B. J. Whiting (at my doctor's oral examination, after a discussion of the French
sources of Chaucer's Wife of Bath's Tale): "What's a Flemish one?

Source: 2021/02/2020ws

Title: World Series Results Claimed to be a Hoax
Date: February 03, 2021

Source: 2021/02/a-dream-of-swordfish

Title: A Dream of Swordfish
Date: February 06, 2021

I was on a rubber raft in the middle of an ocean.  Three or four swordfish
surrounded me. They were about to spear my raft and drown me -- because they
wanted my pension.

I wondered how I was to transfer my wealth to them -- could they take it out in
small, edible fish?

And so my dreamatorium continues to exceed expectations.

[February 13.  Still another "I am lost" dream, but this one with an unusual
feature. I am at a subway kiosk, trying to get a token or change for a $20 bill
so I can board the train, and the attendant says to me, "do you want your change
in money or in spaghetti?" Honest to Pete, that's what she said. I say, of
course, "I'll have it in money, please," but nevertheless she hands me a pound
of dry spaghetti, wrapped in cellophane or plastic, but already falling apart. I
walk away with the pound of spaghetti and try to get rid of it by placing it on
a window ledge, but a passer-by retrieves it and hands it back to me. "You
forgot your spaghetti," he says. Soon after I find a garbage can and stow the
spaghetti, and the dream continues in predictable channels.

I think the question, "Do you want your change in money or in spaghetti?" is one
of the best sentences my dreamatorium has ever generated.]

Source: 2021/02/today-let-us-celebrate-the-blanket

Title: Today Let Us Celebrate the Blanket
Date: February 07, 2021

What an excellent invention! Imagine life without the blanket. At night, we'd
still be keeping warm with hay and leaves. Yeesh, defective insulation. Hay and
hayseeds in our noses and mouths. Leaves, leaflets, thick main ribs and petioles
poking and imprinting our skin. Constant renewal problems: "Have remembered to
fetch the hay for tonight yet?" Cleanliness problems -- small insects in the
hay and leaves, however carefully processed. And then frequent trips to "Hay
and Leaves" -- the chain of stores that dominates the market. "Do you know what
they're asking this year for a half bale of leaves?"

When we pull that luxurious blanket over our shoulders, do we remember to thank
the inventor or inventors of the cotton or woolen blanket?  Are we sufficiently
appreciative of the luxury in which we live?

Coming soon: National Pillow Day.

Source: 2021/02/more-on-the-old-west-bradford-cemetery

Title: More on the Old West Bradford Cemetery
Date: February 11, 2021

In September of 2014 I wrote about a horrible tragedy that is commemorated in
our cemetery -- the old West Bradford cemetery on Hackett Hill Road. Inasmuch
as I've lived adjacent to it these last 52 years, I feel a strange proprietary
connection to the people it houses. I've wandered in it, tended it, studied it,
and cleaned up the trash left behind by visitors. I know that old burial ground
very well.

Here's what I wrote seven years ago:

"The old West Bradford cemetery, which is carved out of our land, is peopled by
the Worthleys, Hacketts, Kidders, and Sleepers who first settled this part of
Vermont. Some of them were long lived, some wandered through this thoroughfare
of woe only briefly. There are o-so-many of those sad stone lozenges at the foot
of a grave that represent infants who died too young to be christened.

Our most disturbing gravestone, in my opinion, is the the one for Stanley
Franklin Dwinell, M.D., born in 1920 and who died along with James Scott Dwinell
(age 7), Peter Dewey Dwinell (age 6), and Jonathan Dwinell (age 2) all on the
same day, December 11, 1952.  What a horror, I thought -- a man and his three
young sons all gone at once. A tragedy. But what sort?  A plane crash?  A
boating accident? House fire?  Perhaps even an infectious disease.

An internet search came up empty-handed, so I enquired of our longer-tenured
neighbors. Here's the local legend as it was reported to me. "Oh yes, the vet,"
I was told (although the tombstone distinctly says M. D., rather than D. V. M).
 "He was driving along Route 5 in Fairlee one winter morning and it was an icy
road and foggy and he went out of control and all four of them died instantly.
His wife was at home drinking a cup of coffee when she got the phone call. She
left the coffee half-finished on the kitchen table, left the house without a
word, and was never seen again. Didn't even take her clothes. Just disappeared."

It's a dramatic, heartbreaking story that sounds like the plot of a short
story by Alice Munro -- but I don't believe it, not a word of it. The same
gravestone that records the four simultaneous deaths also asserts that Constance
S. Dwinell, wife of Doctor Stanley Franklin Dwinell, died January 25, 1985, at
age 65.

I'm trying to imagine the remainder of poor Constance's life. It's hard to
construct a scenario that isn't completely dreadful. Most likely, Constance
returned, shattered, to the small town in New Hampshire, let us say, where she
must have been born. She moved back into her parents' house and took a job as a
town librarian, her life blighted by the tragedy. She never remarried.

But I prefer to imagine that after a period of intense mourning, she moved to
Paris (she had majored in French at Wellesley, I'm guessing,) and never told
a soul about her first family. There she was wooed and won by Baron Guy de
Condorcet de Noialles but could never conceive a child. It was a long happy
marriage. After Guy died, crashing his motorcycle on a winding Riviera road, she
returned to the States a rich woman, and lived out her life in a Park Avenue
apartment in New York. Friends and neighbors who had no idea of her first life
were shocked when they read the will which specified that she be buried, along
side Stanley and the children, right here in West Bradford.

That's my story and I'm sticking with it though I would very much like to know
the truth."

Then a year later, I was contacted by Larry Coffin, president of the Bradford
Historical Society. My local informant, it turns out, was all wrong about the
circumstances of the accident. Mr Coffin wrote this: "I would like to correct
your information on Dr. Stanley Dwinell. He and his three sons were killed in a
collision with a train on a crossing in Newbury, VT as he was going to treat a
patient at Woodsville (NH) Cottage Hospital. His father Dr. Franklin Dwinell was
in a car following."  Mr. Coffin did not comment on the half-finished coffee
cup.

[February 11, 2021.  I've now received the following communication from a
correspondent who calls him/herself "R". He or she is a "descendant of Stanley's
brother" and has sent me the link to this article In the Rutland Daily
Herald.  How could I have missed it?

So that's a slightly different version of the horrible story. The details are
different, but it's the same story in essence.

"R" also refers me to a letter in the Bradford Opinion by attorney Bud Otterman
of Otterman and Allen. It offers other details from the prior accounts but it's
no less tragic. "Franklin Dwinell was a a longtime doctor in Bradford when I
opened my law office in 1951. His son, Dr. Stanley Dwinell, had come home from
World War II and joined his father's practice.Their patients went to the old
Cottage Hospital near the railroad tracks in Woodsville. One of the doctors
would visit their patients each morning. When Stanley went, he would often take
his three pre-school sons with him. They would play in the waiting room while
their dad made his rounds. The morning of December 11, 1952 was overcast with
cold rain and snow in the air. About 11:30 am Dr Franklin Dwinell was called to
an accident at the grade crossing south of Newbury Village. When he arrived,
he found his son and his three grandson dead as a result of a collision with a
southbound train. There were no warning lights at the crossing."

"R" also says that Constance (Stanley's wife and the mother of Dwinell children)
"wasn't alone after Stanley and the boys passed. They had an older daughter who
was 7 and in school at the time of the accident. She's moved away from the area
and is reportedly somewhere out west now."

The older daughter, Hannah Dwinell, would therefore be 76 years old, as I write
this, if she is still alive. I feel for her. She had to overcome the loss of her
father and three younger brothers. Such an event would leave an irremediable
scar. I hope Hannah has had a good life. I wonder if she has ever returned to
West Bradford. It would be most painful for her to do so.

[I've also written about "my" cemetery here.]

Source: 2021/02/anadromous-or-catadromous

Title: Anadromous or Catadromous?
Date: February 12, 2021

Until this last week, when I read Patrik Svensson's Book of Eels (2019), I
had never encountered either of these lovely and mysterious adjectives. I'm
delighted to add "anadromous" and "catadromous," along with their cousin
"diadromous" to my vocabulary, though when I'll be able to drop any of these
words into my quotidian or even hebdomadal discourse is not immediately obvious,
especially inasmuch as I'm not all that confident about their accentuation.
Moreover, I rarely get into heart-to-hearts about icthyic migration.

Anadromous fishes hatch and spend their first months in freshwater streams and
rivers but then they migrate to the vasty deep, where they grow and mature.
When they feel ready, they return to the streams in which they were spawned
to deposit and fertilize their eggs. Salmons are famously anadromous (as well
as romantic and celebrated), but equally so are less-heralded smelt, herring,
and shad. Eels, on the other hand, are catadromous. They are hatched deep
in the ocean and then drift and wander to freshwater streams and rivers.
European eels may spend, according to Svensson, as many as fifteen years in the
shallows until they get the urge for going. No one knows what calls to them,
but they plain have to go. Then they set out for the dangerous Sargasso Sea
in the mid- Atlantic. Eel reproduction has entirely evaded the eyes of human
investigators.  Nor has a single eel egg ever been identified. Eels are modest,
private, discreet. No one  knows if or how eels select their mates. Do they
enact elaborate courtship rituals, or do the females simply lay their putative
eggs amidst a cloud of eelish milt?

Eels are not kosher, but not because they are catadromous. The rules, as set
out in Leviticus, are very clear: "Everything in the waters that has fins and
scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, you may eat. But anything in the
seas or the rivers that has not fins and scales is detestable to you."  Why
the Lord of Hosts set His face against shrimp and clams is unknowable -- but it
worked, in the sense that the religion survived and, some say, prospered for
lo these three thousand years. Food taboos are a common feature of religions
-- they help to separate us from them. But shouldn't taboos be minimally
consistent?  If the author or authors of Leviticus had said, don't eat eels,
they're slimy, ugly and tasteless to boot -- well that would be a religious
prohibition I could honor. But the scales thing, I don't know, because it's now
clear that eels do have scales (as well as fins). Eel scales are very small.
They are embedded in the skin, and they are smothered with eel slime. They are
difficult to find, but they're definitely, unquestionably present. Yet the
authorities continue to deride eels as treyf and have added the distinctly
unBiblical gloss that the fish's scales must be visible and detachable without
harming the skin. Unjust to eels, I say. I think they deserve a retrospective
pass and a full rabbinical apology.

My reasons for not eating eels are plain and sincere: eels are hideous beasts.
Even Svensson, who loves eels and eel-fishing, admits that they are loathsome to
any sensible palate.

Query: my daughter was born and lived here in her home town until she was
eighteen years old. Then she left for California, where she birthed and raised
her two fine children. Now she's returned home to her native streams at last. So
is she catadromous or anadromous?

Source: 2021/02/where-i-lived-viii

Title: Where I Lived --VIII
Date: February 13, 2021

From August 1976 to summer 1977, we lived at this odd, modernistic house at 1
Leycroft Close in Canterbury, Kent. The small tree, something in the prunus
line, wasn't there at the time so the house was more visible. The house wasn't
suitable for a family of five, but we made it work, barely. Two blocks away
was St. Stephen Protomartyr School, which the kids attended for a year. The
boys learned to play soccer and the daughter learned how to speak with an
English accent, which she forsook after two weeks back in the USA. The abandoned
railroad embankment behind the house, loaded with blackberries and wild plums,
afforded the kids much amusement.

Source: 2021/02/jacquardcoverlet

Title: My Life in Objects XIX -- Jacquard Coverlets
Date: February 14, 2021

A coverlet is not a small cover. The "let" is not a diminutive -- it's let as in
copire lectum (L) or "cuivre lit" (Fr).  A bedcover. Neither a blanket nor a
bedspread, but both -- a decorative but warm item of bedclothes.

"Jacquard" refers to the Jacquard attachment, which was a series of punchcards
(the ancestor of the IBM cards) that controlled the weaving and allowed a
skilled workman to produce complicated patterns relatively inexpensively.
Jacquard coverlets were produced in large quantities (about 700 craftsmen are
known) in villages and small towns in the US between about 1820 and the coming
of the Civil War. Weavers were mostly immigrants from the old country whose
skills had already been rendered obsolete by factory-based manufacture. Weaving
was a cottage industry -- many weavers wove in the winter, farmed in the summer.

This coverlet was woven by Benjamin Hausman of Allentown, Pennsylvania, in 1842
-- it says so in the "corner block." It's in amazingly good shape for a weaving
that's 180 years old. The colors, especially the madder red and indigo blue
wool, are still vivid. The coverlet is impressive and beautiful and keeps us
mighty toasty at night.

Source: 2021/02/my-brain

Title: My Brain -- for my Grandchildren, etc.
Date: February 22, 2021

(This entry is written for my grandchildren and any subsequent descendants,
should there by any, who might like to know how and where their brain anomalies
originated. Whether they will revere or curse me for what I've bequeathed them,
I'll never know. Just as well. The further they are removed from me, the less
they have to worry, for I'm only a one-fourth donor to my grandchildren, only
an eighth to the greats. With progressive diminishment they have less and less
reason to be concerned. But they'll never arrive at zero --there's no escape
from me or from a genetic Zeno's Paradox.]

I've lived with this brain for 80-plus years now and have a pretty good idea of
its strengths and weaknesses and peculiarities. I'll try be candid about the
poor pink mass.

I have a very good memory but little capacity for synthesis or organization. I
imagine that the contents of my brain look like the last scene of Citizen Kane.
A warehouse of stuff strewn in heaps, nothing organized, everything disorderly
and random. A great twisted miscellany of jumbled information. Nothing where
it should be, everything a mess. I "know" lots of facts and data, but I've
never had the capacity to make sense of them. When I read, for example, a
well- organized book of history, I'm regularly dazzled by authors who are able
to discover and explain patterns of change or to compare one century or one
civilization with another. My brain can't do such things -- or anything remotely
similar, even at a much lower order of achievement .

I have almost no imagination or creativity. Over the year I've tried to write
stories and poetry, but the stuff that emerges from my brain is piss poor. I'm
only comfortable dealing with facts and evidence. When I'm asked to invent
stuff, to make things up, I falter badly. I'm reminded that when I was a youth
in college, many of my friends enrolled for courses in "Creative Writing." I
couldn't take such a risk -- creative writing terrified me. I was conscious,
even then, of my total want of invention or artistry. On the other hand, I'm
quite a good detective. I can follow clues. I'm a good researcher. Strange to
say, though I'm without imagination in real life, I experience spectacularly
fanciful dreams. There's hardly a night goes by that I'm not transported to some
vividly brilliant alternative world. Why can't I access my nighttime imagination
during the waking hours?  I could have been a pillar of neo-surrealism.

I'm good at arithmetic but a total bust at mathematics. I can do mental
arithmetic much better than most -- add, subtract, multiply, or divide quickly
and accurately without pen or paper. But once things become even the slightest
bit abstract, I go blank. When there is something to count, I'm your man; when
there's something to extrapolate or imagine, no go.

I have a strong aesthetic sense, especially about visual beauty. Museums or
gardens can move me almost to a swoon. I've even experienced Stendhal syndrome
a few times. Majestic mountains and spacious landscapes move me less than a
well- designed garden. Yet my delight in human artistic achievement does not
cross over into anything that might be called spirituality (as it does for many
people). I entirely lack what Charlotte Bronte called the "organ of veneration."

I have a woeful disabling case of directional dyslexia -- worse than anyone
I've ever known except my younger brother. I can't follow directions and I get
lost even in familiar territory. I believe that my inability with left right
east west (I'm brilliant with up and down!) has contributed to my general lack
of daring. Inasmuch as I've always been afraid to go a step too far in space,
I became too cautious to strike out intellectually. Perhaps my inability with
directions is also tied up with my sometimes disabling shyness -- but that's
a guess. I do know that it's the reason that I am regularly bested a jigsaw
puzzles by five-year-olds -- I can't deduce the relationship between pieces.

I'm not prone to guilt but I'm devastated by shame. I suppose I would feel guilt
if I killed or harmed someone, but I've never done much in the pure villainy
line. Though largely guilt-free, I suffer dreadfully from embarrassment. I think
that I've retained in my memory every foolish fatuous pretentious thing I've
ever said or done. I live with a highly punishing shame superego -- which is
good, because it limits the number of times in which I might make an egregious
fool of myself, but it's bad because it's kept me from taking risks that might
have been productive or liberating or just simply pleasurable.

I have a good sense of humor. I can occasionally be witty. I also appreciate the
wit of others. I've learned, over the years, not to be witty at others' expense.
I'm articulate and occasionally, but rarely, eloquent.

I'm observant. When I walk in the woods, or walk down the street, I see and
interpret more clearly than most people. Sherlock said, "You see but you do not
observe." I'm no Holmes, but I do observe. Perhaps it's false pride but I think
that I "read" people pretty well. And I read relationships well. I'm curious
about people and about things, which is why I am happier reading non-fiction
rather than fiction. I'm more interested in the facts than in "make-believe." 
An odd admission for a person who spent a lifetime teaching and studying
literature.

I'm a good listener.

I love music but I have as inadequate a sense of rhythm as anyone on earth. My
dancing is pathetic and ludicrous. My sense of rhythm is so bad that as a youth
I could never learn to pump a swing -- even though in bat and ball games I was a
passable schoolyard athlete.

I'm impatient, easily bored. If I don't get it quickly, I'm liable to give up.
But there have been times in my life when I worked with admirable perseverance
and diligence. Not often enough.

I'm fascinated by language and know more than most people about the way
languages are structured and how they work. I read foreign languages pretty
well. At the same time, I have no ear for sound. My hearing is now very bad,
except when I turn the apparatus up to 11, but even in my youth I didn't easily
distinguish "t" from "d" or "v" from "b." I seem to have to see the word in
my head before I can understand or translate it. I was good at the ancient
languages because they made no demand on ear or tongue. French was a trial
because the sounds were so distant from their spelling. In English, I'm an
excellent speller.

At this point in my life I'm more conscious of the deficiencies of my brain
than of its strengths. I feel fortunate that I had a strong memory, a feel for
language, and a decent prose style, and that those few traits were enough to
let me live a respectable life and make a decent living. But I also know that
many people perform a multitude of tasks without strain that are a torment and a
struggle for me. Which has kept me appropriately modest.

Source: 2021/03/snobbery-in-the-verb

Title: Snobbery in the Verb
Date: March 02, 2021

Sometime during the hippie period, say the early 1970s, I  was driving the
big green Dodge station wagon solo from who knows where to somewhere else,
and as was my custom in those turbulent days, I picked up a hitchhiker -- a
mighty scrawny young guy. He seemed to be in bad shape -- underfed and dirty.
I suspected "speed." Compassionately, I offered him a piece of my sandwich. He
turned me down, saying, "I don't use white bread."

What an effective sentence! In a mere five words,  he managed to claim complete
moral superiority over me. I was now dismissed as a "user" of white bread. and
therefore clearly an unenlightened conformist bourgeois -- probably a rabid
supporter of the carpet bombing of Cambodia. He, on the other hand, was a
butterfly, free and liberated and a dissenter from the Loathed Establishment.

But I don't think I would remember this incident if it weren't for his
deployment of the word "use." "Use" asserts an equivalence between two habits
-- between whatever cocktail of drugs that he might be injecting or snorting or
dropping, and the white bread that I was consuming. It was also implied that my
addiction was the worser one. My emaciated pal was, in his own mind, doing me a
favor, enlightening me about the depravity of my bread habit.

But let me say a word in defense of the bread -- I don't "use" white bread in
the sense of Silvercup or Wonder Bread -- at least not since I left Flatbush
neighborhood of origin. The slices of bread in question might not have been
made of steelcut handmilled wheat berries enhanced with millet and quinoa and
baked in a hickory-fired furnace, but it would have been a perfectly respectable
bread and one that should not have been denigrated by a skinny tie-dyed trust
fund baby soon to shave his scraggly beard and rejoin his father's insurance
business.

But I sure do admire his use of the verb "use."

Here's a more recent incident. On the semi-famous Boulder Mall, not long ago,
a panhandler carrying a sign that said, "Anything Helps" held out his hand. 
Compassionately, I gave him a quarter.  He returned it to me, announcing, "I
don't take coins."

Well, everybody has to have standards.

Once again, I've been put in my place by a verb. "I don't take coins."

A third instance: I was in Boston and I wandered into a ragged antique store
that sold old and truly ancient Chinese art. The place is a mess but I notice
that the goods are museum-quality -- sculptures, mostly, but paintings and even
a few bronze pieces -- Neolithic for all I know.  Way out of the range of
my wallet or checkbook. Trying to appear knowledgeable, I ask the proprietor
if he has any Green Fitzhugh. Peering over lunettes, he says, with aggrieved
condescension, "I don't do export."

Floored again. Put in my place by Mr. Hippie, Mr. Panhandler, and Mr. Antique
Dealer -- all of them master practitioners who know how to make a simple
monosyllabic verb do a heck of a lot of snobbish work.

Source: 2021/03/pandiculation

Title: The Many Uses of "Pandiculation"
Date: March 20, 2021

I've just learned a new word that and I'm trying to figure out how to work it
into the conversation. Some sample usages:

"Have you pandiculated today? How often?"

"I'm not pleased when you pandiculate at the dinner table."

"There were a bunch of kids at the museum today, and half of them were
pandiculating."

"I thought that the way he pandiculated was ostentatious and rude."

"Pandiculation can be very pleasurable, especially early in the morning."

"I wasn't aware that many kinds of mammals pandiculate. You'd never see a
reptile or a bird do it."

"Not only did he pandiculate during the concert, but he did it noisily."

"I think that people should at least cover their mouths when they pandiculate."

Source: 2021/04/beffaapril

Title: Beffa -- April 1, 2021
Date: April 01, 2021

Regular readers of this metablague know that Dr. M. has resumed his study of
Italian. Foolish say some, but heroic say others, because to try to master a
language when one is an octogenarian is truly daunting. However, native speakers
of English, even older ones, can, if patient, slowly acquire Italian. Its sounds
are similar and sometimes identical to those of English; the conjugations, only
three of them, are on the whole regular; and many of its words have English or
Latin cognates. For me, pronouns present a problem, because they're sometimes
required when I wouldn't think to use them, and sometimes dropped when I'd
prefer them to be there -- and, moreover, they come in slightly varied direct,
indirect, and reflexive forms. And then there are the pronomi combinati or
double pronouns which are confusing in themselves and which are sometimes but
not always attached to infinitives, gerunds and imperatives as enclitics.
It's probably too late in the game for me to become a fluent speaker, but I
have hopes of becoming a competent reader. I can now read at about the 6th or
7th grade level; I have the grammar under control so it's mostly a problem of
vocabulary and idiom.

For a greater challenge, I've begun to study a little Beffa. Beffa is a
Kartvelian language with admixtures of Cascagian and Ghetti. Fortunately for me,
there's a small Beffan community here in our town. I work with an introductory
textbook -- Pathways to Modern Beffa (2012) by Divino Divano -- and with a
native speaker named Ismail Kartakov. We meet three times a week when he's
available. Sometimes I enjoy a Beffa-speaking dinner with Ismail and his wife
Soraya and their three young children. I've also been to some Beffan parties and
exuberant dances. I sometimes feel odd-man-out but it's been fun. The Beffan
community, reputedly hostile to outsiders, has been very welcoming. And the
goat, mountain oyster, and black radish stew is superb.

Beffa is a bit more complicated than English. For example, while English has
26 consonants, Beffa has 56, including a two kinds of glottal stops that sound
almost like clicks as well as a voiced glottal fricative that resembles a cat's
purr. It also has both a voiced and unvoiced bilabial trill that sound a lot
like an English "raspberry," and an unusual, possibly unique lingual-dental stop
in which the tongue is pushed firmly against not the upper but the lower teeth.
One peculiarity of Beffa is its consonant clusters -- a word may begin with as
many as six consonants yoked together before the first vowel appears. Some words
have an initial six consonants followed by a vowel and then a cluster of five
or six more consonants. This can be strange to English speakers and sometimes
I notice Ismail's younger children giggling at my feeble attempts to replicate
their plosives. (Voiceless plosives are usually aspirated and one must take care
not to insert a schwa between aspirants.) Beffa also has a varied repertoire
of vowels, including a number of diphthongs and a couple of triphthongs. There
aren't any tones, thank goodness. There's one triphthong the use of which can be
perilous, for if you get it wrong the observation "your blue parrot is pining
for the fjords" apparently sounds almost exactly like "my knife is longer and
sharper than yours."

Nouns have both natural and grammatical gender. Nouns can be masculine,
feminine, neuter, ambiguous, common, animate or inanimate. They can be singular,
dual, plural, or paucative (i.e. a few). Neuter nouns rarely have duals. Beffa
has six fully formed declensions, distinguished primarily by the fact that
plurals in declensions 1 and 3 are formed with a prefix, in 2 and 4 by a suffix,
and in 5 and 6 by an infix. There are also some fifteen cases, all useful but
some slightly unusual. There are the familiar nominative, possessive, accusative
and dative (or indirect object). There are also a series of cases that describe
motion: the locative ("the ball that is lying on the ground"), the ablative
(("the ball that is coming in your direction"); the separative ("the ball that
is moving away from you"); the commitative ("the ball that is touching your
hand"); the partitive ("the ball that has left your hand"); the terminative
("the ball that has stopped moving"); the superessive ("the ball that is on top
of another ball"); the penetrative ("the ball that is inside another ball"); the
perditive ("the ball that is lost"); the oscillative ("the ball that is going
back and forth"); the thumpative ("the ball that is bouncing"); the plungitive
"the ball that has fallen into the water"); the remunerative ("the ball that
has been bought or sold"); the joculatorative ("the ball that does not fall
to the ground"); the alfactorative ("the ball that stinks like a corpse");
the perplexive ("the ball that has disappeared"); and the insouciative ("the
ball that has disappeared and no one cares"). Nouns can be either proximate or
obviative; nouns that are central to the discourse (proximate) are declined
very differently than nouns that are of marginal importance (obviative). There
is also an unusual suffix (at least, unusual to me, for I had never encountered
it before) that indicates whether the object specified touches the earth or
is removed from the earth. And an infix which indicates whether the object is
horizontal, vertical, diagonal, spiral, or invisible.

Verbs can be singular dual, plural, paucative, or undetermined: active,
passive or middle. There are five fully-formed conjugations and apparently
remnants of three others that are retained from the past when the language was
more fully synthetic. The most commonly used tenses are present indicative,
imperfect indicative, past imperfect indicative, future indicative, future
imperfect indicative, future perfect indicative, pluperfect indicative, past
pluperfect indicative, future pluperfect indicative, future stative, pluperfect
resultative, present optative, future optative, past imperfect optative, present
subjunctive, future subjunctive, past pluperfect subjunctive, future pluperfect
subjunctive, future pluperfect conditional subjunctive, and future pluperfect
optative conditional subjunctive aorist. Curiously, there is no future imperfect
subjunctive. Moreover, there are two kinds of vocatives: one when a woman
addresses a man; a second when a man addresses a woman or an animal. There
is also votive, a tense that was formerly used for addressing the deities in
prayer, but is now reserved for tribal chiefs, heads of state or royalty. The
votive is very similar to the conditional and the erroneous substitution of
a conditional for a votive was formerly grounds for mutilation but nowadays
leads only to acute embarrassment, or, in the case of a particularly egregious
grammatical lapse, to exile.

Some verbs are ergative so that the subject of either a transitive or
intransitive verb can be in an absolutive case. Some common ergative verbs are
"to become," "to eat,", and "to gouge" (as in, "to gouge out the eyes of an
enemy").

Beffan script is known as "dabbenaggine." This passage comments on the familiar
Beffan proverb, "If you steal my horse, I will steal your wife."

.

Beffa used to be written boustrophedonically, but since the reforms of 1912
has been written right to left. For some reason which I cannot possibly imagine,
dabbenaggine leaves no spaces between words but runs them all together without
breaks, which makes it just slightly harder to master.

Pronouns and determiners are difficult and complicated and perhaps I'll describe
them sometime in the future when I'm more familiar with their multiple and
various forms.

Source: 2021/04/my-life-in-coffee

Title: My Life in Coffee
Date: April 04, 2021

Although both my parents were dependent on their morning coffee

percolated out of a can like this one, I myself never touched the stuff until
my first year at college. In the 1950s, coffee was 10 cents a cup and I drank
gallons of it, morning, noon and night. It became essential to my well-being.
Black, no sugar or milk, but in truth, not black but barely brown, weak by
present standards. In the early 60s my hipper than I -- not much of a leap -- 
friend SDS introduced me to the coffee shop. Figaro in Greenwich Village, mighty
sophisticated for a boy from Flatbush. I became addicted to coffee shops as
well as coffee itself for many a year. I couldn't handle any routine paperwork,
or indeed grade a tedious set of papers without infusions of caffeine. With
the Starbuck's revolution, coffee became tastier and more luxurious. But,
conservative as I was, I never succumbed to fancy drinks but kept to what had
come to be known simply and condescendingly as "Americano."

During these thirty-five or so years of pleasant coffee dependence, atrial
fibrillation became an annoying feature of my life. Frequent bouts, longer and
longer. Debilitating, possibly dangerous -- there's a strong association of
fibrillation with strokes. Finally, a doctor suggested that I might consider
giving up caffeine. So I stopped on a dime. It took six weeks to get the
caffeine out of my blood and put an end to the longing for coffee -- but the
atrial fibrillation came to a total halt. Ceased. Not a single episode these
last two and a half decades. Astonishing. I had been poisoning myself -- or at
least, compromising my well being.

Do I miss coffee? Yes, I'm afraid so, every morning. I still love the odor
(which was always better than the taste). More than that, I miss the society
of coffee cup and conversation. In those days, I loved to sit with a book in a
nook, warming my palm with a bottomless cup. Once, only once, about two years
ago, I did venture to order a medium Americano -- but I couldn't stomach more
than a couple of sips. Coffee's an acquired taste, and one that I had I de-
acquired.

Tea? I haven't found one that is more than barely tolerable. Hot chocolate?
Feels juvenile. Acceptable for breakfast but not for Peet's or Ozo or Starbuck's
or the Trident.

On the other hand, a heart that keeps to a regular rhythm and doesn't go
creatively syncopated several times a week is also a pleasure.

Source: 2021/04/linen-silk-etc

Title: Linen, Silk, etc.
Date: April 06, 2021

I've been reading about the origin of spinning and weaving -- specifically
E. J. W. Barber's Prehistoric Textiles (Princeton, 1991), a comprehensive
and exhausting survey of everything that was known about the subject thirty
years ago. I'm dazzled -- in part by the author, who turns the story into an
adventure, but even more so by our brilliant neolithic ancestors. Some among our
forbears, starting perhaps 30,000 years ago, looked at this plant, common flax,

and figured out how to turn it into linen -- a complicated, many step process.
How did they even begin to imagine such a transformation? Did they examine
the plant and say, hey that looks like it will make a nice shirt or a pair of
pants? To arrive at such a concept seems like an act of almost preternatural
intelligence. After all, there was no template or model. It's not as though
there were other fabrics made from other plants fibers. Flax into linen was a
first. There were predecessors. Clothes, I imagine, in the form of animal skins
or furs, must have been in use. I've read that reeds and other plant materials
had been plaited into baskets and nets. But flax into linen was not at all
obvious. We can be proud of our ancestors.

Here's a picture of the oldest recovered linen garment: the so-called Tarkhan
Dress, which was found in a cemetery near Cairo in 1913 and radiocarbon-dated to
between 3482 and 3102 BCE, or 5 and a half millennia ago. It's quite stylish and
isn't in much worse shape than some of the favored garments in my own personal
wardrobe.

Source: 2021/04/dumb-luck

Title: Dumb Luck
Date: April 14, 2021

I can remember five near misses -- five times when through inattentive or
incompetent driving I put my own and others' lives at risk. I give thanks that I
avoided killing or mangling myself or the innocent victims of my failings. What
wondrous life is this I lead -- how fortunate I have been!

The first: it was 1963. I was an inexperienced, overconfident driver, traveling
westward, somewhere in southern Illinois. My first cross-country trip. A two-
lane highway, a downpour, very wet pavement. I saw, or thought i saw, an
oncoming car in my lane. There would have been plenty of time for him to pass
and dive back, but I panicked and braked hard. My vehicle, an old Rambler, not
a great handler in the best of times, swerved into the oncoming lane, then spun
out of control and landed backward in a ditch on the right side of the road. We
sat there, stunned, relieved, because I had been in the left oncoming lane long
enough to have killed ourselves self and others. (Within a minute, a man pulled
up in a truck, attached a chain to our car and winched us out. I'm perpetually
grateful to this Samaritan.)

A second instance: an icy winter day in Boulder, early 1970s. Driving the old
yellow Saab with my sister Phyllis (legally, sister-in-law) in the "death seat"
east on Arapahoe, I hit a slick of black ice and made a bad situation worse
by applying the brakes. The car spun out of control and eventually halted
facing backwards in the oncoming lane. Once again, no one injured or even
inconvenienced.

Another: driving across the USA alone in the clunky blue Camry, doing 80 in a
55 zone, I didn't quite fall asleep at the wheel but certainly lost focus, and
didn't see a car stopped in the parking lane until I was just adjacent to it.
If I had been a bit to the right or if there had been someone fixing a tire,
I would have crippled myself and murdered an innocent. Here's another one,
probably the most idiotic. Driving alone through Chicago in heavy traffic, on
one of those horrible highways where there are eight lanes east and another
eight west, I found myself in the third lane from the right and needed to exit
right. Instead of playing it safe, and continuing on, I impulsively dove across
two lanes and made it to the exit. Angry horns to the right of me, horns to the
left of me. Why did I take such a risk? I don't know but I thank the drivers
around me for being alert. What arrogance, what stupidity! The most recent
event, and most inexcusable, happened just a few years ago. I was returning
home from a very disturbing visit to the "memory care" facility. Somehow, in
my grief, I ignored a prominent red light and sailed right through a busy
intersection -- a gross violation of sense and law. But there was no crash and
no police and I proceeded blithely on my way -- only, after a few moments,
realizing with shock and horror that I had put my own life and that of others at
completely unnecessary danger.

When people two hundred years from now look back on our "civilization" --
assuming that there will be people on this planet two hundred years from now,
which is not a certainty -- they will wonder how was it possible that those
people in our century were able to survive. Dashing 70 or 80 miles an hour in
a tin can just six feet from a line of onrushing tin cans? Weaving among giant
tandem trucks and buses and cement mixers -- and expecting to survive. What sort
of brave or foolhardy individuals were these strange, death-defying people?

For myself, I'm astonished at the dumb luck that's allowed me to preserve my
life and mobility to this advanced age. So far, that is. It's not over until
it's over.

Source: 2021/04/the-brown-corpus

Title: The Brown Corpus
Date: April 24, 2021

Interviewing ten candidate a day for a couple of days can make a guy a little
crazy. On the one hand, you owe each candidate your thoughtful attention,
because careers are at stake. But conducting interviews is a tedious process
and everyone who has ever done it knows that faces and voices and attitudes
tend to blur into an indistinguishable lumpy mass. So much earnestness! So much
contrived presentation of self!

I remember one such endless day in a featureless room in a high floor of
a pretentious modern hotel in Chicago, or Atlanta, or perhaps Houston. We
were making an appointment to our budding "Writing Program" -- an academic
innovation that I now believe to have been a total disaster. Writing Programs
hired "writing specialists" -- experimentalist social scientists who believe in
"theory" and who generally can't themselves write a lick. Or half a lick.

I remember one candidate with whom I had this remarkable exchange:

Me:  "Could you remind me about the subject of your dissertation."

He:  "I worked with the Brown Corpus."

Me (astonished): "What the heck is the Brown Corpus."

He:  "It's a computer file of one million edited words drawn from magazines
and newspapers. It was compiled at Brown University. The idea is to study the
English language as it actually written."

(I interrupt this conversation to say that "Brown Corpus" may be the most
injudiciously-named academic enterprise in history. To me, "brown corpus" might
have something to do with decayed corpuscles, or a fecal mass, or someone or
something a-mouldering in its grave. Not a phrase with much poetry to it. But
let us proceed.)

Me: "That seems interesting. What exactly did you study in this corpus."

He: "I studied the use of the comma."

Me: "The comma. You studied the comma." (More astonishment). "What in the world
did you learn about the comma?

He:  "I learned that the comma is used to link a sequence of nouns, or phrases,
in a series."

I was already giddy and aghast when I heard this news and I had a sudden
revelation, a flash. I saw myself picking up the candidate and throwing him
through the plate glass window and watching as he plummeted painfully to the
street below. But I controlled myself and thanked the candidate and, I believe,
ended the interview politely. I didn't even indulge myself with something
snarky, like, "do you intend to do any follow-up work on a more challenging mark
of punctuation, as for example the exclamation point?"

Source: 2021/04/signs-of-spring

Title: Signs of Spring
Date: April 25, 2021

Pictured is a variety of daylily called the Charles Johnston. Looks good,
doesn't it?  First introduced by Gates in 1981, it won an award of merit
1988 from the American daylily society. I ordered a couple from a nursery in
Tennessee because they are VE (very early), tetraploid, fragrant, and reputed
to be accomplished re-bloomers (although daylillies that rebloom in the upper
south don't always do so in Vermont). It's the VE part that interests me because
I don't have any early reds. "Rich burgundy blooms."  Sounds delicious. I think
I'll put them in the vegetable garden temporarily, where the soil is, as LERM
says, "like chocolate cake" and plant them out in the perfect place, yet to be
determined. Somewhere where the large VE blooms can make a statement.

I wonder how my gardens survived my Covid 2020 absence. We'll find out in three
weeks.

Source: 2021/05/overtonjacquard

Title: Overton Mystery
Date: May 03, 2021

Here's a a handsome old double-weave Jacquard coverlet in all its flowery glory,
right there on our very own bed. Extraordinarily decorative, is it not?  Cotton
and wool, and generous with the well-saturated indigo dye. State-of-the-art hand
weaving.

I especially prize this particular coverlet because of its history. It was woven
for Charity Maria Laws in 1835, as is plainly evident from the inscription on
its "summer" side. I wish the weaver had identified himself as well as his
client, but he hasn't.

Who is Charity Maria Laws?  She was a native of a part of Long Island (New
York) with which I'm very familiar and where I spent the best three summers
of my childhood. She was born in 1822 in Ridge and died in Northport in 1894.
Makamah Beach, home to as much fair seed-time for the soul as I experienced,
is located within the Northport precincts. Charity Maria was presented with
this coverlet when she was thirteen years old -- to keep her warm a' nights,
no doubt, but also, as was the custom, to serve as the centerpiece of her
trousseau. The coverlet worked its magic because in 1848 Charity Maria was
wooed and won by John Gardiner Lewis of neighboring Crab Meadow and bore five
children, all of them born in Northport or adjacent Huntington. I have no idea
where the coverlet hid out between Maria's death until it made its re-appearance
on ebay last year, but I'm happy to say that it was treated  very well during
that time -- it's in splendid shape for a textile that's pushing two hundred.

Imagine my surprise, when, a few days ago, a Jacquard coverlet in an identical
style appeared on ebay. When I glanced at the pictures, I said, out loud but
to no one in particular, I bet that one also hails from my part of Suffolk. It
didn't take an S. Holmes to confirm my speculation.The evidence is as plain as
the nose on your face: the exact same lettering, but this time, it's Harriet
Sophia Overton.

This coverlet is not only inscribed -- It's dated, too. December 1, 1845.
Harriet Sophia Overton herself is not easy to identify. There was a Harriet
Sophia in the village or hamlet of Coram, in Suffolk, just a few miles from
Northport, but she was born in 1815 and died in 1821 and therefore can't
possibly be the recipient of a coverlet woven in 1845. There must be a second
Harriet Sophia. And truly, so there is. The first Harriet Sophia had an older
brother, Sheldon Roe Overton, who fathered a girl named after the departed six-
year-old. Harriet Sophia Overton II was born in 1850 and died, unmarried, in
1868. Another dead end, alas, because HSO the second was born five years after
the coverlet was woven.

I am forced to speculate that there was still a third Harriet Sophia Overton who
was born on December 1, 1845 and didn't live long enough to get a mention in the
story or even earn a gravestone. Harriet Sophia Overton was an unlucky name.
Hardly compensated for by the long-lived coverlet.

Despite my love of Northport and environs -- of course I mean the Northport of
my memory, the Northport of the 1940s -- I didn't bid on the Overton coverlet.
But I would love to know its story, which I suspect to be one of great sadness.

Source: 2021/05/jimperry

Title: About James Perry Jr.
Date: May 07, 2021

From our part of Vermont comes some ghastly news. In a paranoid fit, James Perry
Jr. shot and killed Karina, his 38-year-old daughter.

According to the Vermont Digger, our internet newspaper, Perry had been holing
up in his home, convinced that "bad guys with guns" were after him. Here's part
of the newspaper account: "Perry said he shot his daughter... as she stood on
a landing outside his residence. He told police he was concerned that unknown
people were playing 'gun games' with him and he asked his daughter not to come
to his residence.... He was concerned Karina was being used as a “ploy”
by unknown individuals.... For the past couple weeks he has been unable to
sleep.... He was sitting on his couch when he saw his daughter at the door. He
picked up his 12-gauge shotgun, and could see Karina holding cookies, waving,
and trying to open the locked door. ‘I’m just so nervous… and I didn’t
want her to come in, and I didn’t want the cookies. I ordered her to stop, and
I just, I guess I, pulled the trigger. And then I pulled it more, and then I cut
her neck.'" Perry said he believed he used a pocket knife to stab her.

Could there be a more horrific tragedy? A man goes crazy and kills his own
daughter.

But yet there's worse -- in the details that don't appear in the newspaper.
Karina, Jim's older daughter by his second wife, Phyllis, is divorced and is
the mother of four children, who are now left motherless. And Phyllis, Karina's
mother, is ill with a very bad cancer -- so she had to learn, in this last phase
of her life, that her ex-husband shot and killed one of their children.

Here's a picture of James Perry Jr. as it appeared in the Digger. He looks like
a guy who's just been cast as a maniac in a chainsaw massacre movie.

He certainly does not look at all like the Jimmy Perry whom I've known for 45
years. Except for the bright blue eyes, he's unrecognizable.

I remember Jim when he was in his twenties -- a normal guy. Actually he was
quite handsome, strong, energetic, well-liked, already skilled with wood and
bricks and stones. He built the chimney in our new house and he was a more-than-
competent carpenter.

How could the Jimmy Perry that I knew and admired in the 1970s turn into a man
who shoots and kills his own daughter?

Even back then, he drank too much. And used too much marijuana. Sometime in the
1980s, he worked in Wyoming as a roustabout on oil rigs. One day he fell into a
vat of what he called "mud" but was a container for the strong chemicals used
in the oil drilling process. He was burned neck to ankle and spent close to a
year, if I remember correctly, in a hospital -- in severe pain for much of the
time. I don't think he ever fully recovered. His body was a mass of scars. I'm
sure that the beer and the drugs and the pain, and possibly the isolation caused
by the pandemic, contributed to his derangement. But nothing explains what is
fundamentally inexplicable.

I didn't see much of Jim in the last few years. I'd run into him in Hannaford's
occasionally. He appeared to be many years older than his true age. He was
emaciated, sickly-looking. Clearly someone who'd had a hard life. He told me
that he didn't know how long he could continue "crawling on roofs." The last
time I caught sight of him, I confess, I avoided him. I could see even from a
distance that he was "off" and I didn't want to engage with him.

I don't mean to excuse Jim. What he did was the worst. I wish that he hadn't
had a shotgun in the house. If he had to be armed, I would have preferred that
he shot himself. That would have been bad enough. I hope that he doesn't regain
his sanity, because if he does so, he'll have to reckon with what he's done. The
guilt will kill him twenty times over.

Jim was an ordinary man, not an evil one. The picture above doesn't tell the
whole story. He was unlucky, and crazed, and something went horribly wrong in
his brain. Those of us who are lucky and sane should thank our good fortune,
because all of us are vulnerable.

Jim did a lot of work for me in 1978. In the summer of 1979, he came to visit
and said that he had gone over his books and discovered that I had overpaid him
for about a week of work. News to me -- I had no idea. He said that he couldn't
reimburse the money he owed me, but he would take a few days and build me a nice
stone wall -- even then, he was famous for his classy stonework. So together and
with the help of my kids we poached a dozen truckloads of stone from some of our
many crumbling walls. We picked out a site and he built us about fifty feet of
handsome drystone. It's still there, an ornament to the property. The maker of
that wall is the Jimmy Perry, an honest craftsman and a reliable friend, that I
prefer to remember, even while I mourn the death of his daughter and regret the
abysmal woe that he caused his family.

Source: 2021/05/words-of-my-life-slouch

Title: Words of my Life: Slouch
Date: May 10, 2021

When I was a boy, I was regularly reprimanded with these words (or some
variation of them): "Don't slouch." "You're slouching! "You're slouching again!"
"Why are you slouching?"

Apparently I was a natural sloucher.

It was a difficult criticism to absorb or to counter. I wasn't entirely sure
what the word "slouch" meant but I sure knew that it wasn't anything good. In my
mother's eyes, I believe, "slouching" was not only a physical but a moral lapse.
But to be accused of something of which my body, not me in my own person as I
knew myself, was guilty -- well, that was surely puzzling.

To slouch is to "sit or stand in a casual, lazy, drooping, or improper posture."
"Lazy?" -- I was definitely lazy. "Improper? -- I'm not so sure. Nor do I know
why being repeatedly accused of "slouching" was going to turn me into an upright
proper person.

The most famous sloucher in literature is the villainous Orlick in Great
Expectations, who was "always slouching. He never even seemed to come
to his work on purpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident... 
and when he went ...away at night, he would slouch out.... He lodged at a
sluice-keeper's out on the marshes, and on working-days would come slouching
from his hermitage." Slouching is unquestionably a marker of evil for Dickens.
Was it so for my mom?

Then there's Yeats' "rough beast... slouching toward Bethlehem to be born." A
second coming of sorts, and not at all a good one.

So there you have three slouchers: the "rough beast," Orlick, and me.

Source: 2021/05/our-visit-to-beardstown-illinois

Title: Our Visit to Beardstown, Illinois
Date: May 23, 2021

We visited Beardstown, in southwestern Illinois, because it was the birthplace,
in 1845, of one of Lynn's maternal great-grandmothers, Mary St. John DeHaven.
Even though it is Lincoln country, we had no idea what to expect, the AAA entry
being so scant, but we soon discovered that Beardstown is a place that had
its moment of glory sometime in the nineteenth century, but which has allowed
history to pass it by. While it's not entirely derelict, it's not even slightly
prosperous -- nor has it achieved quaintness. The industry of note nowadays is
the JBS meat-packing plant out on the Arenzville Road; most of its employees
come from south of the border, which is why the only indication that Beardstown
might someday be rejuvenated is the dozen or so new downtown taquerias and
iglesias.

Our first stop in Beardstown was a decaying, rather pathetic 200-foot long
peeling boardwalk along the sandy Illinois River, a waterway which in the years
before the Civil War had been a thriving commercial thoroughfare. There we
watched a solitary tug struggle to free a barge that had somehow run itself
aground. Perhaps the boardwalk had once welcomed visitors and tourists, but
during our stay the only spectator beside ourselves was a very frayed out-of-
work fellow who arrived on a beaten-up bicycle, and who seemed entirely out of
his depth when we asked if there was a place in Beardstown to purchase a cup of
coffee. To me, he seemed addled; I suspected meth or opioids.

After gazing at the sluggish river for half an hour (remembering Abraham
Lincoln's enthusiasm for river transport), we toured the few blocks of the old
downtown, in which fewer storefronts were occupied than were vacant. We looked
in at an antique store -- actually less "antique" than "junque" (unless a flashy
bejewelled Elvis Presley doll was a revered artifact of a prior civilization).
Lynn purchased an owl-decorated piece of blue porcelain for $5.00. We inquired
of the proprietor, Mrs. White, if there were a coffee shop in Beardstown.
Patricia White, we soon learned, was a recently retired public school music
teacher and a lively lady knowledgeable about all things Beardstownian. I asked
her about the intriguing storefront adjacent to hers, which proclaimed itself
to be a Grand Opera House. I was skeptical that any sort of grandeur could be
found in such dreary town, but I was wrong. Mrs. White generously offered us a
tour of the old theater. She warned us that it was in deep disrepair but she
said that she and others, led by the local chiropractor, were working diligently
towards its restoration. So up a flight of dark stairs we went, and there, lo
and behold, was revealed to us the picturesque ruins of what had once been a
remarkable structure. Here's a photograph of the remains of its ornate frescoed
ceiling and 20-foot-high windows:

The theatre had a well-proportioned stage and had once (before the balcony was
pulled down) been able to seat several hundred people. In the littered backstage
were the remnants of nineteenth-century traveling shows, including a large
painted backdrop of Venetian gondolas, left behind by a company from St. Louis.
But the building, though its bones were good, was a wreck: leaks in the roof had
caused the ceiling to deteriorate. The auditorium itself had served as a storage
area for the overflow merchandise of decades of store owners. It would take a
dozen roll-offs and weeks of work just to remove the trash and find the floor.
Nevertheless, the Grand Opera House offered us an insight into what Beardstown
had been when it was a thriving community. I was so impressed by the theater
that I decided to donate my bit to its reconstruction. I had determined on $100
until I noticed that Mrs. White had donned a red white and blue Trump 2020 face
mask. And so arose a moral dilemma: I want to support the arts, and I would love
to help return the Grand Opera House to its former glory. Opera and music should
be beyond politics -- but yet I was deeply repelled by Mrs. White's Trumpism. So
I split the difference and donated $60 to the cause. A sensible compromise to a
vexing problem?? I don't know. But it's what I did. I wanted to ask Mrs. White
what Donald Trump's ignorance, bigotry, authoritarian predilections and corrupt,
vacant life had to offer to a cheerful retired teacher in a decaying midwestern
town, but I saw no reason to provoke a controversy.

Afterward, we found some lunch up the street at Sally's Bistro. The bistro did
not live up to "bistro" expectations, and could more honestly be called Sally's
Diner, but it did make a good BLT and almost-decent coffee. We did not try the
"alligator bits" for which it is famous, even though Sally assured us that
the bits were much better than the usual alligator tail. (Beardstown has an
alligator farm but we didn't tour it.)

Mrs. White had also told us about the "old cemetery" so on a lark we went off
to investigate. We wandered about, not expecting much, until we stumbled upon
a gravestone which revealed that the late Henry Foster married the late Mary
McKeever DeHaven. Lynn doesn't know precisely who these people are, but there
are so many of her family names on the marker -- that of her grandfather, George
Foster Massey, her uncle, McKeever Massey, her second cousin, Katherine DeHaven
Milligan -- that they must  be long-departed members of her extended ancestry.
Certainly cousins of some degree.

We googled Henry T. (for True) Foster and found that he was a pillar of the
frontier community of Beardstown. He had immigrated from Maine; Mary from
Philadelphia. We were gratified by this unexpected find.

On the return trip from Beardstown to Jacksonville, we stopped at Griggsville,
which, we were astonished to discover, is the "purple martin capitol of the
nation" and the location of the world's largest purple martin skyscraper.
Skeptical?  Here's the proof:

So altogether a most rewarding day.

Source: 2021/05/fly-swatter-2

Title: Fly Swatters
Date: May 31, 2021

For many years, we've had to make do with this inferior fly-swatter:

It's made of molded plastic and extruded metal wire. It's not handsome -- a
ghastly inappropriate pink-purple color for the flapper and a small gauge
white- coated wire for the handle. Is there a name for this  styleless style,
other than dime-store cheap. Mid-century modern in its least attractive
manifestation. Not only unbeautiful, it leaves much to be desired in function.
The flapper is inflexible and rigid, which makes it difficult to kill the fly
without splattering it. Moreover, the wire handle lacks integrity and offers an
uncomfortable grip.

Now feast your eyes on this newly-acquired fly-swatter. It's a thing of beauty.

Notice the turned hardwood handle (maple, I believe, or possibly birch),
perfectly suited to the human hand. The heavy gauge shaft leading to a genuine
metal screen flapper. It's a fly-swatter to savor;  a classic. Many a graceful
swat in it.

An anniversary or a birthday in the offing? Nothing says "I love you" more than
a fly-swatter of distinction. It's also unsurpassed as a wedding present. If
you're in a generous mood, "his" and "hers" fly swatters will get that marriage
off to a great start.

Source: 2021/06/birches-mutability

Title: Birches White and Yellow;  Mutability
Date: June 21, 2021

It may not be immediately obvious or dramatic, but the large tree in the middle
of the picture is a white birch. It towers over the red maple and the beeches
that are to its left. White birches do not often attain such size, nor are they
long-lived, at least in our part of the world. This particular white birch is
old and imposing and thriving and healthy.

Yet a few years ago this birch appeared to be at death's door. It sported only a
handful of yellow leaves on its thin senescent crown.

Inasmuch as it was an old tree (as measured in white-birch years) we all assumed
that it had come to the end of its natural days. There was a vigorous family
debate on whether it should be submitted to the chain saw before it fell over --
perhaps dangerously -- of its own accord. The consensus was to give it another
year. It was a good decision -- as can be plainly seen.

I have no idea why the birch sprang from its hospital bed. Was it a victim of
some nameless illness that it had overcome? Had it been merely listless and
depressed? Had its local environment altered?  Perhaps some noxious insect pest
had arrived, gone for a kill, failed,  and then decamped. I have no theory --
it's a total mystery, as is so much in life. Nevertheless, I'm happy to welcome
the birch back into our community. May it have many more happy years.

Meanwhile, just steps away, was a young vigorous yellow birch. Yellow birches
are not as striking or famous as their white-barked cousins, but to my mind they
are by far the better tree. They are, at least in our neck of the woods, larger,
better shaped, longer-lived, and their wood is superior for either furniture or
flooring or fuel. Their bark is a splendid glistening yellow gold. A tree to
prize.

But, alas, not this particular yellow birch. Last summer it was a burgeoning
adolescent, adding more than 18 inches of growth a season. This year, I'm sorry
to report, dead as a doornail.

Not a single leaf. Not the slightest sign of life. This is an ex tree.

The yellow birch was in a perfect position and was one that I had counted on to
live for at least a hundred years, perhaps two hundred.  A tree that should
have lasted centuries and been an ornament to the property and a delight to
grandchildren and great-grandchildren -- under whose spreading boughs picnics
and  other rural pleasures would have been enacted far into the future.

But that's the inconstancy of life on earth. One tree, supposedly a short-lived
one, springs to life while another, with a grand future, suddenly and
inexplicably succumbs to the fate that awaits us all.

Mutability, they used to call it. Precarious, I'd say. "All is flux."

We are grateful that we had the yellow birch for as long as it lasted, and
grateful also that the white birch has decided to stick around -- perhaps for
another couple of decades.

Source: 2021/06/red-pines

Title: Red Pines
Date: June 22, 2021

Our stand of magnificent trees is composed of red pines, pinus resinosa.

Each tree is between 60 and 65 feet tall and they are all exactly 51 years old.
How can I be so sure about height and age?

Height is easy to determine with the Calloway 300 Pro Laser Range Finder. Age? 
Here's the history. In 1970, some friend or acquaintance, I can't remember
exactly who, acquired a hundred red pine seedlings for a forestry project. He
couldn't make use of all of them and so he gave us ten -- each one perhaps 4-6
inches long and the sum of their stems no thicker than a #2 pencil. I didn't
know exactly what to do with these treasures, so i planted them in a row in the
vegetable garden. Which is where they sat until 1972, when I decided to plant
them on the dike of the newly constructed pond, where they remain.

In doing so i acted in defiance of the local wisdom, which is, never plant a
tree on the dike. Why? Because the tree will eventually die, and the "water will
follow the roots" and weaken the dam. I judged this reasoning to be faulty.
In the first place, red pines, like all conifers, are shallow-rooted. The
surface of the dike is fifteen feet above the level of the water in the pond,
so when the pine eventually dies, its rootball will still be above water level.
Moreover, red pines are reported to live for centuries (some say three hundred
years), and I just can't bring myself to worry about what's going to happen to
a dike in the far distant future when, no doubt, the pond will long since have
reverted to the thick swamp that it was before we dug it out.

But why red pines rather than the white (pinus strobus) which is generally
considered to be the much superior species? Because a), I owned these red
pine seedlings and b) because at that time many of the white pines in our
neighborhood were suffering from a insect-borne disease that killed the leader
shoot and therefore deformed the tree (leader shoot disease seems to be a
thing of the past and now our young white pines are again growing up tall and
straight).  And red pines as consistently healthy.

For their first decade, the red pines made scarcely any impression on the
landscape. Now they dominate. When I sit in their shade, I am pleased to recall
their entire history, which allows me to tell them, proudly, "I knew you when
you were just a sprout!"

Source: 2021/06/genuine-unedited-unimproved-excerpt-from-a-conversation-with-my-brother

Title: Genuine, Unedited, Unimproved Excerpt from a Conversation with my Brother
Date: June 27, 2021

He:  Did you know that they are now playing seven-inning games?

Me:  Yeah, double-headers.  And that they're starting a runner on second base
in extra inning games?

He:  Good thing Dad didn't know about this. It would have killed him on the
spot.

Me: Yeah, sure would have. DH rule took a couple of years off his life.

Source: 2021/07/trees-old-and-new

Title: Trees Old and New
Date: July 03, 2021

When we arrived here 54 years ago, the land was heavily forested but with a
limited pallet of northern conifers and deciduous trees. In the first category
were pines both red and white, three kinds of spruce, balsam fir, larch and
hemlock. Among the hardwoods were sugar maples and red maples, ash, beech, red
oak, black cherry, white, yellow and gray birch, quaking and big tooth aspen,
and alas butternut and elms, which have both now succumbed to plagues. Common
in the area but absent from our particular property were red cedar, cottonwood,
basswood, walnut, and black locust. In the 70s of the last millennium, I planted
cedars and cottonwoods; they are now mature and replicating themselves. The
walnut that I planted fifteen years ago is now 25 feet tall and very handsome.
I have only one basswood, which I found as a seedling and transplanted to to a
prominent place;  I've been waiting all these years for its descendants. The
black locusts that I grew from seeds harvested in Colorado are now starting to
make an impression on the landscape. I've also added some trees that might be
able to survive our warmer winters: a hickory (growing very nicely), a swamp
white oak, a bur oak (and its lone offspring) and a sycamore (which has survived
two winters).  I've also experimented and failed with some trees that grow just
a bit south of us: catalpa, horse chestnut, "Crimson King" maple, little-leaved
linden, and ginkgo. Perhaps I'll try again now that the weather has warmed. One
of my neighbors has successfully reared a metasequoia; it's tempting to try but
I think on the whole I'd rather stay with north American trees. On the other
hand, we'll need some new trees to take the place of the ash, which are soon to
be decimated.

Source: 2021/08/revelatory-dream

Title: Revelatory Dream?
Date: August 31, 2021

I entered a gloomy, dark, building, perhaps a derelict church. An older woman
was sitting there, not exactly in a pew but in a large wooden chair. She said to
me, "We help dying people."  Was she a nurse or a nun  of some sort?  I said,
"Like hospice." She was adamant. "No, not at all like hospice." I said, "Can you
help me?" When I said those words I realized that I had frightened her. "Do you
plan to murder me," she askewd.  I assured her that I was not a murderer. To
make her more comfortable, I said, "Why don't we go outside where you will feel
safer." But just as we opened the heavy wooden door, a very large, threatening
man appeared. I strangled him without a weapon, with my bare hands. So I was a
murderer after all. The woman whom I was trying to protect, said, "Now I know
you're planning to murder me." I objected: "I'll prove to you I'm not a habitual
murderer. Go directly to your car and get in it and drive away. She did so (it
was a blue Ford Focus). That's when the dream ended.

In real life, I'm a peaceful person. In my dream world, I'm occasionally (not
often, but often enough) a killer. Why?  Is it some deeply suppressed inner
anger that works its way to the surface during the night?  Or I am simply a
member of a species (homo sapiens) that has a million year habit of violence?

Or perhaps the dreams are meaningless? Just the flotsam of badly-wired synapses?
If so, I wish they'd give it a rest.

Source: 2021/09/cishet

Title: Cishet
Date: September 18, 2021

We watched a Netflix series called Feel Good. I suppose that the series title
must be taken ironically, because throughout the first two seasons, not
one character seemed to feel even slightly positive or healthy. Just about
everyone was miserable -- their unhappiness usually linked to romantic or more
specifically sexual dissatisfaction. The program introduced many more eccentric
varieties of coupling and frustration than I, a vanilla heterosexual, would have
imagined. The main character, Mae Martin, played by Mae Martin, is a boyish
lesbian; her on-again, off-again affair with a womanly young lady is the focus
of the story. Lots of obstacles both personal and social stand between the two
women and the achievement of genuine happiness. Let's hope that they can figure
it all out and find love at long last -- or at least by the end of Season 3.

There was one scene that I found to be particularly curious and troublesome. A
group of teachers assemble for a meeting, but before taking up business, every
one of the participants reveals or defines his or her own sexuality. One young
woman, surely the least glamorous of the set, refers to herself as "cishet." I
didn't catch the word as spoken but fortunately we had the subtitles engaged and
I was able to read the word, although in reading I pronounced it to myself as if
the sh were a digraph for the lingual palatal fricative as in shut or shun. But
I investigated the new word "cishet" -- and sure enough it exists and has become
a feature of our contemporary culture. It's "cis" as opposed to "trans" which
means not "across" but "this side" -- as the Romans referred to Gaul as either
cisalpine and transalpine. In this coinage, "cis" refer to a person who accepts
the gender designation assigned at birth by the appearance of one's genitals.
"Het" is simply a truncation of heterosexual." "Cishet" therefore means someone
who is unambiguously either male or female and is attracted to persons of the
opposite sex.

Wow, that's me. After all these years of just thinking I was an ordinary guy,
I now discover that I have a designation. I have a community, a tribe, perhaps
even an interest group. Hey, I belong,

But I think that it's mighty odd and even oppressive that members of a school
community, or any community, would feel that it is necessary or advisable to
announce their gender classification before getting down to the business of the
day. Shouldn't such information be allowed to remain private. If I want to be
cishet, it's nobody's business but my own. But perhaps such formal revelations
don't happen in real life -- only in satirical TV series. I sure hope so.

Not so for Mae Martin, the first paragraph of whose biography reads "Mae Martin
is a Canadian-born comedian, actor, and writer based in England. They wrote
and starred in the Netflix comedy series Feel Good." So it appears that "she"
is a "they" which in current modish jargon doesn't mean that she's plural but
signifies that she feels inadequately represented by the simple and specific
feminine pronoun. I can understand her motive, but frankly "they" confuses me
and sticks in my ear. I appreciate its value as a statement of resistance to
the "hetoro-normative" -- but by golly "they" sure throws a spanner into the
grammatico-normative works. It would be good if English had a set of singular
pronouns that are as gender indistinct as "they," but it doesn't, and to hijack
the plural "they" and turn it into a singular is an awkward and I hope ephemeral
innovation.

Sometimes I receive communications from people who are much more up to date than
dear old dad -- letters that are signed in the traditional way but to which is
subjoined, "My pronouns -- "he his," or "she her hers" (or "they them their").
This habit, I suppose, clears the air and perhaps forestalls some embarrassing
or awkward moments, but again, seems unnecessarily revelatory. It's limiting and
partial. It seems to me to declare that such guys and gals were acting in the
parochial interest of their own tribe or constituency -- much as if everyone
appended to his or her name his own religion or nationality. I'm not happy
with this innovation. Although it might seem progressive, it is in my opinion
ultimately dangerously reactionary.

Therefore I am not so current that I would include my pronouns on any letters
that I write. But I would like to append my adjectives,

Yours very sincerely,

Vivian de St. Vrain

(My adjectives:  "wise, upstanding, formerly debonair.")

Source: 2021/09/sore-loser

Title: Sore Loser
Date: September 30, 2021

I learned what was wrong and bad in the P S 217 schoolyard. At our corner of
the world, where Coney Island Avenue crossed Newkirk, the guy at the bottom of
the moral barrel was the "sore loser." He was the guy who, when he missed an
easy layup, always claimed, against the evidence, that he had been fouled. And
when he lost a game, he picked up his basketball and took it home -- in order to
prevent the rest of us from continuing to play. He was always whining, always
complaining, always wronged. An unpleasant member of the community, disliked by
most, hated by some, loathed by a few. A disruptive presence, only tolerated
because he was rich enough to own the basketball or the baseball bat.

No question but that the greatest sore loser in the history of the planet is our
former president. What a pathetic whiner! He lost fair and square but he can't
admit it, so instead he claims a nonexistent foul, or a series of fouls. He's
out to change the rules to give himself the advantage. And he's willing to mess
up the entire game if he doesn't get his way.

He wouldn't have gotten the least smidgeon of respect in 217 schoolyard.

What's wrong with the people who still support him? What are they thinking? How
come they can't recognize him for what he is?

Sore Loser.

Source: 2021/10/best-garden-advice

Title: Best Garden Advice
Date: October 01, 2021

I read a story in an "art of gardening" book many years ago that I will repeat
here. A famous Japanese gardener, a "national treasure," was asked, "What's the
secret of making a garden as beautiful as yours?" He didn't answer in words but
lifted his arms and made a shearing or lopping motion.

Many years ago, I asked Roy Huse, who had a most wonderful vegetable garden at
the foot of South Road how he did it.  He said, and I quote verbatim, "you
really got to put the shit to it."

And from my father: "it's all about preparing the bed before you plant."

So, don't skimp on getting the bed ready, add plenty of manure, and be ruthless
about cutting things out.

And o yes, you'll need sun and water.

Source: 2021/10/baseball-vocabulary

Title: Baseball Vocabulary
Date: October 22, 2021

I grew up in a baseball-saturated world. The radio voices of Red Barber and
Connie Desmond were the water in which I and my family and my neighbors swum.
It was therefore natural that I early absorbed the vocabulary of baseball and
that many words carried baseball meaning to me long before I recognized their
alternative and larger existence.

For example, as a boy, I encountered the word "mound." It signified, and
signified only, a pitcher's mound -- the ten inches of sand and clay from which
a pitcher throws a ball. I had no idea that mounds could exist in nature or
indeed, could exist anywhere outside of a stadium, there being no mounds on
Coney Island Avenue, or, at least, none that I recognized as such.

And then there was the word "pitcher." If someone had said to me, in the 1940s,
that "little pitchers had big ears," I might have thought of Preacher Roe, but I
would have had no idea that there was such an object as a pitcher for water or
other liquid. A pitcher was not jug, ewer, or crock -- it was a man standing on
a rubber fooling a batter with a slow curve.

Standing on a "rubber?" Yet another word that had a specific baseball meaning,
years before it became an eraser or a galosh or a condom.

Similarly, a "streak" was not a gash of color until many years after it was a
winning streak or a losing streak or batting streak. A "dugout" was not a canoe,
not in my corner of the universe.  Nor was a "rally" a political meeting or
protest. A rally would never have led to a "strike" -- a word which I knew only
as one of the allotted three. "Battery?" A team of pitcher and catcher, not
something of military or electrical storage interest.

And then there were the plethora, the fountain of lovely words peculiar to
baseball, like "shortstop" and "blooper."

Inning was exclusively a baseballism. Not so "outing" which was in my childhood
a pitcher's stint on the mound, and which only later became a picnic (or, even
later, an involuntary revelation of someone's sexual inclinations).

October 24:  How could I fail to include "pennant." When did I learn that a
pennant was a kind of triangular flag?  Not in the 1940s (or even 50s).

Source: 2021/10/whats-on-my-mind-

Title: What's On My Mind
Date: October 23, 2021

Disease, dying and death, I'm afraid. During the last month or so, the cohort of
friends with whom I've gone through life has been suffering major losses. BD, a
friend of more than forty years standing, has just breathed his last. AM, whom I
know from the PS 217 schoolyard, is suffering from cancer of the esophagus, now
described as terminal. M has ALS and can no longer move or speak. LW suffered
a bad stroke some while ago and is now in "assisted living." JP has gone from
robust to frail in a few months and has been moved to a "memory care" unit. And
others.

I've taken to reading the obits. Every week the name of a former colleague or a
friend of a friend shows up. Inevitable, you say. But distressing nevertheless.

I'm healthy, but I'm old, long past my expiration date. I know that one of these
days it will be my turn with the doctors and the hospitals. Too bad, because
after some difficult years, I'm enjoying life to the full once again.

My grandmother, then in her upper 80s, said to youthful me, "I don't like being
old. But what are my choices?"

Source: 2021/10/trophy-homes-vanity

Title: Trophy Homes
Date: October 25, 2021

Among my circle of friends, it is a shameful thing to be called "house proud."
It's a term to be avoided, even shunned. It's competitive and flaunts the
wrong values. Conspicuous consumption. Vanity. "I own a bigger house than you,
and therefore I'm a better person than you."  "House pride" is a very badddd
feeling of the human heart. So therefore I was astonished when I opened a new
edition of Luxury Home Magazine (which should be called Conspicuous Consumption
Quarterly) to discover that in this publication shameless vanity is now not
implied, hinted at, or disguised, but flaunted. The magazine's reiterated theme:
"Make your friends envy your trophy home." It says so in so many words!  Gasp!

And indeed, from the pictures and descriptions of these homes, it's clear that
the advertised trophies are not designed o live in, but rather to let their
owners wow their friends and demonstrate how wealthy (and wasteful) they can be.

Does anyone actually require a 15,000 square feet house with three kitchens,
even if one of them is outdoors. "Main kitchen boasts two islands, multiple
refrigerators, freezers and sinks." And a wine cooler (in addition to the
wine cellar). "Five beds, eight baths, seven fireplaces?" "Massive vaulted
ceilings with a towering three sided stone chimney?" Also, a "luxurious soaking
tub, double-headed shower, and makeup vanity?" Two "indoor-outdoor pools?" An
elevator from the basement to the widow's walk?  "Large tiered media room."
Game room. Basketball court. A putting green. Five oversized garages with 20
foot windows?

Also, "breathability," whatever that is.

I'm embarrassed that I'm on the Luxury Homes' mailing list and I'm embarrassed,
once again, to be a member of the species homo sapiens.

My advice to readers whose mouths water when they yearn for a trophy home:
"enough is as good as a feast."

Source: 2021/10/hands-evolution

Title: In Praise of Hands
Date: October 31, 2021

A few weeks ago, I found myself absentmindedly working in the perennial garden.
I had wandered nearby and noted some weeds that needed emergency extirpation.
I had therefore arrived without my usual trine of implements -- the dandelion
puller, the hand shovel, and the Felco #2. Too lazy to fetch them, I began to
tend to the plants toollessly and at the same time to muse upon effectiveness of
hands alone. (Weeding often leads to musing, as every weeder knows.)  Is it not
the case that the best tool of all is the human hand?  Because my garden soil
is so friable, I was able to dig into the earth with my unaided index finger,
grasp the roots of weeds and pull them. I wondered how the hand had come to so
sensitive to small changes in soil temperature or soil moisture. Sensitive also,
to the texture of things, so that I could identify the roots of witch grass, and
remove them, while leaving untouched the very similar but different roots of the
day lilies. For no good reason, my wayward mind wandered to the Houyhnhnms whom
Gulliver outrageously claimed could grasp a needle between fetlock and pastern
in order to sew garments. Amusing but impossible. The hooves of horses are
wonderfully evolved for galloping but not for tatting or crocheting. Besides,
why would a horse want to darn a sock?

Our hands are superior implements  There's not another animal on the planet
that can tie its own shoelaces.

I've just read a fascinating book by paleontologist Madelaine Bohme called
Ancient Bones. Bohme is concerned to argue that the "out of Africa" hypothesis
needs modification. I am not knowledgeable enough to accept or deny her thesis,
but I much appreciate her effort to bring me up to date about the evolution of
our species, which is much more complicated -- infinitely more complicated --
than the story we were told just a generation ago.

Bohme includes a couple of speculative pages about the evolution of the hand.
First came bipedalism, freeing the hands for a variety of new tasks. Bohme
thinks that the development of stone tools and the development of hands went, so
to speak, hand in hand. The need to hold the tool meant that the hand evolved to
hold it properly -- with an opposable thumb of course. More sensitive fingers
conferred an evolutionary advantage. More information from the fingers caused
the somatosensory cortex, which controls the hands, to enlarge and process more
sensations.

So now we can play the piano, thread a needle, throw a ball, type a letter,
weed a garden, and perform a thousand other tasks that even chimpanzees, who
apparently do not have great sensory input from their fingers, cannot do.

Bohme does not discuss the role of hands in human communication, either everyday
or erotic.  A topic for another book, perhaps.

Source: 2021/11/max-oeschger-1938-2021

Title: Max Oeschger (1938-2021)
Date: November 11, 2021

Max had a long love affair with New Orleans, and he loved to initiate his
friends into the city's splendors and secrets. We were beneficiaries of his
generosity. It was because of "mad Max" that we enjoyed a series of winter
visits to the crescent city. He was a splendid enthusiastic guide as well as a
great character, with a touch of Falstaff about him: charm, flaws, girth.

For me, it was a late-onset friendship, but Lynn had known Max from the 60s,
from her Baltimore days, when Max was a doctoral student in biology at Hopkins.
The two of them reconnected five years ago when Max invited Lynn (and me) to
stay for a month in an apartment in his rental house in the Garden District.
How could we decline such an offer? His house, alas, turned out to be virtually
uninhabitable, with holes in the walls and floors that let in the light, the
wind and rain, and the critters. There was a pungent smell of decay and a tilted
bathroom that seemed about to plunge deep into the earth. Lynn was not fazed: "I
lived in Africa."  Max was only mildly apologetic. We made do.

In subsequent trips to New Orleans we took the precaution of renting a BNB.

But we often visited Max at his place in an apartment house on St. Charles.
Max owned two adjacent apartments. He connected them by busting through the
wallboard with a sledge hammer. Two kitchens, therefore, both, shall we say, far
from immaculate.

A serious and knowledgeable cinephile, Max sponsored a monthly film series
in his home. His screen had to be angled sharply to find a place amidst the
clutter, distributed among which was an exquisite collection of contemporary
American pottery. (Max was a widower; his sometime ladyfriend was a very
accomplished potter).

Max squired us about town, introducing us to both famous and out-of-the-way
restaurants. He was quite a sight, squeezing his 5' 4" and 300 pound frame
into a small sports car. He loved Adolfo's, right across the street from Snug,
because the food was excellent and the portions were enormous.

As much as he loved his dinner, he also loved the south Louisiana vegetation; a
walk with Max was a learned lecture on the local plant life.

Would we have discovered either Angelo Brocato's or the Creole Creamery without
his guidance?

I don't know what eventually killed him last August.  It could have been any
one of his many ailments; he was not healthy and was often in pain. We'll miss
him.

Max and I shared a birthday; he was exactly one year older than I. So his death
is another memento mori. As if I needed another reminder.

Source: 2021/11/when-im-eighty-four

Title: When I'm Ninety-Four
Date: November 23, 2021

When I get older losing my mindJust a few years from nowWill you still b       e
sending me a ValentineBirthday greetings bottle of win                         e

Source: 2021/11/riobravo-deanmartin-rickynelson

Title: Rio Bravo, Total Embarrassment or Great Triumph?
Date: November 25, 2021

We watched the 1969 western, Rio Bravo, and were crushed with disappointment.
How could a film with such famous actors, directed by Howard Hawks (Red River
1948), amount to such piffle?  We could not restrain ourselves from jeering
at its flagrant, grotesque failings. A thin, cliched plot, pieced out with
obvious meaningless padding. Incoherent, contradictory notions and "themes." An
unconscionable reveling in mass slaughter -- the bodies of Nathan Burdette's
gang falling as thickly as the leaves in Vallombrosa. We adjudicated what seemed
like a contest: who is a worse actor, Dean Martin or Ricky Nelson?  (Martin
plays a drunken former gunfighter (named Dude!!) whose shaky hands can only be
stilled when the Mexican band plays his favorite tune!!! Honest to goodness!!)
Nelson is a ridiculously young hotshot gunslinger who would have been better off
staying home drinking his afternoon milk and cookies under the supervision of
Ozzie and Harriet.

We hooted, I'm sorry to say, when impassive reluctant John Wayne kissed Angie
Dickinson with all the passion of a man sucking on moldy lemons. We were
offended by the racist caricatures of the Mexican innkeepers. And we guffawed
when the film allowed both Dean Martin and Ricky Nelson to burst into song --
utterly violating their screen characters but perhaps throwing a sorry bone to
the ticket-buying audience. (Allow me to confess that we fast-forwarded through
the musical interlude.) The irrelevant crooning lost the film any remaining
pretense or shred of integrity.

In short, here was a film that had no reason for being, or so we thought. A
travesty, a mere catchpenny.

Baffled, we turned to the internet for the story. Because there had to be a
story.

And now comes the surprise. Rio Bravo was the second highest ranking western
in the 2012 Sight and Sound critics' poll. Robin Wood, a generally trustworthy
critic and the man who wrote the book on Howard Hawks, rated it as his top
film of all time. What's going on here? We though the film was ludicrous and
embarrassing; others think very differently. Are we completely out of touch? Are
we nuts, intolerant. Has our taste been vitiated by age and mental decay? Are
there beauties hidden the film that are sufficiently subtle that our grosser
intellects could not detect them?  Or does this would-be emperor of a film
lack clothes and the critics and journals and the tomatoes are all blinded and
deceived.

And now comes some more internet info, which may or may not explain the opposing
views of us and them.

"The film was made as a response to High Noon," says Wikipedia. Why? Because
High Noon was thought to be a leftist movie, an allegory for Hollywood
blacklisting, as well as a critique of McCarthyism. John Wayne called High Noon
"un-American." (I've always thought of it as quintessentially American;  what
could possibly be more American than a Quaker's turn to violence, as when Amy
Kane picks us a rifle and shoots one of Frank MIller's kin. And especially when
that turn to violence is portrayed as a step toward a higher morality.

I'm wondering whether the folks who praise Rio Bravo like it not for aesthetic
but for political reasons. I'm suspicious.

Next step: get my hands on Robin Wood's book on Howard Hawks. Stay tuned,
Metablogians.

Source: 2021/12/spatchcock

Title: Words of my Life: Spatchcock
Date: December 01, 2021

I first heard the word "spatchcock" at a Thanksgiving celebration some four
or five years ago. The turkey, I was told, had been "spatchcocked." To be
absolutely honest, I thought someone was pulling my leg. To my pure and
undefiled ears, the word "spatchcock" sounded more than a little obscene.
Certainly not something that a civilized person would do to a turkey. Or even to
a fellow human being. I admit that I was puzzled: what sort of perverse activity
is implied by "spatchcock." And just who would be the spatchcocker and who the
spatchcockee?

But further investigation revealed that "spatchcock" is not a dirty joke nor
even a slangy neologism. The word has an eighteenth-century origin and it's not
sexual but culinary: "to cut poultry along the spine and spread the halves apart
for more even cooking when grilled." Moreover, the word "spatchcock," believe
it or not, has a sibling of its own: "spitchcock": "to split an eel along the
back and then broil it." So spatchcock and spitchcock, yet as far as I know, no
"spotchcock" or "sputchcock"-- but why not?  Lots of other land and sea beasts
out there to de-spine and roast over an open fire. Spatchcocking, the process,
probably dates back to the neolithic, after the taming of fire and long before
anyone thought to call it by such a silly name.

Etymology?  Though there are theories, I'm going to stick with "origin
unknown." The common answer is that the word is "shorthand  for 'dispatching
the cock.'" An undocumented, out-of-left-field guess, in my opinion. If I were
to propose a theory, I would say that the "cock" must be a version of  "cook."
I'm not prepared to venture a guess about the spatch. A mystery, unrecoverable.
Perhaps a humorous coinage?

I'd hypothesize that "cock" might be related to the second part of common
surnames such as Hancock, Adcock, Babcock, Hitchcock or Wilcox. Some say that
the cock in these names is a hypocoristic suffix "applied to a young lad who
strutted proudly like a cock." I'm skeptical. More credible, once again, is
"cook." Hancock is Johan the cook, Adcock is Adam the cook, Hitchcock is Richard
(Rich, Hich) the cook, and so on.

The ever-unpredictable Urban Dictionary provides another meaning for
"spatchcock": "when you intentionally rub your backpack on a nearby stranger's
genitals in an effort to sexually arouse them." What can I say?  Only that I've
lived a long life and have never given a single thought to the erotic potential
of the backpack. Nor have I ever been spatchcocked either in the traditional
culinary nor the speculative contemporary sexual sense of the word (thanks be to
all the gods in the pantheon!)

Other words of my life:

slouch,

cishet,

yips

ramps

jot and tittle

worship

mucilage.

Source: 2021/12/a-cinematic-dream

Title: A Cinematic Dream
Date: December 06, 2021

I was in the midst of the usual noir "can't-find-my-way" dream when all at once,
without warning, the scene and the genre changed. Suddenly I was in technicolor
John Ford territory, holding on for dear life to the cow-catcher of an 1880s
railroad engine. Three central-casting bad guys -- all whiskers and black hats
--were shooting at me with their pistols. Familiar with what's expected such
films, I responded by drawing my own Colt 45-- and plugged two of them. But the
third kept coming, zombie-style, even though I nailed him several times. I was
scared.

Apparently I was rattling around, because just as I decided that I'd better
shoot him between the eyes and be done with it, my faithful bedmate woke me
up.  End of dream; what a relief.

I must be watching too many Westerns.

It's fascinating that the material of this dream is not drawn from the events
of my "real life," but rather from fiction (in this case, the movies). Have I
incorporated such fictions into the deepest layers of my unconscious, from which
dreams are supposedly drawn?

On the other hand, my watching and absorbing a film is a "real life" event.

I can't remember any film in which a character clings to the cow-catcher. Did I
invent such an event?  Or just extrapolate it from various western films?

I should mention that I experienced the dream not in ordinary colors but in the
brilliant artificial color of old-fashioned garish Technicolor.

Source: 2021/12/thomas-massie

Title: "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord."
Date: December 15, 2021

Here's a Christmas-themed picture posted by United States Representative Thomas
Massie of Kentucky. Note the cheerfully decorated tree behind them. Note also
that each member of the shit-eating-grin faced members of the Massie family
is sporting a military weapon. Massie himself, as befits the father of such a
family, carries the piece of artillery that is by far the most threatening. He's
so proud.

I must be out of the military-Kentucky loop, because when my friends send me
Christmas cards, they will characteristically include a message such as "peace
on Earth, good will toward men, or perhaps something about "joy" or "blessings."
Massie's card says, "Please Santa, send ammo," which is not, I believe, a
traditional holiday greeting.

Massie's card is deliberately provocative. It's designed to piss off the libs.
In your face, pinkos! But it's so blasphemous and misjudged that it might also
offend mainline Christians. Goodness gracious, I hope so. Though frankly, I
haven't heard much of an outcry from the pulpits.

But now it has come to pass that it's not just blue-staters that are offended.
Massie has gone and pissed off the Lord himself -- who has retaliated with a
series of tornadoes which have swept through Massie's home state. Can there
be any doubt, any possible probable shadow of doubt, that the Ancient of Days
has responded to the Massie family Christmas card with lightning and thunder?
Vengeance is mine, I shall repay, saith the Lord. It's obvious -- although I am
shocked to observe that I have not yet heard any megachurch preacher draw the
undeniable conclusion. I'm waiting.

When I first set astonished eyes on the card, I guessed that Massie, though an
important office holder, must be what I have heard called in Vermont a "local
yokel." Trash. A rube. An exterminator or mortician or gun-toting bar owner who
lucked into Congress because no more respectable person chose to run. Because
what person of intelligence, sensitivity, experience, or a modicum of education
honors the spirit of Christmas with a display of assault weaponry?  Imagine my
surprise when I looked up Massie and discovered that he has a raft of degrees
and extraordinary prizes from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He's
clearly brilliant (in a MIT kind of way). But even if he were a pure pocket-
calculator I-don't-give-a-shit-about-anyone-but-myself libertarian nerds,
shouldn't he have been exposed, in New England, to enough human beings of all
sorts to recognize that his Christmas greeting is monumentally offensive not
only to his fellows and (as we have seen) to the Lord of Hosts Himself?

Or perhaps he knows that our tearful country is so riven that an irreligious
display of such a sort will amuse and motivate his allies and torment his
opposition. And will strike gold with political donors.

Source: 2021/12/books-2021

Title: What I Read: 2021
Date: December 16, 2021

I decided to keep a record of the books that I read this past 2021. It's in
roughly chronological order, starting just about a year ago. It's an eclectic
bunch; after years of being forced to be a specialist I've reverted to my
natural dilettantism. I've probably forgotten some books, both my record-keeping
and my memory not so good as before.

Here they come (long drumroll):  three novels by Lewis Grassic Gibbon: Sunset
Song, Cloud Howe, and Grey Granite (the first is a masterpiece); Derek
Wilson,  Charlemagne: a Biography; Park Honan, Christopher Marlowe, Poet
and Spy; John Heisey, A Checklist of American Coverlet Weavers; H. L. Allen,
American Coverlets of the Nineteenth Century (taught me a lot about Jacquard
coverlets); Eric Sloane, Museum of Early American Tools and A Reverence for
Wood; Rinker Buck, The Oregon Trail, Edna O'Brien, In the Forest (a forceful
novel); Evelyn Piper, Bunny Lake is Missing (which I read because I was curious
about the film of the same name); Patrick Svensson, The Book of Eels; Isabel
Wilkerson, The Warmth of Other Suns (a long important book which would have
been even better if it had been edited to 2/3's its size); Benjamin Kilham,
In the Company of Bears (a fascinating book set just south of us in Lyme,
NH); James Essinger, Jacquard's Web, Steven Vogel, Why the Wheel is Round
(which it isn't; it's circular); Elizabeth Barber, Women's Work, the First
20,000 Years; J D Schein, Coverlets and the Spirit of America; Anne Tyler, A
Spool of Blue Thread (by one of the most reliable of contemporary novelists);
Elizabeth Barber, Prehistoric Textiles (a fascinating story); Thomas Stumpf,
South St. Louis Boy, v. ii, by my graduate school classmate and friend; William
Dean Howells, The Rise of Silas Lapham, Andy Horowitz, Katrina (sad story of
governmental and bureaucratic incompetence in New Orleans); Sarah M. Broom,
The Yellow House; George Eliot, Middlemarch (what, fifth time?  or sixth?);
Kathryn Hughes, George Eliot, the Last Victorian; Shakespeare, The Winter's
Tale; Charles Dickens, Great Expectations (another perennial favorite); John
Le Carre, The Mission Song; Jane Austen, Persuasion;  Klyza and Trombulak, The
Story of Vermont (summer reading); Harry Reed, Harry, Scenes from my Life
(another autobiography by a friend); Shaun O'Connell, Assembled Pieces, Selected
Writings; Alice Munro, Carried Away; David Lee, Chainsaws, A History; Seymour
Gitin, The Road Taken (reminiscences of one of Lynn's relatives-in-law); Louis
Menand, Cold War (all 800 pages!); Lisa Genova, Remember;  Mark Harris, Mike
Nichols; H. L. Gates, The Black Church; Thomas Hardy, The Woodlanders (twice);
Madalaine Bohme, Ancient Bones; Simon Schama, The Story of the Jews (to 1492);
John McWhorter, Nine Nasty Words; two remarkable novels by Shirley Hazzard: The
Transit of Venus, and The Great Fire (read twice); Valerie Trouet, Tree Story;
James Shapiro, Shakespeare in a Divided America; Betty Smith, A Tree Grows
in Brooklyn; Joshua Hammer, The Bad-Ass Librarians of Timbuktu; Jacqueline
Woodson, Another Brooklyn; Paule Marshall, Brown Girl, Brownstones; Paula
Fox, Desperate Characters.

I've started on a reading project for 2022: books about Brooklyn. Will I
persist? The crowd is in an uproar, waiting to see how it goes. Look for a
report same time, same station, next year.

Source: 2021/12/betty-smith-brooklyn

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  A Tree Grows in Brooklyn
Date: December 23, 2021

My new reading project: novels set in Brooklyn. There are, I've already
discovered, tons of them. I wonder how long I will last at this endeavor. Will
it be a sterile or a fruitful exercise?

How is it that I never read, until this very week, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn? 
It's certainly the best known novel with the noun "Brooklyn" in its title. I've
known about it all my life and just never got around to looking at a single
page. Did my parents, always tentative about sex, warn me off because the novel
has a few frank passages. Or was it anti-Brooklyn snobbery?  As a young person,
I wanted to read about far off places -- Pitcairn Island, nomadic central Asia,
and the Africa of Rider Haggard, -- certainly not familiar grimy Brooklyn. At
the McDonald Avenue branch of the public library, there were many well-worn
copies of of A Tree Grows in Brooklyn sitting on the shelf -- which I ignored
and, if I remember correctly, disdained.

What did I miss?  Tree is not much in the way of a fiction. There's nothing
like a plot, only a series of loosely-related episodes, and except for the
central figure, not much character development. It's a barely-disguised
autobiography. Francie Nolan, tracked from birth through her escape to, believe
it or not, Michigan!!, comes from a grindingly poor family ("food insecure"
before the term was invented). Much of the first few hundred pages is the
barebones account of the struggle for sustenance (and lodging). There is so much
emphasis on overcoming lack that Tree almost seems to fetishize or celebrate
poverty.

So much scrabbling for the next meal is hard to bear, painful to read. It's
especially painful for me, because Betty Smith, born in 1896 in Williamsburg,
preceded my father, also a native of Williamsburg (born in 1904) by only a few
years. He came from an immigrant family as poor as poor can be, and some of the
stories that he told me about the impoverishment of his youth echo and sometimes
exceed Smith's. The essence, therefore, of this "novel," is familiar to me,
perhaps entirely too familiar.

One blot upon the novel is its casual bigotry. Irish characters sometimes go
to "Jewtown" for clothes or food. Jewish characters are gross stereotypes.
But what can be expected from a popular novel of the 1940s, when the radio
offered us, day after day,  large doses of Amos and Andy, Life with Luigi, The
Goldbergs. How we guffawed at ethnic "humor" in those unenlightened days!

Nor was I happy about the novel's Brooklyn chauvinism. For example:

""There's no other place like it," Francie said.

"Like what?"

"Brooklyn. It's a magic city."

"It's just like any other place."

"It isn't. It's mysterious here in Brooklyn. It's like -- yes -- a dream. The
houses and streets don't seem real. Neither do the people."

I wish the novel offered some corroboration for the claim of Brooklyn's magic
and mystery. If it was there, I didn't find it in this grim novel, nor at the
corner of Newkirk and Coney Island Avenues where I first came to awareness.

The "tree that grows in Brooklyn" is the so-called 'tree of heaven," ailanthus
altissima. Smith has chosen it as a symbol of resilience, for the tree of heaven
can thrive under the most inauspicious circumstances. I, for one, can remember
playing on the roof of one of those six story apartment houses so common in
our neighborhood, and noticing an ailanthus growing right out of the asphalt.
I was astonished. But I wish that Betty Smith had chosen a different tree to
invest with meaning, because the ailanthus is, frankly, a "trash tree."  It's
generally considered a noxious weed, an invasive species. It grows rapidly
but is short- lived. Its wood is soft and useless. It suckers vigorously and
eternally, pours forth strong alleopathic chemicals upon its neighbors, invades
subterranean sewers and pipes, is extremely fecund, and stinks. It is known to
gardeners and foresters not as the "tree of heaven" but as the "tree of hell."
It's not a tree that often finds itself celebrated in fiction. Nor in pastoral.
Brooklyn, my Brooklyn, was a city of magnificent oaks, maples, sycamores and
elms. My people, my fellow Brooklynites, deserve a more distinguished avatar
than the tree of of so-called heaven.

Some will remember that T. S. Eliot once referred to the tree that grows in
Brooklyn as the "rank ailanthus."

Source: 2021/12/woodson-brooklyn

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  Another Brooklyn
Date: December 27, 2021

I read, first with irritation but eventually with appreciation, Another
Brooklyn, by Jacqueline Woodson. If I had purchased the book, rather than
borrowing it from the Boulder Public, I'd be peeved, because it's more of a
novella or long short story than a fully-grown novel. Only 165 pages of minibook
size(8" x 5"), with spacious margins, large font, and double or triple spacing
between frequent one-sentence "paragraphs." The whole could be compressed into
30 normal book size pages. I felt cheated because I want my words worth. But
quality should not be measured by quantity, or Mrs. Trollope would be twenty
times as good a writer as Jane Austen. Jacqueline Woodson is apparently a
very famous novelist, but you wouldn't know it by me, for I had never heard
of her, so out-of-date I am. It's a poetic, I think, novel, about "growing up
girl in Brooklyn" (white flight Bushwick to be precise) in the 1970s. It's
not dense with detail, so each incident has to do a lot of work. It concerns
four young girls, each frustrated by the surroundings. The narrator says,
"Brooklyn felt like a stone in my throat," but I don't think the novel makes
good on that stuck-in-the-craw assertion. It's not, in my opinion, a regional
novel; it's a coming of age story with a perennial theme: how do we get out of
this constricting space: "Everywhere we looked, we saw people trying to dream
themselves out. As though there was something other than this place. As though
there was another Brooklyn."

A paragraph that resonated with me, for as an adolescent I myself know only one
thing: "I need to get out of here."

Source: 2021/12/run-etc

Title: Octogenarian Locomotion
Date: December 29, 2021