

================================================================================Source: 2019/01/tomhorn

Title: Our Local Gunslinger:  Tom Horn
Date: January 01, 2019

Although he has been mythologized, he was real. Here he is in the photographic
flesh, perhaps weaving the rope by which he was famously hanged.

And here's the movie version: Steve McQueen, slightly more glamorous.

My earlier self, the Brooklyn 'yoot', would have been happy to know that I now
live only a few feet away from the mythical gunslinger.

Source: 2019/01/whereilived1051-10th

Title: Where I Lived VII
Date: January 09, 2019

From 1973 until 2009, this was the place. My longest stay in one location and
the childhood home of my children. The house had good bones, as they say, when
we arrived and was well worth the $46,500 that we paid for it. But the innards
had been remodeled into oblivion. Green shag carpet covering the lovely oak
floors; slick craftsman woodwork covered with white paint; stained-glass window
replaced and disfigured with a beaded curtain in the style of a New Orleans
whorehouse; flocked wall paper; some sort of plastic substance glued onto the
pine kitchen floor; and a kitchen untouched since 1917 and hopelessly out of
date. It took years to get it into shape, but by the time we left, it was
looking mighty fine. I was sad to leave but the time had come to move on.

I still miss the colorful spring garden, stocked with peonies both herbaceous
and tree, day lilies, irises, a lovely weigela, and a wall of clematis.

Source: 2019/01/akgsibs

Title: For My Grandchildren:  Your Great Grandmother and her Siblings
Date: January 10, 2019

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, and Asher:

Here's a picture of your great grandmother, Anne Krull Goss (1912-2009) with her
siblings.

Anne is the pretty young blonde woman, second from the left. She's the oldest.

The picture was taken during the World War II years, '42 or '43. On great
grandma's right is her brother Jack, whose tank was hit by cannon fire. He
was the only survivor of his crew and spent many months recuperating in an
army hospital. On her left is Hy, who was exempted from service, if I remember
correctly, because his business was declared an essential industry. On Hy's
left is your great-great aunt Frieda. Frieda's fiance (a soldier who was named
Aubrey, but I don't know anything else about him) was killed in Europe. On
Frieda's left is Mendy, the youngest, who was a bombardier on a B-24.

The war disrupted many lives, not only those who served but those who stayed at
home.

I've been lucky -- too young for Korea and too old for Vietnam. I hope you are
similarly lucky.  Better than that --  I hope these endless wars in which
we're engaged (in Afghanistan and Syria right now) come to an end.

Grandma Anne contributed 1/8 of your genetic inheritance. The people depicted
here might seem to come from the remote past, but be aware that they're in you,
part of you.

Source: 2019/01/215w91

Title: Where I Lived (VI)
Date: January 12, 2019

From 1965 to 1969, from my 26th to 30th year, I lived at 215 West 91 Street on
the Upper West Side of Manhattan, first in a 4 room apartment on the 6th floor
and later in a 5 room apartment on the 5th floor. Two babies came home to this
place.

Source: 2019/01/extinctions

Title: Missing Megafauna
Date: January 12, 2019

Many years ago, sometime during the previous millennium, I was taken to an
African game park -- elephants, rhinoceroses, giraffes, and lions (the hippos
were AWOL). It was astonishing to see these huge beasts. I didn't realize at
the time that it was semi-miraculous that these creatures had survived to our
day, even in a de facto zoo, when so many other massive animals had recently
gone extinct. When homo sapiens arrived on the scene, say 50,000 years ago,
there were many animals that would have made a zoo park several orders of
magnitude more remarkable that the one I visited. Why did these beasts go
extinct?  Disease, habitat change, and competition are likely culprits but it's
hard to deny that our predatory ancestors must take some of the blame.

Yes, the game park had lions, but it would have been infinitely more exciting if
it housed not only the African lion, but the European lion which was half again
as large and which survived lately enough to be well known to the Greeks.

Other big cats were also missing: the famous saber tooth, everyone's nightmare,
as well as the American false cheetah, a cheetah-like cougar weighing 190
formidable pounds. I would also have liked to see the thylacine, the so-called
"marsupial lion" or sometimes "Tasmanian tiger" which survived until 1936, late
enough to be photographed.

I would also have liked to see a cackle of European hyenas. Even more, the two-
ton short-faced Bear, with whom our paleolithic ancestors competed, which was
three times the size of a modern polar bear. The equally large ground sloth,
even the bones of which are impressive.

And the sloth lemur, the size of a big male gorilla. The Irish deer, as big as a
moose, with an outsized, out-of-proportion rack. Then there were the elephant-
like animals: the Columbian mammoth of the American southwest, smaller than its
modern African cousin, but with astonishingly curved tusks. The wooly mammoth,
surviving until just 3700 years ago on Wrangel Island off the Siberian coast.
The straight-tusked elephant, two or three times the size of modern African
elephant. The North American mammoths. And also Cuvier's gompothere, which looks
like an elephant but isn't one, but which was seven feet tall at the shoulder
and which lasted until about 14,000 years ago:

And along with them, the morningstar-tailed glyptodon, a five thousand pound
armadillo:

I would have loved to cast my eye on the diprotodont, the largest known
marsupial, which weighed in at three tons and lived until 45,000 years ago

The wooly rhinoceros, as large as a diprotodont. The sivathere, an odd-looking
 giraffid. The tree kangaroo. The short-faced kangaroo, three times the size of
any living kangaroo.

And right there in Vermont, rustling and stomping in the forest, were the stag
moose and Jefferson's ground sloth and the long-nosed peccary and Harlan's musk
ox and the Vero tapir and the giant beaver, all recently gone. (You wouldn't
have wanted to come face-to-face with a giant beaver. Or swim in its pond, if
it made ponds. You'd be better off listening to it slapping its tail in a game
 park.)

And then there were some true avian oddities worth taking a gander at: the
flightless moas of New Zealand, the female at 440 pounds, two-and-half times the
size of the male. The cursorial owl, a three-foot tall flightless owl, which
pursued its prey afoot. Haast's eagle, with a wingspread of seven and a half
feet. The five hundred pound Elephant Bird, which survived in Madagascar until
a thousand years ago.

And then the tarpan, the warrah, the toxodon. Strangest of all, macrauchenia,
a three-toed ungulate not closely related to anything alive today, which looked
something like a humpless camel with a droopy snout and which was around until
about 10,000 years ago.

It would have been quite a show if these animals had survived. Well worth the
price of admission.

Source: 2019/01/where-i-live-now

Title: Where I Live:  Now
Date: January 14, 2019

1655 Walnut Street, Boulder, Colorado. On the second floor, just to the left (as you look from the street) of the main entrance. It's not a handsome building, in my opinion, but the condos are clean and comfortable and new. I've been here since 2009 and plan to stay. Going to go out feet first, as the cliche would have it. There's ample but not too much room and lots of sun (my living room windows are south-facing) and convenience. We're here more than half the year -- the rest of the time in Vermont (almost 5 months) and New Orleans (one month during the winter). We're one block off the semi-famous Boulder Mall, with all sorts of foody restaurants that we don't patronize as well as coffee shops and marijuana outlets. There's also an outdoor gear shop every few feet. Things could be worse.

Source: 2019/01/durocher

Title: Durocher 1947
Date: January 25, 2019

In 1975, Leo Durocher wrote an as-told-to autobiography called Nice Guys Finish
Last. I read every word of it, but I got to tell you, it's not a good book.
It's a piece of self-justifying pro-Durocher propaganda. It's argumentative,
hyperbolic, unreliable. Durocher was an irascible man: he got into fights
with sportswriters, players, umpires, owners, coaches, wives -- everyone he
encountered. In every single case, he was absolutely blameless and they were
absolutely wrong. The gambling that got him suspended for a year? -- why, it
never happened.

Durocher doesn't give it the emphasis it deserves, but he had, by accident, a
place in the story. Durocher was manager of the Dodgers when Branch Rickey hired
Jackie Robinson. It was a watershed moment, a supremely important step in the
civil rights movement, and the beginning of a major transformation of not just
baseball, or sports, but of the nation and the world.

Durocher played his part, and he's proud of it, but I can't help feeling that
he missed his moment. His vision was so narrow, so constricted, so unaware. I
suppose he should be commended for doing the right thing, but as far as I can
tell, he did it for trivial reasons and did not have a glimmer of understanding
of either oppression and injustice on the one hand, or equality and freedom on
the other.

When some Dodgers proposed to petition Rickey not to sign Robinson, Durocher
called a team meeting. Here's what he says that he said to them:

"I hear some of you fellows don't want to play with Robinson and that you have
 a petition drawn up that you are going to sign. Well boys, you know what you
can do with that petition. You can wipe your ass with it. Mr. Rickey is on his
way down here and all you have to do is tell him about it. I'm sure he'll be
happy to make other arrangements for you. I hear Dixie Walker is going to send
Mr. Rickey a letter asking to be traded. Just hand him the letter, Dixie, and
your'e gone. Gone. If this fellow is good enough to play on this ball club --
and from what I've seen and heard, he is -- he is going to play on this ball
club and he is going to play for me. I'm the manager of this ball club and I'm
interested in one thing. Winning. I'll play an elephant if he can do the job,
and to make room for him I'll send my own brother home. So make up your mind to
it. This fellow is a real great ballplayer. He's going to win pennants for us.
He's going to put money in your pockets and money in mine. And here's something
else to think about when you put your head back on the pillow. From everything
I hear, he's only the first. Only the first, boys. There's many more coming
right behind him and they have the talent and they're gonna come to play. These
fellows are hungry. They're good athletes and there's nowhere else they can
make this kind of money. They're going to come, boys, and they're going to come
scratching and diving. Unless you fellows look out and wake up, they're going to
run you right out of the ball park. So I don't want to see your petition and I
don't want to hear anything more about it. The meeting is over. Go back to bed."

To me, his speech, though apparently effective, is trivial -- an opportunity
wasted. He opposed the petition for three reasons: one, it defied authority
(his and Rickey's); two, Robinson is going to help us win and therefore make us
money, and three, there are "others" on the way, who also want to make money, so
get out of the way.

The idea that Jack Roosevelt Robinson and others of his hue should be allowed
to participate out of simple fairness and equity did not occur to him. Slavery,
racism, segregation, justice, equal opportunity -- not part of his thinking.
Durocher's awareness of his place in history -- zero. What a disappointment!

Source: 2019/01/wisdom

Title: Wisdom
Date: January 25, 2019

I've reached the age when, neuroscience claims, the "wisdom centers" of the
brain (the anterior cingulate and ventromedial prefrontal cortices) are supposed
to leap into action. Do they? Tell truth, I don't know. Have I, without
awareness or drama, metamorphosed from a jejune larva, dull as dishwater, into
a butterfly of wisdom? When did it happen? At this moment or writing, I confess
that I feel less wise than tired.

Nevertheless, let me offer, with maximum diffidence, a few homemade aphorisms
and sententiae. Whether they amount to wisdom, and whether they do credit to my
anterior or prefrontal lobes, my loyal readers will have to decide.

A) "Nothing ever happens until it happens." This proverb is slightly gnomic, so
let me gloss. If you assume that just because you've carefully planned your trip
to Tahiti or your visit to the new restaurant or even your outing to the local
barbershop that it's going to happen, you might be in for disappointment. Wait
until you're there before you get excited. There's many a slip twixt the cup and
the lip. Rejoice appropriately -- when it's time. By doing so, you avoid elation
deflation.

B) "No one knows what's going on between two people, even if you're one of
them."  I think this proverb is eminently self-explanatory. It applies mostly
to marriage but equally so to all dyadic relationships. Even between you and
your dog.

C)  "The only people who idealize the past are those that know nothing about
it."  Slavery, plague, torture, injustice, famine, rapine, brutality, poverty,
starvation. Etc.

D) "You're immortal until the day you die." Of course you are and don't let the
nay-sayers and "realists" bother you.

E)  "Religion: my Prince of Peace can beat up your Prince of Peace." Tribalism
sucks.

F)  "Enough is as good as a feast, and often better." Figurative meaning: a
modest sufficiency is all that is needed for a happy life. Literal meaning: one
hamburger (or half a hamburger) lies more easily on the stomach than two or
three. And hold the fries.

G)  "The secret of life is to turn routines into rituals."  Self-explanatory,
I think. Make a fuss about that glass of wine at four o'clock. Savor it.

H)  "The longer something has been believed by mankind, the less likely it is
to be true."  See C above.

Source: 2019/01/a-cortelyou-road-memory

Title: An Unpleasant Cortelyou Road Memory
Date: January 27, 2019

Let's say I was thirteen, so this event would have occurred on or our about
1952. I had brought my Raleigh 3-speed to the Cortelyou Road bicycle repair shop
which was between East 13th and East 14th. The shop was run by a small, fair,
heavily-accented German man who was perhaps 50 years old. He was assisted by his
father, an older and smaller, wizened, bald man who must have been in his 80s.
Mr. Hart and Mr. Hart.The older Mr. Hart, whom in my adolescent wisdom I thought
of as a gnome, was working on my bike -- replacing an inner tube or adjusting
the gears (which were fragile and frequently busted). A group of three middle-
aged women gathered on the sidewalk in front of the shop, chatting. Mr. Hart the
elder, the gnome, didn't like it. He looked up from his work and muttered to me,
"A real hen-party."  A few minutes later, he said, as if he owned the sidewalk,
"they're still there. Hen party."

I had never heard the expression "hen party" but I knew it was a slur. A piece
of anti-woman bigotry. I mean, what was the problem with three women talking on
a public street?

But what disturbed me was that Mr. Hart took it for granted that I was on his
side -- that we were linked by our maleness, our roosterness, against hens.
I knew (in language that did not at that point exist), that I was being "co-
opted."  But although I was uneasy, I was able to offer only silent resistance.
I failed. Later I learned to challenge such mini-bigotries but at this point in
life I was much too young, too unsure.

Of all the events that occurred in 1952, this trivial encounter is one that
clings and needs to be exorcised.

But it is such experiences that shape us. As David Copperfield says, "Trifles
make the sum of life."

Source: 2019/01/street-talk

Title: Street Talk
Date: January 29, 2019

On East 9th Street, and probably in other parts of Brooklyn, a manhole cover
was called a "sewer." I don't know why. Ignorance, perhaps. As far as I know,
manhole covers provided entrance to electrical work and other utilities, not to
watercourses. Openings to the sewers that were located along the channel next
to the curb were also called sewers. A sewer was also a unit of distance. "He
can hit a spaldeen three sewers." It was not a scientifically accurate form of
measurement.

A "gutter" is in most parts of the country a channel for water. On East 9th
Street, the word "gutter" referred to the street's entire asphalted area, not
just the area near the curb. "Hey, kids, keep out of the gutter. You'll get
hurt."

"Stoop" referred to the stairs leading up to the porch. In "stoop ball," you
throw your spaldeen at the stoop and catch it on the rebound.  Five points for
a grounder, ten points for a fly ball, twenty points for a "pointer."

I don't think there was a specific name for what is here called the "park front
area"-- the space between the sidewalk and the curb.  Nor a word for "curb
cut." which was considered, linguistically, as a section of a driveway.

East 9th Street had a wonderful tree canopy. In retrospect, I can identify and
recall a very large sycamore and a series of Norway maples, but the only trees
that had names were a trio of huge old elms which were called "Mickey's trees."
I have no idea why they were so called nor do I know who was this Mickey of
famous memory. The elms were cut down in the late 40s (Dutch elm disease) --  a
tremendous loss to East 9th Street.

Source: 2019/01/man-of-the-west-

Title: Man of the West (1958)
Date: January 30, 2019

Judging by its almost-allegorical title, Man of the West claims, or seems
to claim, that Link Jones, its conflicted protagonist, represents something
fundamental and archetypical about the American western experience. And indeed
it does, if Mr. Jones, played by rugged stalwart Gary Cooper, is to be judged by
his exceedingly laconic manner, his resourcefulness, his fundamental decency,
his initial aversion to gun play and ultimate resort to violence.

But in my opinion the title Man of the West is misleading. Man of the West
is a noir in chaps and ten-gallon hat. Its western-ness is superficial. It's
noirness is essential and real.

Here's what we've got: a reformed criminal trying to go straight who can't
escape his past; a crazed egomaniacal gang leader (played here by Lee J. Cobb
but James Cagney would have been a better choice); a dance hall singer who's
been mistreated by a succession of men even though she's got a good heart; a
bank robbery that goes south and gang members who turn upon each other. No
cowboys, no Indians, no horses, no cavalry. Not even a rattlesnake curling
around the heroine's shoe who is shot by our hero. Scares her temporarily, but
she's grateful.

The film was written by Reginald Rose of Twelve Angry Men fame; it was directed
by Anthony Mann (Side Street). Take away the cowboy hats and substitute fedoras
and you could call it Man of the East.

Source: 2019/02/how-my-mother-did-laundry-for-my-grandchildren

Title: How My Mother Did Laundry (Written For My Grandchildren)
Date: February 01, 2019

Source: 2019/02/two-films-written-by-lenore-j-coffee

Title: Two Films Written by Lenore J. Coffee
Date: February 06, 2019

Lenore Coffee, born in 1897, wrote 50 or more silent films and any number of
studio productions in the 30s, 40s and 50s. Her most notable achievement at
Warner Brothers was the Oscar-nominated screenplay for Four Daughters, co-
written with Julius J. Epstein in 1938. Epstein, with his twin brother Philip
and Howard Koch, wrote Casablanca. Four Daughters is not on Netflix and not
conveniently available, but I'll continue to search.

In 1951, Coffee wrote Lightning Strikes Twice, directed by King Vidor
and starring Ruth Roman and Richard Todd. In 1952, she authored Sudden
Fear, directed by David Miller, which won both Joan Crawford and Jack Palance
Oscar nominations. Both films are well worth watching

Lightning Strikes Twice starts out as though it will center on Richard Trevelyan
(Richard Todd), who has just been released from prison after a jury failed
to convict him for the murder of his then wife, one juror dissenting. But it
rapidly becomes Shelley Carnes' (Ruth Roman) movie. It's refreshing to see a
film in which a strong woman shows "agency" but I have to admit that it is a
little disappointing when she falls under the romantic spell of Richard Todd,
who is supposed to be charismatic and sexual but who to me is an unappealing
block of wood. Trevelyan's guilt or innocence is the nominal subject but
the film focuses on the struggle between two women (Ruth Roman and Mercedes
McCambridge) who seek his affection. It's a noir-y melodrama with a startling
conclusion.

Sudden Fear is the stronger of the two films. Once again, a conflict between
two women: Joan Crawford, a rich successful playwright, and Gloria Grahame, an
on- the-make unscrupulous hoyden. This time the hypotenuse of their triangle
is Jack Palance, who is more expressive than Richard Todd could ever be, and a
heck of a lot scarier. Joan Crawford has some fine moments: when she realizes
that she's been duped by a gold-digging husband who plans to murder her, she
registers terror, thoughtfulness, resistance and finally resolve using only her
eyes. Unfortunately her intricate plan to save herself goes awry. There are some
unanticipated and surprising twists in the complicated plot.

My guess is that the censors intervened between the author's original conception
and the eventual portrayal, in which Palance and Grahame are disposed of in such
a way that Crawford is left without responsibility and without guilt. I would
have been much more satisfied if Coffee had let Crawford kill her antagonists
with that neat little silver revolver. Revenge would have been all the sweeter.

Source: 2019/02/cookie-lavagettos-teeth

Title: Cookie Lavagetto's Teeth
Date: February 10, 2019

But it's not the Montauk Club that's the subject of this paragraph -- it's the
"genial dentist" and lyricist J. T. McAteer who has quite something in store
for us. "Around the Town" continues:  "Dr James McAteer is the dentist for
the Brooklyn  Baseball Club and examines the teeth of each and every player
on the club.  Seems that Business Manager Larry McPhail is fussy about it and
insists on x-rays at least once each year. As far as McAteer is concerned,
infielder Cookie Lavagetto has a perfect set of teeth, while good ones are owned
by pitcher Van Mungo and infielder Johnny Hudson."

So now we know. Cookie Lavagetto had perfect teeth! What a revelation.
Information that has been hidden for 80 years. Everyone knows that Lavagetto
broke up Bill Bevan's 1947 World Series no-hitter with a double off the Ebbets
Field scoreboard. But who knew a damn thing about his choppers?  This is
neglected news of historic proportions.

And it makes a guy wonder about the other players on the team (aside from those
with semi-perfect teeth -- the legendary Van Lingle Mungo and unknown-to-me
Johnny Hudson). Were other Dodger teeth cavity-filled, crooked, misshapen,
stained with tobacco juice, busted, false, even missing. No wonder the '39
Dodgers were so bad. Twenty-five players and only three to write home about,
teeth-wise.

So here they are, the fabulous teeth of Cookie Lavagetto, bright and shiny,
glistening at us over the years (I'm sorry but I couldn't find a picture of
Cookie's molars).

Source: 2019/02/inferior-and-superior-street-names

Title: Inferior and Superior Street Names
Date: February 13, 2019

Among its other attractions. New Orleans (where I happen to be at this moment
of writing) is a city blessed with street and avenue names that are both
unusual, particular to the city, and glorious: Basin, Burgundy (accent on
the gund), Calliope (three syllables), Desire, Dryades, Felicity, Frenchmen,
Poydras, Prytania, Rampart, and of course Tchoupitoulas. Just a few to get the
conversation started.

These names are elegant. No wonder I suffer from a desperate inferiority complex
concerning the names of the streets on which I've lived. East 9th Street, West
91 Street, 9th Street, 10th Street. Designations without character -- gray and
boring. No resonance, no power. Bland.

Of course it hasn't been all bad: I once lived for a transitory summer (1961) on
Snyder Hill Road -- a semi-poetic name that gestures at rurality.

I knew a guy who was raised on Old Oaken Bucket Road. I was initially dazzled
-- until I learned that his neighbors had petitioned the city for a name change
-- his street had formerly been called Third Avenue or Smith Road or something
of that ilk. So it was not a real name -- it was pseudo-historical kitsch. What
suburban pretension! What a comedown! I'd have blushed with embarrassment if
I had to admit that I lived on Old Oaken Bucket Road. It's almost as bad as
Christmas Tree Drive (a real street in Boulder, Colorado, to the everlasting
disgrace, nomenclature-wise, of our city).

But now in this latter end of my life, I've achieved onomastic eminence. For
half the year I live on Walnut Street, a name that is the epitome of small city
authenticity (though it would be slightly better if there were an actual walnut
tree anywhere nearby). And of summers I'm at Hackett Hill Road, which is just
perfectly titled, and even more perfect because there are numerous Hacketts in
our local cemetery and because, fifty years ago, I met aged Edna Hackett, the
last survivor of the family that gave its name to hill and road.

Source: 2019/02/what-i-wore-to-the-oscars-2019

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars (2019)
Date: February 26, 2019

Actually, I didn't go TO the awards ceremony. This is what I wore to watch the
Oscars on TV. Well, that's not entirely true either. I forgot to watch the
Oscars. But I did wear the outfit.

My ensemble: plaid wool shirt by Woolrich; trousers by Lee (regular cut --
"smoky quartz" color); white cotton "Gold Toe" socks by Costco; shoes by Hoka
(with orthopedic inserts by Dr. Scholl); genuine leather belt by SlideBelts;
foundational undergarments by Fruit of the Loom and Carhartt; denim jacket by
American Apparel. Accessories: eyeglasses by Kirkland Signature; hearing aids by
Phonak. Traditional baseball cap by Otto ("one size fits most").

Hair by Joe.

Once again, I'd like to thank all the little people -- my fashion consultants,
suppliers, and supporters -- for their imagination and hard work. I couldn't
have done it without the entire team.

Source: 2019/03/another-film-written-by-lenore-j-coffee

Title: Another Film Written by Lenore J. Coffee
Date: March 06, 2019

It's hard to say how much of The Great Lie (1939) is original to its
screenwriter Lenore J. Coffee. In the first place, the film is adapted from a
novel, and secondly, at least according to the story, its stars Bette Davis
and Mary Astor were unhappy with the screenplay and rewrote much of it. But
how much? Nevertheless, in The Great Lie, as in Sudden Fear  and Lightning
Strikes Twice, two other films written by Coffee, the heart of the matter is a
head-to- head struggle between two strong women. In this film it's Sandra, (Mary
Astor) and Maggie (Bette Davis) who go to the mat about first, a husband, who
is apparently married to both of them (don't ask!) and then, a baby boy. Maggie
(Bette) winds up with both husband and child, but it's touch and go for most of
the film. I wish I could say that Coffee's dialog was brilliant, but not so.
It's a serviceable, competent screenplay. George Brent, playboy and drunkard,
isn't nearly as desirable a husband and father as the film asks us to believe.
Not much of an actor, either.

Mary Astor won an Oscar and well-deserved it; she steals the show. It's ironic,
and it may be significant, that Mary Astor herself had been involved in a child-
custody case several years before this film was made.

The music (by Max Steiner) is noteworthy -- mood-appropriate variations on
themes from Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto.

Hattie McDaniel does as much with the stereotypical "colored" maid as an actress
could be expected to do, but her scenes are still painful and embarrassing to
watch.

Source: 2019/03/amnesia-on-film-dead-again-1995

Title: Amnesia on Film: Dead Again (1991)
Date: March 13, 2019

Usually the amnesia is the hardest bit to swallow. The amnesia in Dead Again is
particularly unpalatable, because Emma Thompson shows up at a Catholic orphanage
without any memory nor with any ability to speak. No explanation is ever offered
for her disease, not a grain. No cracking the skull, no mysterious drugs, no
trauma, nothing. Just a little all-purpose Hollywood-style amnesia to get the
plot rolling.

But spontaneous amnesia slides down the esophagus rather easily compared to
hypnotically-induced past-life regression, huge trenchers of which we're
expected to bolt and guzzle. I couldn't do it and the film became ridiculous
and ridiculously baroque, gimmicky, inhuman. A waste of Kenneth Branagh's
extraordinary talent. And the music --portentous, dictatorial, distracting.

I saw this movie when it first appeared, in 1991, and liked it. What was I
thinking?  My salad days, when I was green in judgment.

Source: 2019/03/the-toaster

Title: The Toaster
Date: March 15, 2019

When I downsized into my present residence in 2009, a few essential items
disappeared, among them a venerable but excellent toaster. I did not replace it
because I was distracted by more pressing matters. I went toasterless for almost
five years.

Later, when I entered into a tentative new relationship, toasterlessness became
a matter of concern. Toast was an essential item in the diet of my new lady
friend. For a while, before she began to spend nights with me, she would daily
transport in bag or backpack -- along with toiletries and toothbrush and changes
of undergarments -- her glamorous red enamel Cuisinart toaster.

That this arrangement was comic became immediately apparent. No one can carry a
toaster from one home to another day after day without feeling the irony.

As our relationship solidified, it became clear that something had to be done,
toasterwise. And so we came to realize that it was time to progress to a stable
two-toaster situation.

The Cuisinart went back to its original home and off we went to McGuckin's
Hardware. There we acquired a Proctor Silex, with which we have lived until a
short while ago.

I don't want to badmouth the Proctor Silex, but let's face it, it's a cheap
lightweight contraption with too much plastic and a tendency to leak crumbs
over the counter. A paucity of knobs and controls. It's an entry-level toaster,
a "starter toaster." A provisional toaster that lacked the dignity that our
maturing connection demanded.

So yesterday, at Peppercorn on the semi-famous Boulder Mall, we purchased a
superior toaster -- a highly-recommended, weighty and substantial Breville two-
slicer equipped with "Lift and Lock" and other bells and whistles (which we
will no doubt some day master), the upper grill of which is inscribed with the
comforting motto, "BAGELS FACE INWARDS." A toaster of heft and permanence. It's
sitting proudly on the counter now.

Moreover, we purchased it with our new joint credit card.

Source: 2019/03/blood-test

Title: Blood Test
Date: March 17, 2019

I cooled my heels for more than an hour waiting for a "blood draw." Why so long?
There was no long line of people ahead of me. Was it simply that the department
was understaffed? That they all went out for ice cream? Or were the blood-
collectors, the vampires, gossiping and lazing about behind the curtain?

I was miffed.

But it wasn't long before I transitioned from passive miff to active glare. Now,
"glaring" is a powerful, if ineffective, way to deal with such inconveniences. I
think that my powerglare was beginning to get the attention of the poor schlub
sitting at the desk pretending to ignore me.

But let me confess that there's a danger inherent in the glare, because if your
lower lip quivers ever so slightly, you're no longer glaring, you're pouting.
Of course I didn't want to be seen as a pouter. So I concentrated all my energy
into my glare. I think I had it under control, but after a while, without making
a conscious decision to do so, I escalated from glaring to seething.

The seethe is more difficult to express than the glare. You can glare with just
your eyes, but you have to put your whole body into the seethe. For proper
seething, you have to cross your arms and hunch over. And once you're in that
posture, you can then begin to move from seething to simmering. But you must be
careful not to be perceived as sulking.

And then on to fuming. Fuming is very like seething and simmering -- the same
hunched body posture -- but accompanied with heavy breathing and an occasional,
intermittent through-the-teeth hiss. You've got to make sure that your hiss is a
true angry hiss and not a pathetic sniffle.

From fuming it was only a short step to boiling, which came at about the 55
minute mark.

Good thing my name was called on the hour, because I was just about to blow my
top.

Source: 2019/03/the-state-of-ornithology-in-the-seventeenth-century

Title: The State of Ornithology in the Seventeenth Century
Date: March 26, 2019

I've just read Tim Birkhead's biography of The Wonderful Mr Willoughby, The
First True Ornithologist (London, 2018). Birkhead's thesis is that Francis
Willoughby was not merely a bird watcher, but an innovative, diligent, and
imaginative scientist, the founder of a new area of knowledge.

Ornithology when Willoughby (1635 –1672) started to look at birds was
astonishingly primitive. For example, students did not even agree that birds
migrated. Perhaps, as Aristotle had suggested, they hid in holes during the
winter. Perhaps they transmuted from a species that departed to a species that
arrived. With no observers in southern lands and no rapid communication, it's
not surprising that it was hard to imagine that birds flew south in the fall and
returned in the spring. Even now, when all is revealed, migration still seems,
at least to me, to be mysterious, miraculous, and wondrously improbable.

Before the "new philosophy put all in doubt," the assumption that governed all
"science" was that the natural world should be studied for evidence of divine
wisdom -- a practice which blinkered understanding and limited speculation.
The questions that people asked about birds were therefore not particularly
challenging. They asked which ones were good to eat, which ones could be kept in
cages, and which ones had medicinal value.

The first task of new ornithology was simply to take a census. What birds live
here, by what names are they called, and how should they be classified?  In the
non-standardized late medieval world, most birds bore regional or demotic names,
and sometimes the same name was attached two or more species of birds. It took
a while before the ars-foot came to be recognized and conventionalized as the
great-crested grebe and to earn the official designation Podiceps cristatus. It
was the same with the such regionally-named birds as the annet, bald buzzard,
the Bohemian chatterer, the copped douker, the coulterneb, the didapper, the
dun-diver, the fern-owl, the flusher, the gid, the glead, the gorcock, the ox-
eye, the pickmire, the puit, the puttock, the pyrag, the rock ouzel, the scarf,
the skout, and the witwall?  It remained to be demonstrated that the "yarwhelp"
"was in fact the East Anglian name for the bar-tailed godwit and was to be
distinguished from the similar black-tailed godwit." That the sea-pie was an
oystercatcher. That the elegug was a guillemot. "The sea-swallows they there (on
Caldey Island) call spurs, and the razor-bills are called elegugus.... This name
elelgug some attribute to the puffin, and some to the guillem[ot];  indeed they
know not what they mean by this name." Nomenclature was a thicket.

Willoughby was an energetic surveyor and classifier. But as he became more
familiar with bird life, he started to ask questions of genuine scientific
interest. What is the function of the tomial tooth? Do all birds of the same
species have the same color iris? How many birds have rictal bristles? Do birds
who lay two eggs produce one male and one female? Do female birds ever have two
ovaries and two oviducts? Can birds hold on to their eggs at will, or are they
laid involuntarily? How do birds survive the cold of winter? Why do birds molt?

While these are not necessarily the questions of a modern ornithologist, they
certainly represent a new beginning. Many thanks to Birkhead for bringing
Willoughby to our attention.

How sad that the first true ornithologist died at age thirty-six.

Source: 2019/03/old-words-new-to-me-

Title: Old Words New to Me
Date: March 29, 2019

A "col" is the lowest point of a ridge between two peaks; a "barmkin" or
"barnekin" is a walled courtyard; a "carr" is a fen or wetland overgrown with
trees;  a "bauchling" (mostly Scots) is a reproaching or taunting in order to
dare an adversary to fight; a "bastle" is a fortified farmhouse; a "cantref"
(plural "cantrefi") was a medieval Welsh division or hundred of land; a "skurr"
is a shed; a "warble" is a lookout mountain; a "garth" is a dike of sand and
pebbles devised to catch fish; a "pele" tower is a small fortified keep or
tower, such as this one:

A "dubb" is a deep hole in a bog; a "pune" is a quasi-legal reprisal short
of revenge; a "terret" is a a metal loop on a harness, guiding the reins and
preventing snags. Here's a 1st century Romano-British enamel terret:

Source: 2019/03/book-report-the-end-of-innocence

Title: Book Report: The End of Innocence
Date: March 31, 2019

I don't read much fiction, but when I do, it's usually one of the 19th-century
classics. However, the "international bestseller" The End of Innocence (2016)
by Benedict Wells came highly recommended, so I gave it a shot. It's pretty
good, not bad, not great, and certainly a novel for today and not for all time
-- not even for the next decade. It's thin, simple.

Egomaniac that I am, I was less interested in the novel itself than I was in
my own reaction to it, which was, in a couple of words, both resistant and
resentful.

Why the hostility,  I ask myself?

In the first place, it's a novel without any sense of style. Perhaps it's the
translator's fault, but gosh, it's written in the prose of a bad TV journalist.
And second, it's ruthlessly manipulative. The the back-cover blurb, boasts "tear
jerker." And so it is, shamelessly. Jules, the first-person narrator, loses his
parents in an auto accident, is sent to a boarding school that is depicted as a
quasi-penitentiary, is abandoned by his two siblings, suffers from paralyzing
guilt, and when he finally marries, has to watch his wife die from cancer (a
sequence which is narrated in extended, unnecessary detail).

I suppose these disasters might have been handled with enough circumspection and
integrity to teach us something about the human condition. But no, only to wring
a couple of tears from our reluctant eyes. And then the too easily won upbeat
ending -- goodness gracious!

Some parts, but not enough of them, rang true. The family dynamics among the
siblings was complicated enough to generate some heft.

Here's a single instance, one of many, to which I objected: a late middle-age
writer suffers from Alzheimer's. Our hero, Jules, puts a gun in the man's hands,
then walks away and hears the report of the weapon. He never confesses that he
assisted in the death, and suffers no psychological ramifications from doing so.
Peculiar, especially since the dead man was his rival for the love of his soon-
to-be wife. I think most people would agree that assisting in a suicide is a
fraught act and that a novelist neglects his duty and cheats his readers when he
fails to acknowledge and explore its effects. A major, compromising misstep by
Mr.Wells.

So there it is, in little: disappointed, exploited and cheated. Not a good
feeling to take away from a novel.

But I wonder at myself. The most manipulative novelist of all times is Charles
Dickens, whose writing  I revere. Dickens is on a level several orders of
magnitude more tearjerkery than Wells could possibly imagine, grasp, or emulate.
How can it be that I embrace Dickens and reject Wells?

Source: 2019/04/the-comancheros-1961

Title: The Comancheros (1961)
Date: April 02, 2019

This reprehensible film aspires to be an "inconsequential romp," as one reviewer
suggests, but fails to meet even that exceedingly low bar.

If a viewer could swallow the buddy-movie plot (Stuart Whitman as a New Orleans
card shark and John Wayne as John Wayne), he'd still have to deal with Nehemiah
Persoff as a brutal Mexican gang-and-cult leader and Ina Balin (the worst
actress Brooklyn has ever produced) as his spitfire daughter. And also embrace
the dubious proposition that the road from New Orleans to Galveston goes through
picturesque southern Utah. And many other improbabilities.

Ok, so the film is one big joke, a comedy masquerading as a western, or vice
versa.

But if the film is a "romp," then how in the world can we justify its treatment
of Indians?

In The Comancheros, Indians have three functions. The first is to be constantly
drunk and constantly in search of whiskey. It offers a truly horrible,
inexcusable scene in which a renowned chief falls drunkenly into his soup.
Amusing? Not to any person with a modicum of fellow feeling. The second purpose
that Indians serve is to be cruel: they torture and scalp. Their third purpose
is to be cannon-fodder. Scores, perhaps a hundred are remorselessly cut down
by our white friends. Not a one of them is awarded a trace of individuality --
though, as is the custom in such films, they get to fall picturesquely from
rocky overlooks or be dragged by the foot in the stirrup when they are shot off
their horses.

Even worse than these atrocities is a scene in which a bedraggled, impoverished
line of hollow-eyed Indians, this time including women and children, trudge
dejectedly across the landscape. A mini Trail of Tears. Not to worry, says
John Wayne, they're "tame Indians." "Tame" means defeated, reduced to poverty,
neglected, dehumanized. Tame as cows or dogs. It's a painful image, hard to
ignore or to forget.

I imagine that we're supposed to say, Oh, this was 1961, we know better now. But
by 1961, John Ford had made a few movies in which Indians were depicted with not
a lot, but a bit of humanity. The Comancheros was reactionary and unenlightened
even it its day, we have to admit, and embodied a transparently racist ideology.
It's treatment of our fellow but slightly different humans is grotesque and
unforgivable.

Criminal, in fact. It is nothing less than a excuse and justification for
genocide. Not inconsequential at all.

According to the story, Michael Curtiz set out to direct the film, but fell ill
and withdrew. The actual direction was under the control of John Wayne himself,
so it is at his feet that this appalling monster must lie.

Source: 2019/04/a-sunday-morning-conversation

Title: A Sunday Morning Conversation
Date: April 14, 2019

He:  "These allergies are getting me down.  Every morning I seem to wake up
with a liter of mucus in my nose. There's so much I should probably save it and
put in the garden. It would be good for the soil."

She:  "Yes, we could save it one of those nice plastic jars that the Talenti
ice cream comes in."

He:  "It might be a problem on the plane. 'What's that in the jar, sir.'
 "It's a pint of my snot. I'm taking it to Vermont to put in the garden.'  '
Er, do you want to step over here, sir.'

She:  "Perhaps we should re-think this."

He:  "It's a good thing that we know each other pretty well. If I had said to
you, five years ago when we first met, 'Hi, my name is...  I'm thinking of
saving my snot and taking it to Vermont,' it would have ended the relationship
right there."

She:  "Yes, you were very wise to have waited five years to mention it. Very
tactful."

Source: 2019/04/little-jimmy

Title: Little Jimmy Hurt his Arm, by Ralph Ganesha Jefferson
Date: April 14, 2019

Today's contribution, Little Jimmy Hurt his Arm, was written by Ralph Ganesha
Jefferson, the author of the best-selling children's book Leonardo, the
Enlightened Lion (2017).

"Little Jimmy hurt his arm.

He said to his mother, my arm hurts. His mother said, let us pray over it. So
they prayed.

But it still hurt.

So his mother took him to the wise women at the end of the street. She
prescribed CBD oil. Jimmy's mother rubbed CBD oil on his arm.

But it still hurt.

So his mother took him to a psychotherapist. He gave Jimmy some anti-anxiety
pills. Jimmy took them.

But his arm still hurt.

So his mother took him to a reflexologist, then to a Kirlian analyst, then to an
aromatherapist. Jimmy did what they advised.

But his arm still hurt.

Then Jimmy said, 'why don't we go to a doctor.'

So they went to a doctor. And the doctor said to Jimmy, "Your arm is broken."
 The doctor set the bone and put it in a cast.

Jimmy's arm stopped hurting.

And then the doctor said, "While you're here, why don't I give you a measles
shot?"  And he did.

Source: 2019/04/other-peoples-lives

Title: Other People's Lives
Date: April 24, 2019

Three times in the last few weeks I've had the opportunity to drop into other
people's lives.

The most recent was a visit to the Mountain Men Rendezvous in Antonito, New
Mexico.

"Rendezvous," you ask?  In the 1830s, fur trappers gathered in various places
in western North America to sell their furs and purchase supplies for the coming
year. According to the story, they drank themselves silly, fornicated as much
as possible, and played at various games and sports to pass the time while they
waited for the wagons to arrive from St. Louis. Modern re-enactors dress in
1820s costumes, and, at least in Antonito, engage in knife and "hawk" (tomahawk)
throwing contests.

It was a world taken very seriously by the mountain men and their ladies. But
strange, even otherworldly to me. I learned about the proper size of a hawk
and how muzzle loading rifles work and I handled an elaborately beaded pouch
made out of a bull's scrotum, owned by our host, whose "mountain name" was Long
Tongue. But no liquor at this gathering. Lemonade only, I'm glad to say. I
wouldn't have been comfortable with all those knives and hawks whizzing around
if the guys and gals had been addled with alcohol.

And also : a few weeks ago, in New Orleans, we shared lunch with the Lords
of Leather. A scary, in-your-face name, but a more welcoming group of men
I've rarely met. Some were costumed, but most of them looked like a bunch of
accountants enjoying a weekend cookout. No doubt their fellowship engaged
private matters that I don't know about and wouldn't understand. Lives very
different from mine.

Also in New Orleans, we attended a "ball."  Not a ball that involves dancing
-- more of a pageant, a display of elaborate costuming. It was sponsored by the
Krewe of Iris, a group of women who roll their pageant wagons (floats) during
Mardi Gras. We costumed ourselves for the ball -- fancy long dress and tuxedo.
The members of the Krewe a) take it all very seriously, and b) know that it's
silly and c) take it seriously nonetheless.

There must be thousands of these cultures and sub-cultures in our rich and
various nation. I'm happy to have participated, a bit, in these worlds.

And I wonder, of course, how strange and exotic my life and culture, bland and
ordinary to me, might seem to some of the mountain men and leather-lords and
Iris ladies.

Source: 2019/04/wisdom-1

Title: Wisdom --  Part 1
Date: April 29, 2019

Now that I'm eighty (80!) years old, it's time to think about what, if anything,
 I've learned. For many years now, I've been waiting for wisdom to kick in, but
so far, no thunderbolts or grand illuminations. Yet I seem to have accumulated
a number of maxims and cliches, which leads to the dispiriting conclusion that
perhaps there's no difference between ordinary commonplaces and sophisticated
wisdom. On the other hand, it is undeniably the case that I am a different
person now than I was twenty or forty or sixty years ago, so perhaps all these
years have produced some changes in attitude and behavior. What follows is the
first installment of either "wisdom" or "commonplaces" -- take your pick.

Although it is true that there are psychopaths and sociopaths, there are very
few of them. Almost all the people I've known over the years have been poor
struggling mortals, like myself, trying to act decently and respectably. The
difficult people with whom I've had to deal are pathetic rather than villainous.
They act badly because of their own inadequacies, anxieties and fear, not
because they are innately vicious. A surprising number of people have endured
dreadful traumas and most of them have recovered to live satisfactory lives.
There are some poor souls who compensate badly. They cause pain to us, but more
to themselves. It's not true that to know everything is to excuse everything,
but knowing people's stories certainly helps you to become more empathetic and
understanding. My younger self was much harsher and less compassionate toward
difficult people than my present self.

Genuine understanding between individuals is difficult and misunderstanding is
rife. It's hard to translate what's in your head to your friend or neighbor,
and just as hard to understand what's in someone else's head by words alone.
If you're going to be surprised because someone misunderstood you, then you're
going to spend half your entire lifetime in a state of dreadful shock. Although
irony and understatement are most useful figures of speech, beware of them.
There's nothing more awkward (and sometimes dangerous) than an ironic remark
that is taken seriously, or a serious remark that is understood ironically. A
meaningful exchange of ideas or insights can't be brief, because it takes time
for a shred or glimmer of understanding to grow and ripen. If you want to have a
real friend, make the time. Understanding someone else's brain is akin to Zeno's
Paradox;  you get halfway there but you never get all the way.

Everyone is engaged in "presentation of self." You meet someone new, and they
tell you about themselves, but they're not really doing so in any profound
way. They're not trying to. They're acting out the "presentation" that they've
devised over the years. They offer you a handful of anecdotes which they think
represent themselves. But the fun and the satisfaction only begins when that
first mask drops away. In order to know someone, you have to ask a question that
is not truly intrusive but manages to take your new friend (or old friend, for
that matter), a hair's breadth apart from their usual style of presentation.
Sometimes it's not worth the effort,  but there are occasions when it can
precipitate a worthwhile friendship. Too many conversations are not exchanges
of information.  A says something from his repertoire of self-presentations;
then B, impatiently waiting his turn to talk about himself, responds with a
nugget from his own store. No genuine communication takes place. This kind of
exchange is disappointing and almost useless. We all generate these forms of
presentation partly as a defense against revealing too much of ourselves and
becoming vulnerable, and because we all have our own follies and weaknesses. So
we act a role. The further the contrived role is from the true self, the more
transparent and even offensive it becomes. It's hard for people to be true to
themselves;  it takes work.

More wisdom (or commonplaces) coming soon. Stay tuned.

Source: 2019/05/dream

Title: Brief Account of Enigmatic Dream
Date: May 13, 2019

I dreamed I was on the phone with my father (who has been dead these 35 years).
 Although his voice was very faint, it was distinctly him. He said, "Don't vote
for Beto." End of conversation, end of dream.

Source: 2019/05/amnesia-on-film-shadow-on-the-wall-

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Shadow on the Wall (1950)
Date: May 29, 2019

Another day, another amnesia movie. This one, Shadow on the Wall, is  different
only because the amnesiac is a child.  The poor dear has witnessed a murder,
and has been traumatized, which we know because her wooden perkiness transforms
into wooden woodenness. In the vulgar reductive Freudianism to which the film
pays full credence, the little girl won't be cured until she remembers what
she has repressed. Which she does, unsurprisingly and predictably, in the last
scene, thereby freeing her father (Zachary Scott) from the threat of execution
for a murder he didn't commit. More turbid amnesia waters flowing under the
Lethean bridge.

I don't now why I have such a dislike for Zachary Scott. True, he's not a good
actor, but it's not that. It might be his mustache, which is far too tidy and
trim and which says (to me), "this person can't be trusted."  Or perhaps it's
his receding chin.  Or his hairpiece. His awkward movements. His pathetic
attempts at comedy.  I can't say for sure.

I think that I must have been mistreated by a Zachary Scott lookalike in my
childhood, events that I've forgotten but have retained in my subconscious.

If I could just remember what happened I might be able to free myself of this
irrational hatred. Meanwhile, I'm sorry the movie turned out the way it did. 
I would have preferred it if Zachary Scott had been executed, mustache and all,
even if it was for a murder he didn't commit.

Source: 2019/06/written-for-my-grandchildren-your-great-grandmother-lillian-green-

Title: Written for My Grandchildren;  Your Great-Grandmother, Lillian Green
Date: June 13, 2019

My mother, your great-grandmother, Lillian Green, was born in New York City,
probably in Harlem, on June 9, 1905.

Her parents, Sonia Chafetz and Joseph Usilewski, were part of the great
migration to America of Eastern European Jews. According to my mother, Sonia and
Joseph were both engaged to other people when they eloped, he deserting from the
Russian army. They arrived at Ellis Island mid-August of 1904 without a kopeck
in their pockets and only one pair of shoes between them. I used to think that
my mother had been conceived aboard the ship from Rotterdam, but the dates don't
bear it out. Moreover, It's a melancholy fact that passengers in steerage were
segregated by sex and kept apart.

My mother was born Lilly Usilewski but when she entered public school, which is
where she acquired English, she was enrolled as Lily Solawisky. When her younger
brother was enrolled as Daniel Oslofsky, my grandfather Joseph realized that it
was time to Americanize his name. The judge before whom he appeared was named
Green, so Green he became. Lilly became Lillian when she married, my father
insisting that "Lilly's not a name." He and everyone called her "Lil" but she
was always "Lilly" to her mother Sonia.

Lil's upbringing, I am afraid, was impoverished and harsh. I was told that her
father raised her and her younger brothers Dan and Ellis (Bub) "with the belt."
Her mother Sonia was chronically ill from goiter and from the consequences
of her five home-made abortions, so against her wishes Lil was taken out of
school six weeks into high school to run the house and to raise her brothers, a
sacrifice for which she received no appreciation either from them or from her
father. For her, it was a disaster and a source of bitterness.. Her life from
age thirteen to age twenty-six, when she married my father, Emanuel, is almost
entirely blank to me. I know that she worked in the printing industry and was
a skilled proofreader. She was not at all athletic or artistic but she was
musical -- she played the piano and sang. At some point in early adulthood she
started to take vacations at one of those camps for young Jewish adults in the
Catskills. She sang in camp musicals and it was there that she met my father, a
law clerk studying for the bar. My grandfather Joseph Green disapproved of her
independence and refused to speak to her for two years -- a wound from which she
was still suffering when I came to know her. Lil and Manny were married on June
19, 1930 and had four children:  Eugene (1935- 2006), Susan (1937-1938), Elihu
(1939 -    ), and Jonathan (1942 -    ).

Her hard early life and the death of her daughter at the age of nine months,
along with a chronic, agonizing stomach ulcer left her a troubled woman. She was
what used to be called "difficult" -- acerbic, rude, insensitive, thoughtless.
She once said to me, "I was a good mother until you boys were six years old;
after that, I couldn't cope." I think it was honest and insightful of her to say
so. Yet my very earliest memories are pleasurable. She kept us warm and fed and
loved; otherwise I don't know how my brothers and I would have been able to have
lived satisfying lives. But I also know that I have no memories of touching her
or being touched by her, although sometimes she would demand a quick peck on the
cheek. She was not at all "supportive" -- "assaultive" would be a better term.
There was no praise, only incomprehension or disdain.

I can't remember any particular words that she said to me, but here's a sample
of her language. I remember that when my two or three month old firstborn
suffered noisily from colic, she proposed to my wife, "Maybe your milk is
poisoning him"  -- which not a sentiment likely to endear her to a struggling
new mother.

It took me into adulthood to recognize that my mother's peculiarities were not
villainy but the product of her emotionally impoverished early years and of her
almost constant pain.

After her children were grown, she resumed her piano playing and turned
herself into a stalwart of the League of Women Voters. In 1960, during JFK's
presidential campaign, she gathered fifty or sixty women and welcomed Eleanor
Roosevelt herself to our home on East 9 Street. A most memorable and important
contribution.

She did not mellow with age. Yet I would have to say, that all things
considered, she did well.

Lil died at age 74 from the consequences of her then-incurable ulcer. In the
hospital, dying, "intubated" and incapable of speech, she scribbled on a scrap
of paper, "I love you all,"  and I know that she meant sincerely what had
always been so difficult for her to express. I retain that piece of paper as a
relic.

Here's a picture of Lil at her best. Me and my mom, c. 1940.

Source: 2019/09/picture-1967

Title: For my Family: West Bradford History (I)
Date: September 29, 2019

This is a photograph of the buildings on the West Bradford property as they
existed when we made the deal in 1967. As you know -- children, grandchildren
and other interested parties -- we are no longer in possession of this part of
the property. It passed to Phyllis and Bruce in 1977 and then to Bruce entirely
when he and Phyllis divorced in 1984 or thereabouts.

But this is how it looked to the photographer, whom I believe to be my brother
Jonathan, when he stood on the near knoll looking westward.  Much remains
superficially constant but everything is different.

Still in place: the house and barn, the Red Duchess apple tree just to the left
of the house and closer to the camera; the big sugar maple on the left, near
South Road.

But to my eye, there's much that has changed. Hanging over the house is a very
large, very dead elm. There's another infected and doomed elm to the right
of the barn. Indeed, the property was sometimes called by us "Dead Elm Farm"
when we spent our first summer there, in 1968. There's a chicken house, barely
visible, to the right of the white clapboard milk house; there is also another
outbuilding once used as a garage and a storeroom for wood visible between the
house and barn; there's a porch of sorts at the street side of the house -- all
these elements have been removed though they remain vivid in my memory.

But what you can't see, grandchildren, is more interesting than what is visible.

The property was owned for forty years by Tom Roberts, who was probably as old
in 1968 as I am now. He knew that he was too tired and probably too resource-
poor to maintain ownership. His wife, eight years older than he, was mortally
ill, and Tom himself had only a couple of years to live. It was time for him to
move on.

The house itself (supposedly built in part in 1856) was out of an earlier era.
It lacked a septic system (it had only a cesspool, which was an open sewer into
which untreated waste flowed and stunk.)  There was a 15-foot deep dug well
(you can see a bit of the topmost well tile and the concrete well cover just to
the right of the apple tree) from which a very old electric pump pushed water
up to an open copper-lined tank on the second floor of the house. There was no
water pressure (because there was no pressure tank) but only a "gravity feed"
to the faucets and toilet. The plumbing was rusted iron (in) and lead (out).
There was no heating system -- the wood stoves that had heated the place were
sold at auction before we took up residence. No insulation either, except (we
later discovered) the piles of hazelnut shells that generations of squirrels and
chipmunks had deposited in the spaces between the split lathe-and-plaster inner
walls and the outer sheathing. The sills were rotten and the house was sagging
in places -- although, as you can see, the roof line was still deceptively
sound.

The barn was in even worse condition than the house. Its partial collapse was
the reason -- the last straw -- that Tom Roberts sold out. During the previous
winter, the rotted-out floor on the east side of the barn had given way,
strangling three of Tom's eight cows in their stanchions. Tom was heartbroken --
he dropped more than one tear when he told us about the disaster. "I hooked them
one by one to the tractor and dragged them out into the field, over there, and
buried them."  He pointed to a spot that would be just about the lower right
hand corner of the photograph.

The barn, at first, was a scary place.  It took us (Bruce and me) a couple of
weeks to get up the courage to enter. It was a disaster area: giant spider webs,
peeling whitewash, jumbled and distorted structures for dairy use, piles of
twisted lumber. It's now been repaired and remodeled -- completely transformed.
But I still treasure the memory of the way it was, at least after it wasn't in
danger of further collapse. I miss the majestic 16' by 16' hemlock beams, the
spacious haylofts, the hand hewn tree that served for a ridgepole.

Despite the fact that the buildings were way past their prime, barely
functioning, I didn't think for a second that we had made a mistake in buying
the place. I never thought of reversing course and selling out. I was totally at
home from the first breath. I fell in love with the buildings, and even more so
with the land.

When Althea took her very first walk on the property, just as we passed what
we call the "meander" and crossed over the spill (now enclosed in a culvert)
through which water from the swamp (now a pond) courses into the Baldwin Brook,
she said, "This is too beautiful to be in private hands."

It's even more beautiful now.

[Addendum October 24, 2019.  I suppose I should mention that the decision to buy
the property was controversial. My father in particular, ever cautious, was
adamant: you don't buy a second home until you've bought your first home. You
have no idea what you're buying. The land has never been surveyed;  you don't
know the boundaries."  His reasoning was perfectly correct, but all wrong.
Buying the property was the best financial decision of my life.]

Source: 2019/10/more-on-west-bradford-in-1968

Title: More on West Bradford in June, 1968
Date: October 02, 2019

The famished waif with the tousled hair is NGP; the naked one-year-old with the
swollen belly is Ben. There's a rain barrel -- why?  There's a gas-powered lawn
mower, so brand new that it still bears its sales tag.  There's some black
plastic pipe  and what might be a horseshoe on the floor. A couple of white
plastic containers. Miscellaneous wooden furniture. There are many cubic yards
of hay -- not baled, just loose.

The potter, oblivious to the chaos and hard at work, is Phyllis.

It's all happening just inside the big barn door -- an improvised pottery
studio.

Source: 2019/10/real-ice-cream-a-personal-history

Title: Ice Cream -- a Personal History
Date: October 02, 2019

In the 1940s of ancient memory, it was a rare treat when my father would bring
home, on a summer evening, a pint of ice cream to be shared among the five
of us. This was in the days of "ice boxes" and before the refrigerators that
replaced them had freezer compartments -- so the ice cream had to be consumed
immediately. Which it was.

There was also the Good Humor truck:

Source: 2019/10/the-new-building-on-hackett-hill-road-1978

Title: A New Building on Hackett Hill Road, 1978
Date: October 05, 2019

It shouldn't take more than a moment, dear grandchildren, to figure out exactly
what building is under construction. It's the early spring of 1978 and the house
that we've lived in these last forty or so years is rising out of the ground.
It may be a little difficult, but if you scrutinize closely, you'll notice the
space that has been left for the familiar sliding door (with its prominent
header), and also the spaces for the front door and the kitchen windows. The
workmen (is that Jimmy Perry up there?) are just starting on the second floor.
There's also a large boulder which came out of the basement on the lower right,
sitting where it remained for 30 years or so until it was replaced by a much
more handsome piece of granite. (The boulder in the picture can now be found,
part buried, at the entrance to the new waterfall garden.)

It's a very small house (the footprint is 20' x 28') not because we were in
love with small houses, but because we were working with an extremely limited
budget.  Believe it or not, the house (including foundation, roof, well,
electricity, and septic) cost just $33,000 --very little even in 1970s dollars.
That's because we cut every corner that could conceivably be cut: unfinished
lumber for framing, second-hand doors, used plumbing fixtures and appliances,
plywood flooring in some rooms, etc. etc.  (Almost all these elements have been
replaced and upgraded over the years as the family has become more prosperous.)

Also important: the house site. It might seem natural and inevitable to you,
grandchildren, that the house is where it is. But in fact, there was a long
serious debate about where to put it. And here you must remind yourself that in
1977 the area that now contains a house and a garage/barn and three cabins and
an orchard of sorts and three or four different gardens was a blank space, a
tabula rasa -- just a meadow behind the old West Bradford cemetery.

Four sites were under consideration and three were rejected : the first where
Cabin #3 is located, the second, where the barn sits, the third in the back
field (but that would have involved a prohibitive investment in a road and the
undergrounding of many feet of electrical wire). I made the decision to put the
house up on the knoll, with a good view of pond, forest and field, accessible
to the road, and with the hope and possibility of a dry basement. The right
decision, I still think.

There was only one road in at the time -- the one to the south of the cemetery .
Thedriveway we now use came the next year                                      .

There were many adventures and many anxieties in the building of the house, most
of them a consequence of the limited budget. It was not an enjoyable experience,
but it didn't sour me on the land or the property. I learned a lot.

Source: 2019/10/estelle-fendricks-chicken-soup

Title: Estelle Fendrick's Chicken Soup
Date: October 08, 2019

Here's a marvelously instructive tale about culinary practice, custom,
superstition, religion and how knowledge passes from generation to generation.

We're in the 1940s.

My mother was sitting with her childhood friend, Estelle Fendrick, who was
preparing a chicken soup. My mother (this is exactly how she told me the story)
noticed that Estelle broke the long bones (the "drumstick") of the chicken
before putting them into the cooking vessel. She asked Estelle, why she broke
the bones. And Estelle replied, well, it's what my mother did. I don't know why
but I'm going to see her next week and I'll ask her why she broke the bones. So
the next week, Estelle asked her own mother why she broke the bones, and her
mother answered in the same way as Estelle: I do it because my mother did it.
But look, tomorrow I'm going to visit my mother in the Hebrew Home for the Aged
in Riverdale and I'll ask her. So, and here my mother's narrative comes to its
climax, Estelle's mother went to visit her own mother and asked her, why did
you use to break the bones of the chicken before you put them into the cooking
vessel, and Estelle's grandmother thought for a while and then said (and here
you have to imagine a very strong old country accent), We had a very small pot.

Source: 2019/10/silo

Title: Silo (1968)
Date: October 11, 2019

When we arrived at Dead Elm Farm in 1968, we were confronted with a derelict
silo. It had not been used for many years and displayed a Pisa-like lean. We
thought it was a hazard and decided to take it down, which we did by the simple
expedient of tying one end of a rope to one of the metal rings and attaching
the other end to a car bumper. The silo offered little resistance. But once it
was removed, we discovered that decades of leaking at the junction of silo and
barn had engendered massive rot in the uprights and sill and that the side of
the barn was hanging by a thread and would need even more reconstruction than we
could possibly have imagined.

The picture makes it all very clear, but there's a small structure visible at
the top and to the right of the silo which I don't remember. What was it? 
Perhaps it was part of the primitive venting system that was used to keep hot
air from building up in the hayloft. Or a cricket to keep the rain off?

And when did that vent or cricket disappear? What became of it?  I have no
recollection.

It was not a functional or useful silo, but it was beautiful in its own way    .
Though doomed                                                                  .

Source: 2019/10/-brothers-rico

Title: Another Film Noir:  The Brothers Rico (1957)
Date: October 21, 2019

It's not the most artistic poster (way too crowded a field) but it's a heck of
a movie. It's a familiar film noir subject: guy (in this case), Eddie Rico, a
former mobster, tries to go straight, but his past catches up with him. The
first couple of scenes establish him as legitimate businessman and husband. In
fact, the director, the ever-reliable Phil Karlson, pushes the Code envelope
when Eddie and Alice (Dianne Foster) wake in separate beds (as required by the
Legion of Decency) and he reaches over and lays his hand just an inch  or so
from her benightgowned right breast. (Makes me wonder how much negotiation was
required with the censors: "Can he put his hand here? How about here? Above?
Below?") And then when Eddie playfully asks Alice why  she married him, she
answers rather forthrightly, "I was a girl. I wanted to be a woman." Whoa, how
did Karlson slip that one through?  Did the censors not understand?

Discussion of prudery is relevant, because censorship spoils the ending of the
film. It's grim gangland world into which Eddie is reluctantly thrust. Everyone
lies, no one can be trusted, every conversation reeks of menace, and violence
is ubiquitous and casual. In the showdown, Eddie is wounded and survives, but
every element in the logic of film requires that he die. The tacked-on happy
ending, in which a headline proclaims that the gang has been destroyed and Eddie
and Alice enjoy connubial bliss, is false, and, I think, even insulting to the
intelligence of the viewer. Better to ignore it, or, better still, turn off the
tv just three minutes before the end, because the first 87 minutes are just
terrific.

Source: 2019/10/something-about-my-father

Title: A Few Words About My Father
Date: October 21, 2019

Here's a memory from my youth. Let's say it's the early '50s. I'm a thoughtless,
self-absorbed adolescent, nominally studying at Erasmus Hall but in fact not
paying much mind to schoolwork. It's a Sunday dinner, so I've probably just come
home from playing several hours of schoolyard basketball or softball. We're at
the dining room table. Roast beef, possibly. There's a desultory conversation,
but then my father, Emanuel, savoring the loaded table, observes, right out of
left field I thought then, "I don't think we could eat better food." He paused.
"Perhaps fancier, but not better."

I didn't know what has prompted his observation but it made enough impact on
me that I retained it in memory for now these seventy years. I doubt that any
of the five of us dissented and I suspect that we continued to stuff ourselves
with meat and roasted potatoes and (inasmuch as it was the 50s), some sort of
soggy canned vegetable. But now, almost seven decades later, I think that I
have a better understanding of Dad's spontaneous celebration of the roast. I
also think that I know why that particular moment has stayed in my mind when so
much else has long since evaporated. After all, Dad was not given to gratuitous
compliments, certainly not to the food on the table. My father was neither a
gourmet nor a food critic (I've written about his eating habits elsewhere). I
now know that he wasn't commenting on the preparation or the presentation of the
food. He was savoring its inherent quality -- its grade A choiceness -- wait,
not just its quality so much as its abundance. But even more specifically, when
I think back, he was enjoying the knowledge that he was able to provide such a
bountiful dinner for his family.

To understand Dad's spontaneous overflow of emotion, it's necessary to recall
the facts of his own childhood. From what I've gleaned, the family in which he
grew up must have been among the poorest in America, the very bottom of the
economic ladder. His father worked in a factory -- which was just a large room
behind a storefront -- as a roller of cigars. It's well documented that in the
first part of the 20th century, cigar-rollers were one of the most exploited and
most underpaid of American workers. Grandpa's wage when Dad was growing up, he
told me, was $9 per week. The family, the six of them (the parents Isaiah and
Eta, the children Max, Sol, Mollie, and Manny) lived in a sixth floor cold water
walk-up flat -- that is, in an apartment in a tenement up six flights of stairs
(no elevators), water but no hot water. I don't know how many rooms in this
apartment but it didn't matter much, because, Dad said, they all spent their
time in the kitchen, which was the only room they could afford to heat.

Dad's mother, my grandmother Eta (she's Yetta in her naturalization papers)
didn't speak much English and I can only remember one conversation with her --
just a short while before she died in 1962 at age 89. It was a struggle for her
to speak my language but she managed to say two memorable sentences about her
early years in America. She said, with pride, "we was poor but we was clean,"
and (very relevant here) "we always had what to eat."  That sentence of hers
--"we always had what to eat"-- was said with almost exactly the same valence
as my father's "I don't think we could eat better food." For grandma, putting
food on the table for six individuals was achievement enough. It was a triumph.
Grandma didn't speak of her diet in the old country, but from her height (4'10")
and that of her husband Isaiah's (5'1"), I can guess that food was an issue and
that dearth was common. I also suspect that the sixth floor walk-up might have
been luxurious compared to the standard of living in StaryConstantin in Ukraine.

But to my father. He had no difficulty acknowledging the poverty of his early
years. I think, looking back, that he had some pleasure in knowing that he had
overcome the hardships of his youth. If he didn't have a jacket in the coldest
of winters, well, he had a sweater, and that was enough. I only remember one
complaint, and it wasn't about his family. During World War I, students in P.
S. 122 were lined up on the side of the room and were instructed to offer their
donations for the purchase of War Bonds. When they surrendered their dimes
or quarters, they were allowed to sit down.  But Dad was required to remain
standing because he didn't have even a nickel to donate. "Wasn't that a cruel
thing to do to a child," he said to me.

But poverty did not distort my father's personality. He was the precise opposite
of the stereotype of the upwardly mobile overachiever, grasping for more and
more.  He was actually rather contemptuous of such people. He said to me once,
"Anyone can make money if he makes it the whole business of his life to do
so." And I also remember an instance when I overheard a conversation among his
friends about how much their stocks had gained. After they left, my father
said, "When the stock market is going up, everyone's a genius." He himself
never had an extra dollar to invest in stocks. But enough is as good as a feast.

He was the person least interested in material goods that I have met in my
entire lifetime. He had no possessions and craved none. He was a real estate
lawyer in a world where clients squabbled over inches, but his opinion was
"Nobody owns anything. Maybe you can say you have a lifetime lease, but that's
all."

Here's another piece of wisdom that offered, and one from which I've profited. I
think I can quote this verbatim. "Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a
friend. And never be embarrassed to accept a favor from a friend. People like to
help each other."

Source: 2019/10/jot-and-tittle

Title: Jot and Tittle
Date: October 28, 2019

First of all, let us dismiss the notion that Charles Dickens invented a pair of
persnickety punctilious accountants and named them Jot and Tittle. Sorry, it
could or should have been the case, but it's not so. Nevertheless, both "jot"
and "tittle," often found in each other's cozy company, have stories to tell.

Take jot, for example. In the masterful "seduction scene" in Shakespeare's
Othello, Iago first torments the Venetian general and then pretends sympathy: "I
see this (i.e. his nasty sly hints that Desdemona has been a-bed with Cassio)
hath a little dashed your spirits." Othello responds defensively, perhaps a tad
dishonestly: "Not a jot, not a jot."

Professor Google tells me it's none of those things and that I am entirely off
track. "Jot" is alphabetic; it translates the Greek "iota," the smallest letter
-- no more than a single straight line, a minimal minim. And therefore Othello
might just as well have said (the words are cognates), "Not an iota, not an
iota." He might have said it, that is, if he hadn't spent his dearest action in
the tented field engaging exclusively in broils and battles, but instead had
studied at some North African classical academy.

In fact, Shakespeare either didn't know or didn't use the word "iota," which
seems not to have entered English until a generation after he ceased putting
quill to paper. On the other hand, Shakespeare was mighty fond of the word
jot, which he employed at least twenty times (though never so notably as in
Othello), always to denote a small quantity and frequently to appear as
a partitive: "jot of promise," "jot of ceremony," "jot of color," "jot of
pleasure," "jot of blood.'" Shakespeare's "jot" can even signify a moment in
time: "No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer." (His "jot" is always a noun,
never the converted verb meaning "to write a few words quickly.")

Shakespeare undoubtedly knew the word "jot" from its famous and mysterious
appearance in Matthew 5:18. Here's the familiar King James Version (1611): "For
verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." The phrasing is almost the
same in the Geneva Bible of 1576 -- the translation that Shakespeare himself
knew and used. "For truly I say unto you, Till heaven and earth perish, one jot
or one tittle of the Law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled."

I don't know what "all things" are and I certainly don't know what is meant by
"fulfilled." But why should I, since Jesus's prophesy has long baffled trained
professional theologians. But I do know that the pairing of "jot and tittle" has
become proverbial.

What, then, is a "tittle." No, it's not a very small female breast. Nor is it a
diminutive seabird, though it's not difficult to imagine a rocky south Atlantic
island frequented by the "Lesser, or Little Tittle." In actual fact, it's a
stroke of a pen -- and one that's even smaller than an iota. Specifically, it's
the dot over the lower case "i" or lower case "j." Or, in an extended sense, any
simple diacritical mark.

Shakespeare used "tittle" just twice. The first was in Love's Labor's Lost in
a passage in which Shakespeare makes game of affected language. Pompous Don
Armado de Adriano compares little things (the woman he woos) to greater things
(himself) "Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou exchange for rags?
robes; for tittles? titles; for thyself? me." What a difference a "t" makes!
"Tittle" makes its second, almost inadvertent, appearance in The Winter's
Tale as an element in the dismissive reduplicative "tittle-tattling." Both of
Shakespeare's tittles acknowledge that the word is an inherently silly one.
Is it accidental that a number of words that resemble tittle are frivolous or
infantile: babble, toddle, tattle, prattle?

"Tittle" smacks of triviality. It lacks heft. It would have been a literary
disaster, a catastrophe of the first order, if Othello had responded to Iago not
with "Not a jot, not a jot," but with "not a tittle, not a tittle."

[October 29]  Otis Brown responds: "Dr. M.: you've forgotten the most famous
Tittle of all: Yelberton Abraham. How could you?

[November 2]  Vivian de St. Vrain responds:

Source: 2019/10/more-about-my-father

Title: More About My Father
Date: October 28, 2019

My father had many admirable traits. He was absolutely honest -- "honest to a
fault" even. He had a fine sense of humor. He was compassionate and though he
affected stoicism, he was deeply romantic and emotional -- tears came easy to
him. He was a self-effacing but diligent worker. He was a fine, graceful athlete
-- basketball, tennis, baseball (a catcher!) His social views were progressive.
I never detected a jot or tittle of bigotry in his conversation (in fact, words
that denigrated racial or religious groups were unknown in our home. When I
heard words like "goy" on the street, I had to do some research to find out what
was meant.) He was a thoughtful man, a wise man, a realist and not an ideologue.
He was an affectionate father and husband. He never provoked a soul and had no
enemies. He enjoyed his life.

I profited immensely from observing these excellent traits in action.

But perhaps because of his impoverished first-generation beginnings, he
was never at ease in the world. Yes, he was comfortable at home and in his
backyard garden and among his circle of friends, many of whom he had known from
childhood. He was comfortable walking to the BMT at Newkirk Plaza, taking the
subway to Court Street in downtown Brooklyn, and practicing his profession,
where he was much respected. But he did not like to step out of his milieu.
He couldn't fend for himself. Here's an extreme but telling example: one day,
when I was ten or so years old, as we were walking home, probably from the
schoolyard, he stopped in front of the local A & P and said to me, "Your mother
wants a quart of milk; you go in and buy the milk. I'll wait outside." Which I
did, of course; I was used to running such errands. My father couldn't go into
a market without stress. He could buy a newspaper at a candy store or kiosk,
and he could bring home a loaf of rye bread from Ebinger's bakery, but I never
once saw him in a vegetable market or a fish store or a butcher shop. When my
mother died in 1978, he had to hire people to shop for him. And someone to cook,
because, as the saying goes, he couldn't boil water. Because of his discomfort
when out of his routine, he was a classic stick-in-the-mud. He couldn't travel.
He never learned to drive a car. In his relations with others, he was totally
passive. He allowed my mother to organize his social life and after she died,
he became completely isolated. He hated change. Once when I visited him late in
his life, when he was in serious arthritic pain, he complained about the station
to which his radio was tuned. It was one of those "twenty-four hours of news"
stations that repeated itself every few minutes. I said, "Why not change the
station?" He said, "Aw, it's already set there."

I tried very hard not to imitate these less-than-admirable habits.

Source: 2019/11/amnesia-on-film-hangover-square-1945

Title: Amnesia on Film: Hangover Square (1945)
Date: November 01, 2019

It's a play on Hanover Square in London, where, apparently, there were many
drinking establishments. It's also still another variety of amnesia. This time
the victim knows he's lost his memory, but his friends and relatives don't
notice.

George Harvey Bone, a composer played by the immense (300 lb) and immensely
talented Laird Cregar, experiences what he calls "moods" where he can't remember
what he did or where he did it. It being a film noir, what he does is kill
people. An elderly Scottish antique dealer for one, and Netta Longdon, a wicked
exploitative chantoosie  (Linda Darnell at her best), who's been playing Bone
for a sucker. But he doesn't remember, so it's not his responsibility, say some.
In the event, he carries Netta's newly-strangled body to the top of a Guy Fawkes
bonfire and then returns to his own house where, melodramatically seated at his
piano and playing his concerto while fire blazes around him, he's burned to
death. As far as I can tell, he never does discover that he's a murderer when
he's "in the mood." Nor must he be punished by the law; the fire does the job.
"It's better this way" says George Sanders, Bone's ineffectual psychologist.

Fascinating addendum: Linda Darnell, consumed by fire in this movie, died twenty
years later in a house fire in Glenview, Illinois. (Laird Cregar, 31, died of a
heart attack after Hangover Square was completed but before it was released.)

Is it a good film?  It's fascinating for sure and there are many good scary
scenes, but the plot is so compromised by the inexplicable designer amnesia that
it's hard to embrace, hard to recommend.

Source: 2019/11/vaulting-variable-ramps

Title: "Vaulting Variable Ramps"
Date: November 22, 2019

Let me guess that a modern reader coming upon Shakespeare's euphonious phrase
"vaulting variable ramps" would be baffled as to its sense. Just WS being
willfully obscure, one might complain. But it's not so; it's just that the
language keeps on changing, making things difficult for audiences and readers.

The most obvious meaning  of "vaulting various ramps" -- hurdling a
miscellaneous series of inclined planes, as in a steeplechase -- won't fly.
"Ramps" takes us down a wrong path, because its modern meaning (a wood or
concrete construction leading from one level to another) was unknown in 1611.
It didn't enter the English language until 1778 -- as a borrowing from French
rampe. (The entrance to a highway, as in "take the ramp on the right" is an
Americanism dating only to the 1950s.)

A "ramp" is also a vegetable. It's an uncultivated, wild member of the onion
family lately celebrated by fad foodies (or food faddies) as a great delicacy.
But why Shakespeare would want someone to hurdle an individual ramp or even a
field of ramps is less than obvious. Another false start.

Let us therefore examine the context of the phrase "vaulting variable ramps."

It occurs in Cymbeline, the most magical of Shakespeare's last plays. Nasty
Iachimo ("little Iago") tries to persuade Innogen that her virtuous husband
Postumus has been unfaithful -- that he has, in another splendid Shakespearean
phrase, "partner'd with tomboys." The situation excites Shakespeare's exuberant
pen. Iachimo embroiders "tomboys" and claims that Postumus has consorted
with "with diseased ventures/ That play with all infirmities for gold/ Which
rottenness can lend nature; such boil'd stuff/ As well might poison poison."
Should she, that is, Innogen (and here Iachimo's rhetoric soars)

Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets,

While he [Postumus] is vaulting variable ramps,

In your despite.

"Ramps," therefore, are the opposite of Diana's priestesses, who live chastely;
they are in fact loose women. Ramps who are neither architectural nor vegetable,
but sexual and promiscuous. At least, they are so in this instance, because
otherwise "ramp" carried a meaning closer to "virago" -- in 1611 an overbearing
woman but not necessarily an unchaste one. The word "ramp" in this signification
has disappeared but has bequeathed us "rapscallion" (which was earlier spelled
both "ramscallion" or "rampscallion.") There is no evidence to support the easy
inference that rapscallion combines "ramp" and "scallion."

"Vaulting variable ramps" means "to engage in a series of athletic sexual
encounters."

To vault into a lover's bed might seem to border on the comic but I don't think
that it does so in this case. Shakespeare elsewhere seems to imagine intercourse
as a vigorous event. A brothel is in his language a "leaping house." And surely
it's not comic when Juliet hopes that Romeo will "leap to [her] arms."

The conception behind "vault" and "leap" reappears in the contemporary demotic
phrase "jump his/her bones."

Ramps:

Source: 2019/11/wisdom-proverbs

Title: Wisdom II: Proverbs, Anvils, Hammers.
Date: November 23, 2019

In the back of our fourth-grade "reader" at P. S. 217, there was an appendix
containing proverbs and other jots of wisdom. Most of these were commonplaces:
"look before you leap"; "a stitch in time saves nine"; "empty barrels make the
most noise."  Many of these gnomic bits mystified me. For example:

For all your days prepare,

And meet them ever alike.

When you are the anvil, bear.

When you are the hammer, strike.

I had no idea what an anvil was (now I own a beauty!!) but I understood that it
was something to beat with a hammer. For what purpose? I had no clue?  But I
was a moderately progressive youth and I couldn't grasp why we anvils were being
urged to "bear." It seemed like a reactionary idea then and still seems so now.
Way too passive, I thought. Why shouldn't the anvils join together and form a
united front against the hammers, or whatever capitalist oligarch controlled the
hammers? Why did my grandparents come to America if not to free themselves from
the perpetual anvilhood of sorry Ukraine?

Moreover, I completely missed the mark on "strike," which I interpreted to mean
"go on strike." An easy mistake, because the only other meaning I knew of strike
was the "three strikes and you're out" of basebalI. Even naif me knew that
baseball had nothing to do with anvils and hammers or fourth-grade readers.

The poem was therefore incoherent. Endure and suffer when you're an anvil, but
get on the picket line when you're a hammer.

Why couldn't anvil and hammer unite and resist their oppressors together?

I should also confess that anvil and hammer fused and mingled in my youthful
brain with a Phillies shortstop of the period named Granville Hamner.

Source: 2019/11/another-trump-fantasy

Title: Putin Envy
Date: November 27, 2019

Close

And here's an image that appeared today on Trump's twitter account.  The obese
flabby inhabitant of the White House hits a new low, imagining himself as a
Putinesqe warrior.  This is madness, nothing more or less.

Source: 2019/12/prairiedogs

Title: Wisdom from Cynomys ludovicianus
Date: December 08, 2019

For twenty-two of a day's twenty-four hours, I'm a contented kind of guy. Not
self-satisfied by a long shot, but by and large reconciled to both my modest
achievements and to my inadequacies. Yet between 2AM and 4AM, in the dark
insomniac gloom, I'm a different person. I struggle with "what ifs," with
"should have's," with alternative life choices of every ilk, however trivial.
Although I am well aware that (in 80's pop psychology) one shouldn't "should" on
oneself, I "should" relentlessly. I become a classic second-guesser, a merciless
self-critic, a shrill Monday morning quarterback of my own life.

So because "dark is the dawn when day is nigh," with sleep or the coming of the
sun, I revert to my normal, equable self.

A parable: yesterday we went for a walk on one of our town's many lovely open-
space trails. This walk took us right through an extensive prairie dog village.
It was a sunny day and the little plague-bearing rodents were outside -- cute,
furry, squeaky, sitting or standing, each one asserting possession of his or her
own burrow.

I said to my companion, "If I were a prairie dog, I'd probably be saying, 'I
should have chosen a different spot for my burrow. If I had just dug it a yard
or two north, or fifty feet away next to that tree, or even over the hill, I
would have led a much more productive life. Who knows, I might have had a better
burrow. I might have eaten more forbs and fescue. I might have had more mates,
I might have achieved more. My kits would have been more advantaged. I could
have made better use of my brief time on earth. I could have been better prairie
dog.'"

Don't laugh, please! This is serious stuff.

I don't need to underline the lesson of this tale. It's plenty obvious.

But will its wisdom and perspective console me tonight?

Source: 2019/12/vagaries-of-memory

Title: Vagaries of Memory; Fear
Date: December 10, 2019

We watched the last ten minutes of an early 30s James Cagney crime film. I don't
know its title because we came in very late and didn't catch the name. The
concluding bit of the film was very good: a chase scene (rather tame by modern
standards) and then unrepentant Cagney in the hoosegow, facing a long stretch.
A gloomy prison cell. Cagney's girlfriend (a familiar face but not one I can
identify) comes for a visit. She promises, as is the custom in such films, to
wait patiently for him until he's released. An empty promise?  I don't know.
But Cagney perks up and delivers the film's last line: "If I had the wings of an
angel over these prison wall I would fly." Followed by a fade. The End.

I immediately said to my companion, "I know what he's quoting;  it's "The
Prisoner's Song" by Vernon Dalhart." I looked it up and I was correct: the lines
are right there in stanza 5.

Now if I had wings like an angelOver these prison walls I would flyAnd I'd fly
to the arms of my poor darlin'And there I'd be willin' to die.

"The Prisoner's Song" (1924) was a big hit;  in fact, according to Wik, the
first "country" song to sell a million copies. I imagine that Cagney's 1930s
audience would be expected to recognize the allusion. But ninety years have
passed and the lyric is pretty much forgotten today. Except, of course, by me.
An amazing recall. What a guy!

I have to tell you, I wallowed in self-congratulation. Preened. Demanded
extravagant praise. For twenty-four hours I was the cock of the memory dunghill.
But how quickly glory transits.

The next afternoon, I watched, with my 6-year-old grandson Luke, the re-play of
an NBA basketball game. Houston versus Toronto. I had seen the game a couple of
days before, so I knew it was a good one. But (and here comes the memory horror)
I couldn't remember who won. True that I remembered various plays and players,
but true also that I thought the game went into overtime and Toronto won. Not
so; James Harden, one of my least favorite players, "took over" the last couple
of minutes and Houston won decisively. I had simply forgotten. Blanked.

I was deflated, memory-wise. And scared. One day you can remember Vernon Dalhart
and the wings of the angel, and the next day you can't recall James Harden and
who won and who lost.

Here's the fear: it's obvious that the moments of memory-triumph are going to
be fewer and fewer and the moments of memory-failure are going to increase. And
continue to increase. Burgeon. Yikes. Double yikes.

This is Vernon Dalhart.

But who the heck is this?

By the way, has anyone  seen my keys?  I left them right there on the desk.
Didn't I?

Source: 2019/12/senior-decathlon

Title: Senior Pentathlon, or Octogenarian Olympics
Date: December 19, 2019

In the Senior Decathlon also known as the Octogenarian Olympics, there are five
events requiring different levels of agility and skill.  Events are scored both
on speed (as in track) and grace (as in gymnastics).

Source: 2019/12/me-and-critters

Title: Me and Critters
Date: December 19, 2019

An old friend reminds me that I once kept a cat as a pet. I had forgotten.

Here's the story. There was a cat and I was overfond of her. We left the cat
with a friend when we went on a three-week vacation. She refused to eat and
starved to death before we returned. I've never owned another animal since. Too
much responsibility.

Besides, I was a city boy who had lived a concrete and chain-link-fence
childhood. No room for animals except maybe squirrels and pigeons. But because
I've owned some rural land in Vermont since the 1960s, a surprising number of
critters have passed through my life, though I've never owned a single one of
them. Some have made an impression.

There was the pair of geese, Brady and Lady, who liked to peck at the backs of
my knees and also liked to frighten the children. I once watched my older son
(when he was a small boy) mount a chair and in revenge leak all over Brady, who
was sunbathing. A primitive assertion of dominance. There were chickens, many of
them. I enjoyed the eggs but I was repelled by chicken sexual mores. And then
the ducks. I remember once saying "Those ducks (there was mother and a dozen or
so ducklings) are so loud they could be right in the kitchen." And they were.
The heifers, July and September; I was very fond of September. I loved the way
she cleaned her nostrils with her long tongue. Jackson the runaway horse. A
nameless piglet, whom we boarded one summer, and whom the kids tried to teach to
play soccer with his nose. Despite being assiduously tutored, he never improved.
Rabbits, many of them; pets, not food. The next-door-neighbor's horses, all
noble Morgans, both chestnuts and bays, all pastured on our fields: Gillian,
the lead mare, Liz a wayward rule-bender; Gabe, an ex-boy, very friendly;
Harmony, beautiful as a foal, who liked to look in my pockets for apples.
Also in the back pasture: sheep, Scottish Blackfaces, many of them but no
more than twenty at a time, with none of whom I ever established a proper
one-on-one relationship. Occasionally I helped to track down a stray, but that's
the extent of it. Goats, my favorites, with personality to spare -- dwarf
Nigerians mostly. Excellent pets, excellent playmates for the grandchildren. The
glamorous mysterious rooster who came out of the woods, adopted us, and liked
to  tom-peep into our bedroom. And then these last few years, the miniature
donkeys, Big Joe and Little Joe, who winter in Connecticut and whom members of
the family love for their beauty and the music of their braying.

Source: 2019/01/the-precious-gift-of-atheism

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."