

================================================================================Source: 2011/01/rio-grande-1950-then-and-now

Title: "Rio Grande" (1950) Then and Now
Date: January 03, 2011

Last night, on the big HDTV, with the collaboration of Netflix, and peering
through our toes, we watched the John Ford cavalry movie "Rio Grande." I
first saw this film in the year of its release (I was eleven years old) at the
Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue.

In days of yore, it was the custom for the neighborhood urchins to take in a
double bill on a rainy Saturday afternoon.  It was a good way for our harried
mothers to dispose of us for four hours -- and on the cheap, inasmuch as the
price of admission was only fourteen cents.

"Rio Grande" was a perfect kind of urchin movie. Good guys (cavalry) versus bad
guys (Indians), lots of action, no overt sex. It offered much too much singing,
but the slow periods would have been enlivened by hoots, whistles, popcorn-
throwing, banging the head of the kid in the seat in front of you with the heel
of your hand, primitive pre-flirting, and chasing in the aisles.

In 1950, Maureen O'Hara (John Wayne's estranged wife), was puzzling if not
inexplicable  -- merely an impediment to the action. Sixty years later, she is
beautiful, dignified, even majestic. The poor Apaches, who for me and for my
heedless comrades were nothing other than targets for cavalry bullets, are now
unutterably tragic. John Wayne was then an immensely heroic figure, but with the
passing of years. he has become a rigid incompetent dope.

The West, in those days, was part Monument Valley, part myth;  now I live in a
West that has nothing to do with Coney Island Avenue, even less with John Ford.

Source: 2011/01/predictions

Title: Predictions for 2011
Date: January 09, 2011

I've been inspecting the entrails of slaughtered oxen and also observing the
flights of birds.  I've studied the movements of planets and tea leaves.  I
can now announce my predictions for the coming year.

1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and/or lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East;

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sexual
scandal (perhaps both);

10) the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq will not end.

You read it here first.  Not for nothing that I've acquired the reputation of
an inspired mystic, or shaman, or something.  Nostradamus redux.

Source: 2011/01/whores

Title: Whores
Date: January 13, 2011

This reminiscence will not mean much to anyone but my born-and-bred-in-Brooklyn
readers.

One of my smart schoolyard buddies, Jimmy Nolan, won a scholarship to Columbia.
He was a year or two older than I, and the first of our gang/crowd to venture
out of the neighborhood. The summer after his first college year, we were
sitting in front of the candy store, drinking egg creams and practicing our
spitting, when someone asked Jimmy "what's it like up there." "Up there" was the
far north, Morningside Heights, in Manhattan, where Columbia was located -- the
end of the earth, kind of. Jimmy said, "You might not believe this, but up there
they pronounce "hua," "hor."

I remember thinking, why would they do so?  Don't they know any better?

Source: 2011/01/amnesia-in-film-the-crooked-way-1949

Title: Amnesia in Film:  The Crooked Way (1949)
Date: January 16, 2011

Eddie Rice has served in World War II, won a silver star, but lost his memory
to a piece of shrapnel buried in this brain (the x-ray is flashed onto the
screen). It's an "organic" rather than "psychological" amnesia and therefore
incurable. Released from a hospital, Eddie returns home to L. A. to find that
he was once Eddie Riccardi and that he was a no-good, double-crossing hood,
hated by both police and former gang members and also distrusted by his ex-wife.
Eddie Rice is a Dr. Jekyll, but his pre-amnesia self was a Mr. Hyde. It's a
curious and unexplained transformation -- from evil to good. There is almost no
psychological continuity between his ante- and post-trauma personality. Eddie
the amnesiac is utterly untroubled to discover that he was once a monster. He
extricates himself from the mob, jettisons his past, and starts a new life. His
amnesia is a thing apart.

The direction (by Robert Florey) and the noir cinematography are splendid.
John Payne, a fine, underappreciated actor, (as Rice/Riccardi) cannot possibly
convey the psychological complexity that should have been, but wasn't, written
into the script.

Source: 2011/01/is-sarah-palin-jewish

Title: Is Sarah Palin Jewish?
Date: January 19, 2011

Certainly not either by inheritance or conversion or moral stance. Yet Sarah
Palin seems to imagine that she's Jewish -- in a peculiar, one-dimensional way.
It's not always easy to guess at what's going on in that soup of a brain, but is
it possible to determine what Sarah means when she claims to be a victim of a
"blood libel?"

The actual targets of the "blood libel," it is no secret, are not overpaid Foxy
commentators but ordinary Jews who, according to pious medieval preachers, Henry
Ford, Nazi propagandists, and contemporary Syrian statesmen, make it a practice
to drain innocent babes of their blood, which they then bake into matzos.

Here are the exact words in which Sarah invokes this hideous accusation:
"journalists and pundits should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only
to incite the very hatred and violence that they purport to condemn.” It's
a confusing sentence, hard to explicate. Can we be confident that Sarah is
learned enough to know that "blood libel" is a phrase with a long and agonizing
history?  Are the "hatred and violence," which she claims are visited upon
her, designed to recall the pogroms (and worse) that have been precipitated by
the "blood libel"?  If her sentence is to be taken seriously, Sarah believes
that she is the victim of an attack analogous to the worst kind of anti-Semitic
ravings. Just as Jews are accused of killing Christian children, so has Sarah
herself been unjustly accused of killing Representative Gabrielle Giffords. In
her scenario, in her analogy, she herself, Sarah Palin, is the Jew.

In her daily deeds, Sarah Palin does not seem to understand or embrace aspects
of Jewish tradition such as compassion, the centrality of community, a deep
reverence for education and learning, fierce and informed intellectuality,
and robust philanthropy. Pure and simple, she sees herself as a victim -- a
condition or state of mind, which, in my opinion, is not only incorrect but
dangerous to the polity and to her own self-regard.

In short, she's scammed herself.

Source: 2011/01/muff-and-spot-once-again

Title: Muff and Spot, Once Again
Date: January 25, 2011

Every little once in a while, a mountain lion creeps into the fold and snares
a lamb, a calf, or a German shepherd. At even more infrequent intervals, a
mountain lion attacks a human being (usually a child).  Whenever there's a
human-lion interaction, there comes a deluge of letters to the local newspaper
demanding that the authorities exercise “lethal control" over the big cats.
Killing catamounts is neither hard nor dangerous. They were hunted nearly to
extinction in the nineteenth century. Dogs chase the animal up a tree. The brave
hunter takes aim and fires.

But Is it a good idea to extirpate the mountain lion? In the United States,
there’s an average of one death by mountain lion a year. Here in our county,
there’s been one such death in the last hundred years. One is a very low
number, especially when, in the country as a whole, snakes cause a dozen deaths
each year, lightning claims seventy-five, bee and wasp stings a hundred. Dogs,
when they’re not out hunting mountain lions, account for between twelve to
twenty deaths a year – a couple of hundred a decade-- many of these, it's sad
to say, infants in the crib. Given the numbers, It’s hard to believe that
calls for the extermination of mountain lions aren’t motivated less by facts
than by fear.

Domesticated dogs are responsible not only for a dozen to a score of deaths,
but also for an estimated 4 to 7 million (that’s right, million!) cases of
dog-bite a year, almost 800,000 of which require medical attention. Dog bites
cause 368,000 emergency room visits, or (do the math!) one thousand such visits
a day.  The social cost of dog bites is estimated variously, but the Center for
Disease Control in Atlanta claims that the direct medical costs of dog bites per
year is $165 million, with many more millions in ancillary expenses.

Mountain lions, which are relatively harmless, inspire terror, but dogs, which
are far more dangerous, are our sacred cows -- loved, in my opinion, beyond
all propriety. It’s hard not to cringe when otherwise sensible people –
good decent people --tell me in all seriousness that Towser is a full member
of their family, or that Fido is about to undergo surgery to replace a hip --
an operation the cost of which is more than the annual medical budget of whole
villages in Africa or Asia. The run-of the-mill doggie in America enjoys a
better diet and better medical care than half of the human beings on the planet
-- a thoroughly indefensible skewing of resources. Dogs are not human beings,
and it’s immoral sentimentality to treat them as such. It’s embarrassing.

The ancients, following Aristotle, divided their possessions into three
categories: an object was an instrumentum mutum, an animal was an instrumentum
semivocale, and a slave was an instrumentum vocale.  By eliding the differences
between humans and animals, the Greeks and the Romans made slavery both easy and
natural. Aristotle's notion underlay serfdom.

I used to worry that people who treated animals as humans would be tempted to
treat humans as animals. But it's not so; the people I know who are sentimental
about animals and "animal rights" are extraordinarily sensitive to human rights
-- but then, perhaps my sample is skewed. All of my friends are sensitive to
human rights; if they weren’t, they wouldn’t be my friends.

I wonder whether the love of dangerous dogs and the fear of the cats who are
by and large indifferent to us isn’t an instinct acquired slowly over the
last half million years. Our ancestors, armed, at best, with flint-headed
spears, spent countless millennia at the mercy of feline predators larger, more
powerful and more terrifying than 100-pound mountain lions (the extinct European
lion, panthera leo fossilis, was taller, stronger, and and a foot and a half
longer than the modern African lion). It was only some 50,000 years ago that
an ancient Einstein conceived the idea of domesticating wolves and selecting
their population for useful traits. Humans and proto-dogs started to cohabit;
dwellings and caves came to be littered with coprolites. Co-evolution began, and
over the course of time, dogs and humans came to be sensitive to each other's
traits. Those early dogs were our first allies on this lonely, hostile planet.
They could raise a ruckus when a couple or three lionesses prowled about the
entrance to the cave.

We're indebted to dogs and so we tolerate their bad habits.  By the same token,
we have inherited from our ancestors a primordial fear. Hence the over-hasty cry
to exterminate the mountain lion.

Source: 2011/01/puccini

Title: Puccini, Marion Morrison, John Wayne
Date: January 28, 2011

Yesterday we watched and heard Puccini's La Fanciulla del West imported
digitally from the big apple's Metropolitan Opera. It was shown on the enormous
screen at our local Century Theater. I was overwhelmed. I usually watch opera
from the nosebleed seats, which are expensive enough. With the new technology,
and with the telescopic close-ups, I could look right up Deborah Voight's
nostrils and into her mouth. I swear I saw her well-trained uvula vibrating.

The Girl of the Golden West is a fascinating cultural stew.  t's set in the
gold-rush California of the dime novels. The play on which it's based was
written by David Belasco, a London-born Sephardic Jew. The "West" is not real
but mythological -- replete with gunslingers, a big-time bar room brawl, poker
cheats, a cringe-making Indian squaw and papoose, a tough, mustachioed sheriff
and a Calamity Jane-style heroine. Yet it's sung (sung!) in Italian. "Dick
Johnson," the romantic lead, was performed by Marcello Giordani, a chubby
tenor from  Augusta, Sicily.  Interviewed during one of the far-too-long
intermissions, Giordani was asked if he had any trouble playing a last-century
horseback westerner. "Not at all.  I grew up watching John Wayne movies." I
admit to giggling at his answer, even though giggling is always inappropriate
in Grand Opera. Giordani also claimed that he tried to walk like Wayne.  He
didn't  -- he sashayed.

John Wayne himself didn't walk the John Wayne walk until Raoul Walsh and John
Ford transformed him from Marion Morrison, a furniture mover from Winterset,
Iowa, into a mythological figure.

Nothing in La Fanciulla del West actually touches ground. Or touches any ground
that I recognize.

Except that there are people who don't know it's a myth. Witness the recent
events in Tombstone -- I mean Tucson -- Arizona. At this very moment, the Utah
legislature is about to select its state weapon. The 1911 Browning pistol seems
to be the gun of choice. In neighboring Arizona, it would probably be the Glock
9mm 30-round semi-automatic.

Source: 2011/01/amnesia-in-films-the-bourne-identity

Title: Amnesia in Films: The Bourne Identity
Date: January 30, 2011

Jason Bourne has contracted the worst case of amnesia in movie history and it's
going to last for at least four long films (three of them already released).
Bourne's type of amnesia is very convenient for plotting because he doesn't
know who he is but yet retains an astonishing range of martial and intellectual
skills. He's a born-again innocent (a murderer with a newly minted heart of
gold) who is shocked to discover that before he lost the marbles of memory, he
was a professional murderer. He's rather charming in an idiot-savant-assassin
way, but I suspect that his particular variety of amnesia is not very well known
to non-Hollywood neurologists.

It's a curious idea -- that an individual can be cleansed of his previous sins
by losing his memory. And yet The Bourne Identity doesn't make much of this
interesting moral question. "Who am I" is not investigated in the vocabulary of
tragedy, as in Lear's "Who is it who can tell me who I am" but as in "what's my
name, what's my address, what's my phone number." Pertinent questions, surely,
but not profound ones.

On the other hand, King Lear never climbed down the outside of a building,
handholds in the cracks between blocks of marble, nor, as far as I can remember,
did he plummet his Fiat down a series of flights of stone stairs while being
chased by a posse of sirening motorcyclists .

Source: 2011/02/more-noir-otto-premingers-laura-1944

Title: More Noir: Otto Preminger's Laura (1944)
Date: February 01, 2011

Laura is a stylish noir mystery that maintains its fascination even after the
passage of sixty years. It is cleverly written and handsomely cinematographed
but it also comes with some murky psychological baggage. At the heart of the
enigma lies Waldo Lydecker (played by Clifton Webb). He's so head-over-heels in
love and so ferociously jealous of Laura (the ingenue Gene Tierney) that he'll
resort to anything, even murder, to keep her from other men. The premise is good
whodunit fare, but it would make more obvious sense if Lydecker weren't both old
and gay.

Clifton Webb was fifty-five when the picture was made, but he looks and acts
ten or fifteen years older. He may be a bachelor, but he's not an eligible one.
There's a story that Webb had a clause in his contract with Twentieth-Century
Fox that barred the company from alluding to his homosexuality, but the
prohibition, if it existed, didn't stop him from playing Lydecker with a
pronounced gay affect. He's fussy, he's bitchy, he's a queen -- in short a
stage homosexual in every aspect except that he's not obviously interested in
men. Well, not overtly;  but it is a surprise that he exposes himself to the
detective Mark McPherson [Dana Andrews] when he steps out of a bathtub and asks
McPherson to throw him a robe.)

A clue to Lydecker's character occurs in the film's first scene. He spies on
Detective McPherson, who's wandering around Lydecker's apartment, browsing an
extensive collection of fragile objets d'art. McPherson goes to pick up a piece
of glass and Lydecker calls out "Careful, that's very valuable" (I'm quoting
from memory). From this incident we learn two things:  that Lydecker is a
collector of beautiful works of art, and that he's willing to let people look
but not touch. These same two traits control Lydecker's relations to Laura: he
cherishes her beauty and molds her in a Pygmalion-like way, but he's hyper-
protective. For him, she becomes an untouchable work of art (the portrait of
Laura, on which the camera focuses so obsessively, is the metaphorical signifier
of her place in his mental world).  His cool sexuality (he's perfectly content
with twice-a-week dinners) and his age (he's more interested in fathering Laura
than in making love to her) are less powerful than his pygmalionism.

By transforming Laura into a work of art, Lydecker attempts to preserve her
virginity. He therefore shoos away her potential lovers. He destroys the career
of Jacoby, the painter, by writing a vitriolic attack on him; he collects
revealing information about the southern gigolo Carpenter (Vincent Price). He
competes with McPherson.  t's a neat turn that to do so he becomes a detective
himself -- loitering in the snow outside Laura's apartment, eavesdropping behind
a post in a night club, etc.  Eventually he comes to understand that he can't
preserve Laura's "purity"; it's then that the film turns to violence. After all
is lost, he gives away the game when he says to McPherson, with visceral horror,
"I suppose you'll have a disgustingly earthy relationship" [i.e. with Laura].

It's fascinating that McPherson, though he has all the outward marks of the
macho gumshoe, is himself tepid about sexuality. He lacks charisma, emotion,
lust. The film allows him and Laura only one slight awkward peck of a kiss. The
detective is not a creature of passion, but he may be, like Lydecker, a lover of
art;  it's revealed, climactically, that Laura's portrait will be auctioned and
that McPherson has put in a bid on it.

Source: 2011/02/life-with-charles-dickens

Title: Life with Dickens
Date: February 03, 2011

Charles Dickens and I are intimate friends and have been so since 1952,
when, delighted and astonished, I zoomed through David Copperfield -- the
first of ten or a dozen readings. At this very moment, I'm renewing our
long asymmetrical friendship by re-reading the fifteen novels (fourteen and
a half, actually, inasmuch as Dickens collapsed while Drood was still in
process). It's my third pilgrimage through the collected works; first in
the summer of 1969, again sometime in the early 1980s, and now once again
(no doubt the last). I know a couple of the novels almost word for word --
Great Expectations, for example, -- but others, such as Barnaby Rudge  --
gosh, I don't think that I could say any more about it than that it's a
historical novel and that it contains both riots and a conspicuous cherry
ribbon. I don't know any more about Barnaby Rudge than your average man on
the street. Despite these blank spots, my relationship with Dickens has been
enduring and satisfying. Troubled, some of the time, but always rich and
complex.

He's the best of novelists; he's the worst of novelists. Dickens' formula is
"make 'em laugh, make' em cry, make 'em wait." Waiting must have come easier in
previous centuries. It's a good thing that I'm a patient person, because these
800-pagers can wear a reader down. There are times in almost every one of the
novels in which I would be happier if there was a trifle less waiting. On the
other hand, laughing and crying have remained a splendid part of the Dickens
experience. No matter how much I steel myself against the obvious tearjerker
death or disaster looming at chapter's end, I still fall into the Dickens trap
and besprinkle my Penguin with hot tears -- not as plentiful, I think, as those
that I let fall when poor David's mother died in 1952, but no less genuine. And
when Aunt Betsey threatens to tread on Miss Murdstone's bonnet or when Trabb's
boy lashes himself with his empty blue bag -- well, even after all these years,
I can't help but break into loud laughter. When he goes after Chadband and
Creakle and Podsnap, he's unequalled. No one can equal Dickens for comedy.

I am convinced that the finest moment in all of nineteenth-century literature
occurs just in Bleak House, just after the death of poor Jo the crossing
sweeper, when Dickens stops the novel right in its tracks and directs the full 
force of his indignation at his own indifferent country: "Dead, your Majesty.
Dead, my lords and gentlemen. Dead, Right Reverends and Wrong Reverends of every
order. Dead, men and women, born with Heavenly compassion in your hearts. And
dying thus around us every day."  There has never been another writer who had
the magnificent effrontery, the bravura daring, to so attack his readers, high
and low. Dickens is a force of nature, not to be judged by ordinary canons of
literary excellence.

But Dickens can also be awful -- sentimental, gooey, repetitive,
obsessive. Sometimes the satire is ill-aimed. Why is it so ridiculous to
be concerned with the victims of imperialism?  Perhaps the denizens of
Borrioboola- Gha, on the left bank of the NIger, need all the help they can
get. Why should Mr. Guppy or young John Chivery to be so pilloried, just
because they dare to love above their stations?  Why does Dickens have so
much trouble with ambitious or wronged women?  Don't Miss Dartle and Miss
Wade have a right to be angry? And what about Dickens' Jewish problem? His
bigotry disfigures the page and makes the philosemitic Mr. Riah even more
offensive than horrid old Fagin. And then there are all those monsters of
goodness: the weak-tea Brownlows and Clennams. Dickens is sometimes faulted
for his caricatures, but his grotesques are a thousand times more realistic and
more interesting than his faultless, blameless, bowel-less goody-goodies. And
there are moments of high stupidity, such as Mr. Krook's death by spontaneous
combustion. Goodness gracious -- the greatest of hearts supported by the most
ordinary of brains.

Up next in my final passage through the novels, already two-thirds of the way to
the finish line: Dombey and Son,  where I'm going to cry at Paul's death, be
offended by perfect Walter Gay, giggle at Mr. Toots, marvel at Edith Grainger,
and spend far too much time transfixed by Carker's teeth.

Source: 2011/02/footlocker

Title: Ducks/ Bad Corporate Names
Date: February 23, 2011

It is possible that in the entire history of capitalism in America, the
silliest name that has ever been devised for a business is "Lady Footlocker."
I understand the reasoning behind the name: "Footlocker" was a successful
athletic goods store for men and the geniuses in charge wanted to hive off a
parallel enterprise for women. How to do so? Well, right here, in our state,
as all basketball enthusiasts know, we have the Colorado Buffs and the Lady
Buffs; why not, by analogy, Lady Footlocker -- except for the intractable fact
that footlockers don't exhibit gender. A female footlocker? Goodness gracious.
Not that the name "Lady Buffs" is at all is satisfactory -- although inasmuch
as a female buffalo is properly a cow -- well, things could be worse. Which
inevitably calls up the question of what to call the distaff version of Oregon's
famous Ducks. Lady Ducks? The obstacle here is that "duck" is already female
("drake" the male "duck"), so Lady Ducks would be excessively hyperfeminine.
The finest solution to this onomastic puzzle would be to change the men's team
to Drakes -- and then the female version would be immediately obvious. But what
about the related question: what to do for a mascot for Drake University of Des
Moines, Iowa. My choice would be Drake Monks, but I would accept Drake Drakes.
No such luck; in defiance of all mascot logic, they're the Drake Bulldogs --
and I'm going to guess that the women's team is called the Lady Bulldogs, but
I don't know for sure. It's a horrid moniker, but still orders of magnitude
superior to Lady Footlocker.

But is Lady Footlocker the worst corporate name, as I've asserted? I can offer
two other nominees. The first is Unisys (formerly Sperry-Rand); "siss" is
a syllable that should never be found in any corporation's name (except in
conjunction with -tem) especially if it expects to be taken seriously. My
other nominee:  a cleaning product that I use, which is called "Mr. Leather."
Entirely too S & M for my taste.

The question of worst corporate name is the kind of  topic for which the
internet is designed. If you google "worse corporate names," you find several
lists. Here follow some of my favorites: Casket Basement; Chainsaw Cottage;
Hung Fat Lingerie; Stiff Nipples Air Conditioning (you think that  I'm making
this up; check here; Blood's Seafood and Caterer; B. S. Liquidators;  Dodo
Mortuary; Cramps Liquors; Beaver Cleaners; Lynch Tree; PMS Firearms; Master Bait
and Tackle; Knobs and Knockers. There are dozens more, but none, I think, quite
so quintessentially absurd as Lady Footlocker.

Source: 2011/02/duck

Title: On the Telephone with Ella (8) and Lola (17 months)
Date: February 24, 2011

Ella:  "Say 'duck.'"

Lola:  "Duck"

Ella:  "Say 'ball.'"

Lola:  "Ball."

Ella:  "Say 'hair.'  (Pause.) No, no. Don't touch your hair. Say "hair."

Source: 2011/02/baseball-facts

Title: Baseball Facts
Date: February 24, 2011

In 1968, the average AL batter hit .230 and Carl Yastrzemski won the batting
championship, hitting .301; in 1930, the average NL batter hit .303. In 1904,
87.6% of starting pitchers completed their games; in 2004, of 4854 starts, only
150 were completed (3.1%). In 1997, the Texas Ranger franchise was purchased
for $252 million; The Ballpark in Arlington was built for $191 million;  in
2000, Alex Rodriguez signed a ten-year contract with the same Texas Rangers
for $252 million. In 2004, the New York Yankees sold 3.78 million seats at an
average ticket price of $27.34;  in the same year, the Montreal Expos sold
750,000 seats at an average price of $10.82. In 1976, the average salary for
a major league baseball player was $51,501; it's now $2,632,655. In the new
Comiskey Park, built in 1991, the first row in the new upper deck is farther
from the field than the last row in the old park. In 1932, the Giants' shortstop
"Doc" Marshall was nicknamed the "ancient mariner," because "he stoppeth one of
three." In 2004, the Colorado Rockies hit .305 at home; they hit just .258 on
the road. In 1904, Jack Chesbro introduced the "spit ball."  He won 41 games, a
record that has never been surpassed.

Source: 2011/02/biophilosophy

Title: An Old Lesson Learned Once Again
Date: February 24, 2011

A good friend, a distinguished biologist, asked me to read his cancer
manuscript.

When I read science books (popularizations, for the most part), I usually do
so with only half a brain. I'm lazy; I skip the hard parts. But because I was
being asked for a serious opinion, I read this book closely. In all honesty, 
It hurt my head. The hardest chapters were those on the workings of the cell. I
last studied cells in high school biology class with Miss Goetschius.  It was
1957, before there was anything known about DNA.  We copied elementary pictures
of cells from the textbook. "You don't know how to stipple," Miss Goetschius
complained. There's a thousand times more known about cells than back then in
the dark ages, and I haven't gotten any smarter.

Cells are spectacularly complicated  -- no wonder it took billions of years for
them to evolve. Once the single cell had achieved a level of efficiency, the
rest of evolution -- even including us -- was piece of cake.

Reading about the lives of cells and about cancer (which is what happens when
cells go wrong) confirmed and strengthened my ideas about life and death. 
Life,our life, is almost entirely an accident. It's an accident that cells
incorporated pieces of bacteria to form mitochondria; it's an accident that they
agglutinated in the way that they did to form multicellular creatures; it's an
accident that we're here. But more than that: the success and the deterioriation
of the cells that make us are part of the same process. The end of life is
implicit in its inception. Cancer is exactly as natural as breathing.

It's trivial;  t's what everyone knows, it's what we've always known. It's a
cliche: "death is a natural part of life." And yet it's strangely comforting.
Whatever comes next -- cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's -- is perfectly
natural. Of course it will lead to death. But it's also life.

Source: 2011/02/conversation-with-our-congressman

Title: Conversation With Our Congressman
Date: February 26, 2011

I went to a forum, sponsored by local Dems, with our congressman. Fifty or
sixty of my friends and neighbors were in attendance. Our congressman is a
good person -- smart, informed, energetic, and progressive. He described the
situation in the House of Representatives -- the difficulty of serving in the
minority, especially when so many members of the majority side aren't serious
about governing. The audience was sympathetic but there was an undercurrent of
impatience. Why can't the Dems make it clear that cutting taxes and cutting the
deficit are incompatible goals?  Why do the Dems always lose the messaging
wars? Our congressman's answers were not always satisfactory to his liberal
constituents.

I understand his plight;  i's easy to stand outside and criticize. But I also
felt that he didn't appreciate how damn dangerous these right-wing Republicans
and tea-partiers have become. The gap between rich and poor is becoming larger
and less ameliorable. We could lose our democracy to the corporations.

Afterwards, I asked him, semi-privately, if the new Republican congressman can
be educated. Will they ever come to realize that governing is a hard job that
can't be done with slogans and a simplistic ideology.  He didn't think much of
my question and didn't answer it.

I was filled with foreboding when I left for the forum. I returned home even
more pessimistic about the future.

Source: 2011/02/conversation-with-our-state-representative

Title: Conversation with our State Representative
Date: February 28, 2011

Dr. M:  "Do you think that these tea party Republicans can be educated?"

State Rep:  "I'm not hopeful. They don't know much about governing. They don't
want to know anything.  They're very disciplined -- they vote exactly the way
they're told to vote. And they're not very intelligent."

Source: 2011/03/random-harvest-amnesia

Title: Amnesia in Films:  Random Harvest (1942)
Date: March 04, 2011

In Mervyn LeRoy's Random Harvest (1942), amnesia is not merely a plot gimmick.
The amnesia of Charles Rainier, a shell-shocked World War I veteran, is the
principal subject of the film. Rainier (Ronald Colman) begins in Condition A
(amnesiac but solid citizen and loving husband) but is hit by a cab in Liverpool
and transitions to Condition B (aristocratic, efficient, but passionless, and
with no knowledge of the three years between the war and the cab). Will he
remember the lost years and reintegrate the two parts of his hstory?  Well,
yes, he does, but only with the decades-long assistance of his patient-Griselda
wife Paula/Margaret (excellently played by the ageless Greer Garson).

It's kind of a soap-opera-y film and I'm embarrassed to confess that it moved
me. The last scene, in which Rainier finally remembers that he had long ago
loved and married Margaret under her real name Paula, is a curious kind of
anagnorisis. Although they've known each other for decades, true recognition
comes suddenly and joyfully. And I bought it, much against my will. Dropped a
reluctant tear.

Because of the amnesia, Charles has two different lives, but he doesn't, as
in other films, have two different personalities. He's kindly, steadfast, and
rather boring in both states. The film offers little in the way of a theory
of amnesia. "As one door opens, another closes" says a friendly but passive
psychiatrist, whose expertise is validated only by his middle-European accent.

In most films, diseases resemble their manifestations in real life. Amnesia,
on the other hand, can be anything the screenwriter says it it is. It's a
mighty elastic phenomenon, unmoored to medical experience or knowledge. However
imagined, the total amnesia of characters in films is a great plot device.
The audience is always in the know and therefore feels superior to the poor
character/actor who stumbles toward an understanding of his own self. It's hard
to believe that Shakespeare was able to write forty plays without ever resorting
to amnesia.

At a social event a few days ago I met a psychologist who works at the AFB in
Colorado Springs with veterans of Afghanistan and Iraq. I asked her if she
had ever encountered a case of amnesia. She said that many injured personnel
can't remember the moments just before they were wounded, but that she'd never
enountered a case of movie-style amnesia. Or heard of one. And, she added, trust
me, I've dealt with many kinds of mental disturbances.

Source: 2011/02/something-going-on

Title: How Long Has This Been Going On?
Date: March 06, 2011

I have a favorite moment in Diner (1982), the first of Barry Levinson's quartet
of Baltimore movies, and it's not the scene in which I made my silver-screen
debut. It's when two of the working-class guys who hang out at the Fells Point
hamburger joint find themselves taking a drive in the Maryland countryside. They
happen upon a rich, well-tended young blonde woman riding an elegant horse (in
her own spacious meadow). They stop the car try to chat her up but she's clearly
out of their league. When she gallops off, one of the guys says to the other:
"Do you ever get the feeling that there's something going on that we don't know
about?"

I was thinking about that scene when I read that Moammar Ghaddafi's son Seif
threw himself a birthday party at some spectacular resort in the West Indies and
paid the pop singer Mariah Carey $1,000,000 smackerootis to sing four songs. You
read it right -- one millions bucks. The article didin't say whether she had to
pay for her own motel and continental breakfast and transportation but I'm going
to guess that expenses were extra.

I tried to calculate whether I had earned $1M in my working life. I can't
remember and I don't have the records, but I know that I started at $3600 and 
by 1966 I was already pulling down $7800. I think that in my first decade of
employment I earned well under $100,000. Yeah, I know, them was different
dollars -- but still.

A working guy who makes $40,000 would take 25 years to earn what Mariah Carey
took home for twenty minutes of effort.

But it's not what she earned so much as what he paid. The Ghaddafi clan of
brutes, lunatics, oil-bloated twits, and kleptocrats has been looting the
Libyans for forty years. No wonder that the family is willing to commit mass
murder to hold on to their hoard. (In his defence, Seif claimed that it wasn't
him; it was his brother Muatassim.) Here's a question: how many years does it
take your run-of-the-mill Libyan to earn $1M?

I think that the average Libyan would understand the point of view of the diner
guys. There's something going on out there, and it ain't all good.

Source: 2011/03/funny-thing

Title: A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Arena
Date: March 07, 2011

Thank you, thank you. (Applause)  You're a terrific audience. (Applause). 
Hey, did you see what's going on in basketball.  A Brigham Young player
was thrown off the team for having pre-marital sex. (Audience groans).  No
kidding.  Doesn't look good for BYU.  They got rid of the only kid on the team
who could score.  (Laughter)  Wouldn't it be great if Duke played BYU in the
NCAA finals?  The Blue Devils versus the Blue Balls.  (Laughter) Thank you,
thank you.  Actually, the team isn't named the Blue Balls.  They're called
the "Cougars."  Who would name a team "cougars?" Unless out there in Provo,
Utah, they think that "cougars" means "mountain lions?"  (Knowing laughter) 
Did you know that the official airline of Brigham Young is Virgin Atlantic? 
(Hoots) And that Brigham Young players don't have numbers on their Jerseys; 
they use letters.  The team color is scarlet.  (Audience groans). Hey, just
checking -- did Wilt Chamberlain go to BYU?  (Audience is mystified)   How did
the coach find out about the sex?  I don't know but there's a rumor that the
girlfriend, a BYU volleyball player, is pregnant.  No one knows whether she is
or not,  because they can't see under her burqa. (Confusion, jeers, embarrassed
tittering)  OK, we have a great show lined up. We'll be right back. (Hysterical
laughter and applause)

Source: 2011/03/sticker-shock

Title: Sticker Shock
Date: March 14, 2011

In the old days, when I'd whip up a big batch of spaghetti sauce, I'd add a
pound or so of ground beef and a generous portion of hot Italian sausage. But
that was B. C. (before cholesterol). Nowadays, it's all vegetarian. Not nearly
as tasty, but acceptable -- and appropriate, in its blandness, to these latter
days.  To enrich the meatless mixture, I add a couple of cuisinarted carrots
and a grated zucchini or two.

At our local food market, a 6" zucchini costs $1.00. An entire buck. I'm not
usually one to complain about the price of things. It's not helpful or cheerful
to do so.  I pay the freight and and I'm glad to be able to do so.  I don't
grieve about the cost of cars or insurance or potatoes. Nevertheless, I'm
appalled when I plunk down that dollar for a short, skinny zucchini.

The zucchini is an abundant fruit.  Production is measured in cornucopias. In
August and September, at harvest time, it's impossible to keep up with them. 
Just two small hills and there are so many zucchinis that we can't possibly eat
them, can't give them away, and have to get out the backhoe and dig a trench to
dispose of them. (In our part of Vermont, there's a local saying that in late
summer you must keep the door of your car locked or someone will open it up and
throw in a zucchini.)  And then there's always the hidden zuke that, hiding
under an enormous leaf, has grown to the size of a three-year-old child, only
heavier.

I know that it shouldn't be so, but that dollar for a measly little zucchini
irks me.

Source: 2011/03/dickens-joke

Title: An Amusing Joke by Charles Dickens for Knowledgeable Insiders Who Are Aware of the Amazing Proliferation of Names for Horse-drawn Vehicles
Date: March 15, 2011

"'I know what's to be the end of it, as far as I am concerned' replies Mrs.
Pipchin, 'and that's enough for me.  I'm going to take myself off in a jiffy."

'In a which, Mrs Pipchin,' says Mrs. Chick.

'In a jiffy,' retorts Mrs. Pipchin, sharply."

More on Charles Dickens and vehicle amusement here.  More on life with
Dickens here.

Source: 2011/03/egyptian-religion

Title: Phallophagia
Date: March 16, 2011

I was informed that the granddaughter had become interested in Egyptian
mythology, so I decided to buy her a book on the topic. It's hard to know what
to put in the hands of a young lady whose reading level is astonishing but who
is just eight years old. I visited the "young adult" quarters at our local
library and withdrew four books on the subject. Which one to buy?

The first book that I looked at was clearly inappropriate. It read as though it
had been condensed out of the 11th edition of the Encyclopedia Brittanica. Hard
words, unelucidated, and a patronizing, paleocolonialist point of view. The next
book was too simple -- all pictures and treacle. The third book, a retelling of
the story of Isis and Osiris, was moving along nicely until Seth tore the body
of Osiris into fourteen pieces and scattered them all over the landscape. "When
Isis heard this, she paddled over the swamps in a little boat looking for the
fragments of Osiris to put them back together again and make them whole. After
much searching she found all the parts of Osiris except his phallus which had
been swallowed by a fish." Can this story be recommended for eight-year-olds.
Would it be appropriate for Sesame Street or Mr. Rogers?

Call me squeamish if you must. Diagnose me with an advanced case of castration
anxiety. Stigmatize me as indifferent to the profound Jungian significance of
this gruesome story. Say what you will -- I do not want to explain phallophagia
to the young lady. Frankly, I don't even want to explain "phallus."

Book number four seemed to be acceptable and I have purchased a copy of it.
I hope I made a good decision. Book number four is about Egyptian religion,
not Egyptian mythology ("mythology" is an unquestionably loaded and derogatory
word).

The book might be a little hard for the granddaughter and it might be a little
too detailed. I'm hoping that she skims or skips the section of the book that
describes Egyptian embalming techniques. "Inner organs were usually dried after
removal and placed in special containers called canopic jars. The embalmer's
tools included a spirally curved copper hook for breaking the ethmoid bone in
the back of the nose to remove the brain, which was then discarded."

Eeew, as they say nowadays.

Perhaps I am just a tad squeamish.

Source: 2011/03/what-my-father-ate

Title: What My Father Ate
Date: March 24, 2011

Sardines, by the tinful. Herrings, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed
never to eat tongue again, and I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken liver.
Steak, when we could afford it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen
meats -- salami, baloney, corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of
Heinz. Apples, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially
white chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, covered with gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. No alcohol, nary a drop. On hot days,
no beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee. Cheese, either Velveeta or
swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb cake direct  from Ebinger's
Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat.
Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning, bagels and rolls, warm from the oven,
eaten while reading the Times (25 cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream,
the more exotic the flavor the better.

Source: 2011/03/haircuts-a-lifetime-of-sweating-in-the-chair

Title: Haircuts: A Lifetime of Sweating in the Chair
Date: March 25, 2011

When I was a child, haircuts were perpetrated at Joe's Barber Shop on Coney
Island Avenue. It was a pleasant place: there were wall-to-wall mirrors on
either side of Joe Montuori's shop, and a boy sitting in the chair could lose
himself in the series of infinitely-regressing images. Joe always had a friend
or two in the shop with whom he spoke incomprehensible rapid-fire Italian. The
haircutting itself was an ordeal. Joe charged 75 cents a head, but my mother had
driven a bargain: three haircuts (myself and my two brothers) for $1.80. Joe
revenged himself on me by a) working the electric buzzer as rapidly as possible,
and b) frequently re-arranging the angle of my head with a blow from the heel
of his hand. Back home, my mother would sigh and say, "Turn around. Let's see
what he did to you this time."

I'm not big on personal adornment, and, perhaps because of my early hair-
chopping experiences, I've never been comfortable in the barber's seat. As soon
as the cloth is fastened around my neck I feel hogtied and hopeless. "What
are they going to do to me today?" Once, on the west side of Manhattan,
in the late 1960s, when my hair was rather long (it seems absurd that you
could signal your opposition to the war in Vietnam by letting your hair
grow, but such was the case), I walked into a shop and asked the barber to
"leave it long." He immediately transformed me into a rabid supporter of
carpet-bombing. Also in New York: when I naively wandered into a shop with a
specialized clientele, a hair technician employing a razor and a variety of
gels and lotions turned me into someone whose hair was giving off signals with
which the rest of his body was not in accord. In Hanover, New Hampshire, in
an upstairs 'salon,' the barber suddenly stopped work, drew back, studied me
for fifteen or twenty seconds, and asked, "Are you Jewish." I mumbled something
about not really wanting to discuss my ethnicity with him, whereupon he launched
into a disquisition of which I understood not much and remember less, except
that that it involved prophecy, the Book of Isaiah, and The Hatching of the Egg.
He hauled out his heavily annotated King James Version and pointed me to various
passages underlined in coded colors. As it happens, I'm more conversant than
most people with scripture, and so I can assert with moderate authority that his
reading of the Bible was -- how shall I say -- original. It took me an hour to
extricate myself from his insistent and wayward scholarship: fifteen minutes of
hair-cutting and forty-five minutes of exegetical enthusiasm.

For a decade or so, when our finances were perilous, my wife cut my hair. There
were some benefits (a guy could cop a feel while being ministered to) but I
must admit that although my good woman was earnest and effective, she never
fully mastered tonsorial technique. She had the habit of yanking upwards on the
strands with the scissors, with the result that each snip produced a stab of
pain -- although nothing more intense than might have been alleviated by the
injection of a dozen or score shots of novocaine directly into the scalp. And
then there were the ear nicks.

After a while, I returned hair responsibility to the world of commerce. I
had success for many years with Liz of Chicago Hair across town. Liz was
good at her work and respected my multiple cowlicks. But then she started to
raise her prices. When she reached $20, I would just hand her the Visa and ask
her not to tell me what she charged. When she went to $30, I retaliated by
spacing the haircuts further and further apart in order to keep my annual cost
constant. But when she broached the $40 barrier, the puritan in me rebelled. I
started to patronize the cheap ($14) barbershop across the street from the
college. There's a rotating staff and it's hit-and-miss: sometimes the results
are acceptable, sometimes disastrous.

When I come home from the expedition, my wife says, "Let's see what they've done
to you today."

And then she sighs.

Source: 2011/04/ferdinand

Title: What We Read in the Forties:  The Story of Ferdinand
Date: April 02, 2011

Yesterday's NYTimes reports that it's the 75th anniversary of the first
publication of The Story of Ferdinand by Munro Leaf.  This brief novel about
a pacific bull was the first book that I knew and loved. It was The Book of
my first few years on earth and I've probably read it, to myself and to my
children, twenty times more than I've read King Lear and Hamlet combined. I've
never tested myself, but I might be able to recite it from beginning to end with
only an occasional prompt. I believe that several leaves from my 1942 codex are
still the the family archives (and by archives, I mean those plastic boxes in
the basement),

I did not know that "Ferdimam" (as the kids call it) was thought by many to
be a subversive, unpatriotic allegory and that it had been banned by Franco
and burned by Hitler. As a child, it never occured to me that Ferdinand was
a pacifist -- I thought he was sensible.Why be killed in a bullfight when you
can sit and smell the flowers?

It was the book's language that engaged me, especially the one sentence that
was my first taste of pure, immortal, transcendent poetry: "Flags were flying,
bands were playing... and all the lovely ladies had flowers in their hair." 
Not even Shakespeare ever composed a more glorious succession of iambs.

Source: 2011/04/certified-dialogue-transcribed-verbatim-from-real-life

Title: Certified Dialogue Transcribed Verbatim from Real Life
Date: April 02, 2011

Telephone conversation with an eighty-two year old cousin.

"Evreryone down here, all they ever talk about is their pains, their doctors,
their diets, their diseases.  Now I have something to talk about.  For
years I went to this doctor, maybe forty years, he's almost as old as I am 
Every time I go into see him, with a sore knee or pains in the chest or
whatever, he'd look at it, and he'd say, 'what can you expect at your age? 
You're lucky to be alive.'  I'd go in with a sore throat.  He'd say, 'Can you
swallow. So what it hurts. You're too old to worry.' If I had a headache,
he'd say, 'whatever happens, happens.  You're old, enjoy the day.' Finally
he retired. He took a job as a dance instructor on a cruise ship. I'm not
kidding. He leads exercises or something. So I went to a younger doctor. He
listens to me breathe, pokes around a bit, puts me in the hospital, and now I
have three stents."

Source: 2011/04/a-very-distressing-memory

Title: A Very Distressing Memory
Date: April 08, 2011

There's been a re-birth of nativism in the "give me your tired, your poor" land
that I love. The right-wingers, who need someone to hate, have decided that
anti-Hispanic and anti-Muslim noise-making is just what our beleaguered country
needs right now.

All of which brought to mind a painful memory. Sometime in the 1970s, I was
sitting in a coffee room at the U. -- a rare event for me -- and a group of
people were recalling happy moments from their various childhoods. One of the
participants was a grey-haired woman perhaps 15 years older than I. She was a
secretary or administrative assistant at not mine but some other department. She
was a kindly, competent, unpretentious woman with whom I occasionally exhanged a
few words of greeting or business.

I can't remember exactly what the other participants ibn the discussion
remembered from their early days -- probably hunting trips with dad, hitting
the winning single in a softball game, a romp with the family dog -- but I will
never forget what Masako recalled: "When I was in the internment camp in Utah,
one day Marian Anderson came to sing for us."

Source: 2011/04/lolas-language-at-eighteen-months

Title: Lola's Language at Eighteen Months
Date: April 09, 2011

Her language consists mostly of nouns: "baby" -- both herself and her beloved
doll; "wawa" (water);  "mommy";  "daddy"; "ayi" (Chinese for aunt);  "didi"
(Chinese jiějie, older sister); "paopao" (Chinese, grandmother); "pock"
(pocket); "book"; "ball": "eye"; "nose" etc.  Her words are occasionally less
specified than they will soon become; for example, "duck" seems to mean "bird."
At the zoo, she identified an emu as a duck. Similarly, "gogo" (Chinese for
dog), means mammal, even including the zoo's llama. "Up" can mean either up or
down; it seems to signify a change of position. "No" occasionallly means "yes";
she seems to conceive it as a response to a question. There is, however, no
ambiguity to her very definitive "mine."

When she slid down the slide in the park, her audience exclaimed "whee."  Lola
responded, "I do whee," understanding "whee" to be the name of the action rather
than an exclamation of pleasure.

Source: 2011/04/howtoharvestme

Title: How to Harvest Me
Date: April 12, 2011

Yesterday I renewed my expired driver's license. I was worried about the eye
exam because of the cataracts, but I passed easily. Believe me, the bar for
visual acuity is not set very high.

On my previous license, "hair" was "brown";  this time, it's "gray."

The clerk asked, "Are you willing to be an organ donor?"  "Sure," I answered,
"but I don't know whether  anyone would want my organs."

Surely no one would want my myopic, be-cataracted eyes. Nor my ears (although
they would be  supplemented with an expensive set of hearing aids at no extra
charge). My heart?  Well, if it came with a "Use at Own Risk" label and a whole
library of erratic ECG printouts. Certainly not my spine, which was a "second"
or "factory reject" right from the womb. I would not recommend it even at a
severe markdown. My liver -- I think I can recommend my liver. It's barely been
used and should command a premium. My prostate -- now there's a bargain in the
making. A prostate is supposed to be the size of a walnut, but mine is more like
a potato, perhaps a Yukon Gold -- and yet as far as I know it is cancer free. It
could be chopped up and transplanted into three or four men.

My best organ, if it's an organ, is definitely my knees, both right and left. 
I'm at the age where knee-replacement is commonplace, but I have the knees of a
twenty-five year old: flexible, functioning, pain-free, even if somewhat prone
to hyperextension. Some linebacker who's abused his own would be overjoyed to
extend his career with a perfectly wonderful set of knees. Or a basketball
player, preferably someone who wants to regain his "hops." Maybe, in someone
else's body, my knees could finally win the trophies and renown that they
deserve.

Source: 2011/04/the-most-obscene-word-in-the-english-language

Title: The Most Obscene Word in the English Language
Date: April 14, 2011

The foulest, most obscene word in the English language, at least as far as
sound is concerned, is, by all odds, "kumquat."  It's hard to say whether
it's the "kum" or the "quat" that is more reprehensible, but the two together,
o my goodness gracious! "Kum" is linked to Fr. "con" and ME (Middle English)
"queynte" as well as to the common colloquialism for sexual climax. "Quat"
recalls Shakespeare's "quatch buttock" and also "quatch" in its exceedingly
vulgar modern urban signification. Readers attentive to language will also hear
in "quat" an echo of Robert Browning's famous "twat." (PG-13 rated note: Having
encountered in an anonymous 1660 poem the couplet "They talk'd of his having
a Cardinall's Hat; /They'd send him as soon an Old Nun's Twat," Browning took
"twat" to refer to article of clothing and so composed the following: "Then owls
and bats/ Cowls and twats/ Monks and nuns in a cloister's moods/ Adjourn to the
oak-stump pantry."  It would appear that Browning was insufficiently alert to
obscenity.)

"Kumquat" should properly be used in formulations such as "why don't you shove
it up your kumquat?" or "eat my kumquat," or "your mother is a kumquat."

If only Kobe Bryant hadn't called the referee a "fucking f-gg-t" but had called
him a "fucking kumquat" instead. He would not been fined $100,000 and he would
have enjoyed a far more satisfactory vituperative experience.

Incidentally, one of the most popular varieties of kumquat is the "fukushu."
Honest.

Source: 2011/04/butterfly-mosque

Title: Book Report:  G. Willow Wilson's The Butterfly Mosque
Date: April 25, 2011

It's bad enough to be born into and involuntarily indoctrinated into a
religion, but if a person has the good fortune to be born into a family of
non-believers, why should he or she regress to dogma and doctrine and fantasies
of the afterlife?

But then, I'm tone deaf and colorblind to religion.

Nevertheless (you can trust me here, dear blog-reader), I've read more than my
share of the kind of autobiography called the "conversion narrative" in which
the writer describes how he or she came to locate and embrace some particular
god or creed. "Conversion narratives" generally take one of two shapes. In
some of them, the subject experiences a sudden blinding insight (after the
style Saul/Paul on the road to Damascus); in others, the author endures
a long dark night of the soul that is painfully and gradually superseded
with "enlightenment" (Newman's Apologia is the archetype).

G. Willow Wilson's memoir The Butterfly Mosque (New York, 2010) describes a
conversion of a sort that I've never before encountered -- it lacks not only
a voice from the clouds and but also a scalding of the heart. Wilson simply
sets out with a desire to convert and then hunts for an appropriate religion
-- a most odd and unusual  procedure. In college, Wilson reports, she was "in
the market for a philosophy." Soon after, she became a Muslim -- essentially
because she wanted to be something and couldn't think of anything better.

Here's the key paragraph: "I discovered I was a monotheist....  That rules
out polytheism.  I also have a problem with authority, which rules out any
religion with a priesthood.... And I cannot believe that having given us these
bodies, God thinks we should be virgins unless we desperately feel a need to
reproduce. That rules out any religion that is against family planning or sex
for fun....  Islam is antiauthoritarian, sex-positive monotheism."

It's a series of reasons so quirky that it's hard to take seriously.  If
I were G. Willow's spiritual counselor, and she came to me with such a
shallow argument, I would have said, "go home, young lady, take a couple of
years and try to think more deeply."

"I discovered I was a monotheist"? Mere mysticism, no more more persuasive
than "I discovered I believed in only one angel." Islam has no priesthood? 
Depends on how you define priest, doesn't it. No Roman-style priest who acts
as an intermediary to God, but a heck of a priestly establishment nonetheless
-- boatloads of imans and mullahs and ayatollahs all laying claim to special
forms of knowledge. Is Islam sex-friendly?  Perhaps in theory, but in practice
it's hard to find a more misogynist or homophobic operation out there in
monotheismland -- and I suspect that sex is more cheerful when it's shared by
equal partners.

On the whole, Islam does not meet Wilson's three criteria nearly as well as the
Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster, which is monotheist to a overcooked
fault, supports not a single priest (only a website), and as far as I know,
expresses not the slightest antagonism to sex in any form or coloration.

The Butterfly Mosque offers its readers some very sensitive insights into
Egyptian society and especially into American-Muslim relations. It's also a fine
little love story -- a young American woman finds a sweet young man in Cairo
and tactfully negotiates the profound cultural barriers that might have divided
them. Sometimes it seems a little like Romeo and Juliet gone all sentimental
and gooey -- as though the young lady would be secretly happier if her marriage
had caused a Montague-Capulet feud. It doesn't because both Omar's family and
G. Willow's parents are urbane, sophisticated, open, loving, practical and non-
ideological  and offer no resistance whatsoever to the exogamous marriage. And
Wilson is honest enough to admit it.

I worry about the stability of this conversion.  When a new religion is
embraced for such superficial reasons, it can be shucked equally as easily.  It
wouldn't surprise me if G. Willow returns, some day, to the steady rationality
of her parents. Let's hope so.

Source: 2011/04/see-the-ball-hit-the-ball

Title: "See the Ball, Hit the Ball"
Date: April 28, 2011

When Manny Ramirez visited George Washington High School, his former baseball
coach, Steve Mandl, asked hm to say something to his players about the art of
hittiing.  Ramirez, one of the most spectacular batters of all time (555
home runs, .585 slugging, .313 batting average), thought for a few moments and
then pronounced "see the ball, hit the ball."  From which we can derive that
he is not looking at a post-retirement career as a hitting coach.  He may be
the idiot savant of hitting.

Good thing the coach didn't ask him about fielding.  "See the ball, fumble the
ball."

"See the ball, hit the ball" is universal  wisdom that transcends its baseball
context -- like Wayne Gretzky's famous "skate to where the puck is going to be,
not where it is."

I've heard the masterful sentence ascribed also to Pete Rose.  But it's more
far more appropriate to Manny.

Source: 2011/05/gauguin

Title: Carving by Paul Gaugin
Date: May 02, 2011

I visited the quirky but impressive Gauguin exhibition at the National Gallery.

Some of the Tahitian paintings are genuinely "iconic" but certainly worth
viewing in real life, where they're a ton more wonderful than in the familiar
reproductions.

In my great ignorance, I had not a shred of knowledge of Gauguin's carvings,
and was frankly, dazzled by their beauty. Illustrations do scant justice. Even
more than the paintings, the sculptures need to be seen. (They also need to be
handled, but art galleries don't exactly encourage tactile familiarity. I hate
the nasty beeper that goes off when you I bring my near-sighted eyes close to
the object.)

"Soyez amoureuses," one of Gauguin's most interesting carvings, is made of
painted linden wood.  It's a hefty 97cm x 75cm. Here's what the artist said of
it:

I have been working for 2 months on a large (painted wood) carving and I'm bold
enough to believe it's the best thing I've done up to now as far as strength
and balance are concerned (although the literary side of it seems crazy to many
people. A monster, who looks like me, is holding a naked woman by the hand --
that's the main subject.  The spaces are filled by smaller figures.) At the
top there's a town, some sort of Babylon, and at the bottom the countryside with
a few imaginary flowers (a desolate old woman) and a fox, the prophetic animal
of perversity among the Indians... Despite the inscription, the people look sad,
in contradiction to the title.

Like Blake and Yeats, Gauguin had developed his own private mythology.

The sculpture was exhibited in Brussels in 1891 and provoked a "critical storm"
-- but what sort of tempest my catalog don't say.

This carving was lent to the National Gallery by the Museum of Fine Arts in
Boston which apparently has other Gauguin sculptures.

Now I have an incentive for another visit to New England.

Source: 2011/05/talk-about-upscale

Title: News from the "Hair Industry"
Date: May 02, 2011

While indulging a long, pleasant walk this morning, I happened upon a shop I
had never before noticed.  It's called Juno's Studio of Contemporary Hair
Artistry.  I ws curious as to whether a "hair artistry studio" was what we
called in the old days a "barber shop" or a "beauty shop." I tried to peek
inside the shop but the situation was a tad too "architectooralooral" (in
Mr. Joe Gargery's phrase) for me to feel  comfortable doing so. Nevertheless,
I was sufficiently intrigued about "contemporary hair artistry" to
visit Juno's website. I am now prepared to "share" with my readership what I
have learned. The following paragraph comes to you absolutely verbatim.

"Jules Juno’s passion for the hair industry pulses through her life and work
at every turn and every look, as her creative spirit is continuously fueled by
the rhythms, themes and movements of the subtle and deep rich nuances of the
world around her - from the street to the flora, feathers and fur of nature,
to the lines of fashion and art in all its forms. Aligned closely with the
powerful totem of Raven and ready to celebrate newness in light of every full
moon, she dwells in the magic of change and transformation. Often called the
“Hair Shaman” and “Keeper of the Hair” by her devoted clients, Jules
believes in the sacredness of being trusted to work her creative magic on the
high chakra space of one’s head."

I can tell you one person whose brilliant (though graying) mane Juno's not
going work her creative magic upon (even though the hair industry pulses
through every deep rich nuance of its rhythms, themes and movements). Mine,
that's who's. Keep your ever-loving hands off my high chakra space, Hair
Shaman!!

Upon further investigation, Juno (her real name?) turns out to be a disciple
of Minnesotan Horst Rechelbacher -- under whose tutelage she taught "for a
triune of years before adventuring her creative genius as a platform artist." 
In our town, she plans to "keep the fires of inspiration burning and push the
edges of hair design."

And while here, she will also "push the edges" of New Age Bullshit.

By the way, what the heck is a "platform artist?"  And what distinguishes a
"triune of years" from "three years?"

Source: 2011/05/holbein-rugs

Title: "Holbein" Rugs
Date: May 04, 2011

What is this remarkable object? It's a seventeenth-century Turkish rug that
now resides in the Philadelphia Museum of Art. It's of a type called a
"Holbein."  And just why, pray tell, should a class of rugs be named after
a sixteenth- century German painter? Was Holbein a closet weaver? Or
an importer of rugs?  No. The answer is that rugs of this sort appear
prominently in paintings by Holbein, and, inasmuch as textiles deteriorate
more rapidly than oil paintings, much more is known about early Turkish rugs
from their representation in European art than from the bits and fragments that
have managed to survive. Hence "Holbein."

It may be not be easy to see in the picture (rugs need to be seen and handled
in person) but on closer inspection, it's clear that there's a repeating
geometric pattern in the field within the rug's borders.  That pattern is the
hallmark of the "Holbein" rug.

Look again at Holbein's best-known picture, "The Ambassadors."

The canvas is loaded with realistic and iconographic detail, and,
moreover, it's easy to be transfixed by the floating magic-realism-ish
anamorphic death's head that dominates the bottom quarter of the canvas. But
look, on the table, under the very up-to-date scientific instruments, a Turkish
rug!  Look again.

The rug that's depicted is comprised a series of squares of which the right
side of one and the left side of the other are clearly visible.  It's a very
handsome "Holbein."

There's an even clearer example in Holbein's "Darmstadt Madonna." There it
is, in its full anachronistic glory -- a lovely example of a "Turkey carpet"
enriching the very  bottom of the picture.  The repeating geometric pattern
is fully revealed.  It's not the same rug as the one in the "Ambassadors"
portrait, but it's clearly in the same style.

"Holbein" rugs don't just appear in Holbeins.  There's a great example
in Andrea del Verrocchio's "Madonna with john the Baptist and Donatus" (c.
1480).

A sixteenth-century Turkish rug right at the feet of the madonna and child    .
Anachronisticissimus                                                           .

I pause here for a bit of autobiography. in the summer of 1968, Mrs. Dr.
Metablog, struck by a sudden infatuation, bid for and won at a country auction
in rural Vermont a small geometric ( 4' x 5') rug. It's been with us now these
forty years and  has been a constant source of visual pleasure. No, it's not
a Holbein, but it's in the same phylum. it's a Konakghend prayer rug, perhaps
dating from the late nineteenth century, and like many Kuba or Shirvan rugs,
it's geometrical (rather than swirly or floral) in design. Something like a
"Holbein" but not quite. I would love to have a "Holbein" on one of my otherwise
blank walls. There's something mighty intriguing and suggestive about their
cross-cultural links. But in the matter of antique rugs (as in other areas of
art), my taste is infinitely in advance of my wallet. Instead of purchasing,
we gratify our enthusiasm for rugs by going to exhibits, visiting the museums
(including the almost unknown Textile Museum in DC), wandering into the better
rug stores (NOT the ones that are declaring bankruptcy and in which EVERYTHING
is now 70-80% off) where we pretend to be wealthy, and we study the rug books.
Let me testify: "oriental" rugs are one of the great, great, great art forms.

Are genuine "Holbeins" still available?  (I mean old Turkish ones, not new
sweatshop or machine made jobbies from India or China.)  Here's one that was
recently sold on Ebay.

It's a mid-nineteenth-century beauty and, to judge from the picture, in
remarkably fine shape for its age. It's described as a "Yuntdag," which is a
region in West Anatolia. If I had the cash or even the credit, I'd jump on it.
And then I would let a photographer take my picture while I pose in front of it,
and by doing so connect myself to Holbein and Verrocchio-- to the aesthetic part
of the tradition, that is, not to the Virgin part.

Source: 2011/05/real-dialog

Title: Fragment of a Genuine Telephone Conversation
Date: May 08, 2011

The grand-daughter (now age eleven), studying the Darmstadt Madonna (1528) by
Hans Holbein the Younger that is reproduced in q previous post:  "It doesn't
look like Madonna."

Grandpa:  "I think it may be a different Madonna."

Source: 2011/05/joke

Title: My Life in Jokes*  **
Date: May 11, 2011

Why did the moron throw the clock out of the window?  Because he wanted
to see time fly. &&&  How do you say "refrigerator" in Italian?  Ice-a
box. &&& Why do fireman wear read suspenders?  To hold their pants up. &&&
Knock-knock. Who's there?  Anita. Anita who?  Anita borrow a pencil.
&&&  "Over the Cliff" by Hugo Furst. 'The Russian Surgeon's Revenge" by
I. Kutchakokoff; "The Yellow Stream" by I. P. Daley?  &&& Guy is walking
in the woods and meets a friend. The friend has a black eye and a bloody
nose. "What happened to you?  "Guy beat me up." "Why?"  "I don't know. I was
looking for hotel I'm supposed to stay at, and I came upon this man lying
on top of a woman. I asked him, how far is the Olde Log inn and he jumped up
and hit me."  &&&  Horse wants to try out for the Dodgers. Leo Durocher
says, sure he's a horse but the Dodgers are in the dumps; let's see what he
can do. "Can you throw?" Horse picks up a ball, walks to the pitching mound,
and throws a 105 mile fastball right down the middle of the plate. "Can you
hit?" Horse picks up a bat and steps to the plate. On the first swing, he
hits a tremendous line drive off the scoreboard in right field. "Run," says
Durocher. "Run," says the horse. "Why do you think I'm here?  If I could
run I'd be at Hialeah." &&& Man is knocked down by a bus. He's lying in the
road, bleeding to death. A friend comes by, says, Solly, how you doink? Solly
says, "I make a living." &&&  Truman, Churchill, and Stalin are driving in a
car down a narrow road. There's a cow in the middle of the road, blocking the
way. Churchill gets out of the car, waves his hands and screams at the cow,
but he can't get it to budge. Truman gets out, picks up a stick and starts
beating the cow. It still won't move. Stalin gets out, walks up to the cow
and whispers something into the cow's ear. The cow bolts and disappears into
the woods. They get back into the car. Truman and Churchill say to Stalin,
"What in the world did you say to the cow to get her to run like that. Stalin
says, "I told her I'd put her on a collective farm." &&& Man is in a nightclub.
Everyone's singing and dancing. He gets an urge to take a dump. Can't find the
toilet. He's having a hard time holding it in. Waiter tells him the bathroom
is upstairs.  He goes up to the next floor, can't find the toilet. He's about
to explode.Finally he sees a hole in the floor. He squats and lets fly with a
tremendous load. He gets dressed, goes downstairs. Everyone has disappeared; no
music, no dancing, no drinking. He finds the waiter. "What happened?" Waiter
says, "Where were you when the shit hit the fan?"  &&& The mayor of Muncie,
Indiana is scheduled to preside at a ceremony honoring a local girl-made-good
now called Lolita Lamour, but who grew up in Muncie under the name Flora Faye
Fluck. But he's worried that he might mispronounce the name and embarrass
himself. He practices:  Flora Faye Fluck. Flora Faye Fluck.  Finally, the
big day arrives. The mayor makes his speech. "And here she is, ladies and
gentleman, Lolita Lamour, known to all of her friends here in Muncie as
Flora Faye Klunt." &&&  A man is walking on a beach. He comes upon a
naked woman lying on the shore. He jumps on her, screws her, and continues
on his way. After a half-a-mile he meets three or four members of a search
party. One of them says, "A woman has drowned. Have you seen a dead body on the
beach." Man says, "O my god. Was she dead?  I thought she was English." 
&&&  A scorpion say to a turtle, "I need to get to the other side of the Dead
Sea.  Let me climb on your back and you swim across."  Turtle says, "But if
you're on my back, you could sting me." Scorpion says, "Why would I do that? 
If I sting you, we'd both drown." Turtle says, "OK, get on my back."  They
get to the middle of the Dead Sea, and the scorpion stings the turtle. Turtle
says, "Why did you do that?" Scorpion answers, "Because this is the Middle
East." &&&  An airplane is flying over the Atlantic Ocean.  Suddenly, the
loudspeaker comes on. "This is your pilot. If you look out of the window on the
right side of the plane, you can see smoke coming out of the #1 engine. If you
look out the left side, you can see flames coming out of the #2 engine. Now
look down. If you look closely, you can see a small life-raft floating in the
ocean. I am speaking to you from that raft." &&& Searching for the meaning
of life, a man travels to Tibet, climbs the highest mountain, comes to a
monastery where the wisest man in the world lives. He asks the monk, "What is
the meaning of life." The monk says, "life ... is a barrel."  The man goes
back to Cleveland, thinks about it for five years. What does it mean, life is a
barrel?  He can't figure it out, so he gets back on the boat, travels to Tibet,
climbs the mountain, finds the monk, and asks him, "What did you mean, life
is a barrel." The monk shrugs his shoulders. "OK, so life isn't a barrel."
&&&  Old guy, maybe a bluesman, bottle of hooch in a brown paper bag, sits on
a bench in the middle of the night, downtown, playing air-sax, nodding. Young
fellow comes by, cheerful, asks him, "Crosstown buses run this way?"  Blues
guy looks up, pauses for a second, and then drawls, "Doo--dah, doo-dah." &&& A
man, 93, and his wife, 91, go to the rabbi and tell him that they're miserable
and want a divorce. The rabbi says, "You've been unhappy all these years and
you wait seventy years to get a divorce. What are you thinking?" Man says, "We
wanted to wait until the children were all dead."  &&&  "My brain!  My second
favorite organ." (W. Allen). &&&  Man goes to the rabbi in distress. He says
that his wife is trying to poison him. "How do you know that?  "I saw her
putting stuff in my coffee." Rabbi says, "It's got to be a mistake. I'll talk
to her." Two days later, the rabbi calls him. "Your wife came in. I talked
to her for three hours.Three hours straight I talk to her." "So what's your
advice?" "Drink the poison." &&& Man goes to see his doctor. The doctor says,
"I have good news and bad news. The bad news is that you have terminal cancer
and you're going to be dead in a month." "So what's the good news." "Well," the
doctor says, "You see that cute nurse over there. I finally fucked her." &&& An
older guy is walking down the street. He meets a friend and they chat for a few
minutes. Man starts to leave, turns back to his friend, and says, "By the way,
when we met, was I walking north or south?" "You were going south." "Good,"
says the guy, "then I've already had my  lunch." &&& George W. Bush goes for
dinner at the ADL where he's served a bowl of matzo ball soup. He looks at
it suspiciously, but then, remembering all the strange foods he's eaten at
ceremonial dinners, takes a bite. Not bad. He turns to his host: "Tell me," he
says, "do the Jews eat any other part of the matzo, or only the balls?" &&& Two
old guys are ritually washing a corpse.The first one says, "Look at the schlong
on this guy. He's a horse." The second guy says, "It's just like mine." First
guy says, "You have a dong like this. I don't believe it. I've never seen
anything half as large."  The second guy says, "I said it was like mine. I
didn't mean mine was just as large.  I meant mine is just as dead."  &&& 
Knock-knock.  Who's there?  "Yo mama."  "Yo mama who." "Yo mama. This is no
joke. Open the damn door and let me in."

* All jokes are as remembered.  No websites or other research tools have been employed.

**  All jokes are genuine historical artefacts and many not conform to the highest standards of contemporary taste.

Source: 2011/05/a-great-moment-in-sportscasting-history-

Title: A Great Moment in Sportscasting History
Date: May 13, 2011

Rajan Rondo is knocked down by Dwayne Wade and falls awkwardly dislocating his
left elbow.  Even though it's gruesome, the tape is repeated over and over
again. We see Rondo's arm bend backwards and we see him writhe in pain.

Jeff Van Gundy:  "It's horrible. I can't watch."

Mark Jackson (a Brooklynite who doesn't like Van Gundy):  "You can't look?  I
always wondered where you were from.  Now I know.  You're from the suburbs."

Later, Rondo returns and heroically plays the fourth period with just one
working arm.

Source: 2011/05/why-we-hate-wells-fargo

Title: Why We Hate Wells Fargo
Date: May 13, 2011

The New York Times says that former employees of Wells Fargo admit that
they "systematically singled out blacks in Baltimore and suburban Maryland
for high- interest subprime mortgages."  "These loans," Baltimore officials
have claimed in a federal lawsuit against Wells Fargo, "tipped hundreds of
homeowners into foreclosure and cost the city tens of millions of dollars in
taxes and city services."  Why did the bank act with such malice?  Because
Wells Fargo "saw the black community as fertile ground for subprime mortgages,
as working-class blacks were hungry to be a part of the nation’s home-owning
mania. Loan officers pushed customers who could have qualified for prime loans
into subprime mortgages. Wells Fargo employees picturesquely identified these
transactions as "ghetto loans" made to “mud people.”

The city of Baltimore has filed a suit against Wells Fargo.  "The toll taken
by such policies, Baltimore officials argue, "is terrible. Data released by the
city as part of the suit show that more than half the properties subject to
foreclosure on a Wells Fargo loan from 2005 to 2008 now stand vacant. And 71
percent of those are in predominantly black neighborhoods."

It's called reverse redlining -- systematically marketing the most expensive and
onerous loans to black customers.

So here's the deal.  The city of Baltimore loses, the neighborhoods lose,
individual families are financially crippled for a lifetime, and the CEO of
Wells Fargo gets a 50% raise to $21,000,000 a year. What a deal!

What's going to happen to the suit?  It was filed in January, 2008.  Three
years later, after a predictable spate of legal wrangling, a federal judge
has allowed the suit to go forward, but not before Wells Fargo "succeeded in
limiting the pretrial discovery the city has been able to get and in limiting
the allegations and damages the city could claim if the case makes it to trial."
A bank spokeswoman said Wells Fargo will “continue to defend ourselves
vigorously.”

Here's what's going to happen. The bank, which has far greater resources
that the city,  will assign a couple of hundred lawyers to the case and wear
down Baltimore with various hair-splitting motions.  Judges will retire
and/or die. The case will be in the courts for an unknown number of Jarndyce and
Jarndyce units of time. After a generation or so, when most of the aggrieved
will have long since left the earth, Wells Fargo will settle for a slap on the
wrist and pay a nominal fine, but admit to no guilt. The bank will trumpet its
vindication. Justice will not be served.  It will be bought.

Can we possibly imagine what will have happened to the many thousandes of no-
longer-occupied houses and to their one time oh-so hopeful purchasers?  Nothing
good, trust me.

Source: 2011/05/all-about-eve-erasmus

Title: Erasmus Hall in All about Eve
Date: May 15, 2011

"Phoebe," she calls herself, but in the script she's just
"girl." It's the last scene of Joseph L. Mankiewicz's (Stuyvesant '24) All
about Eve. "Phoebe" has sneaked into Eve Harrington's hotel room and has
pretended to fall asleep. Eve accosts her and is about to call the police
when the intruderess proclaims herself a fan of the actress. Here's their
conversation:

"GIRL You know the Eve Harrington clubs - that they've got in most of the
girls' high schools?EVE I've heard of them.GIRL Ours was one of the first.
Erasmus Hall. I'm the president.EVE Erasmus Hall. That's in Brooklyn, isn't
it?GIRL Lots of actresses come from Brooklyn. Barbara Stanwyck, Susan Hayward -
of course, they're just movie stars."Phoebe might also have mentioned that both
Barbara Stanwyck (Ruby Stevens) and Susan Hayward (Edythe Marrener) were not
only from Brooklyn, but also from Erasmus Hall High School. Why doesn't she say
so? Or is being a native of Brooklyn disability enough?

Phoebe might have added to her list and mentioned that Mae West was also an
alumna of the same high school. Cheers to Erasmus Hall, mother of actresses --
even though Erasmus's Barbra Streisand '59 was still in braces and still in
P. S. something or other when All about Eve was being exhibited at the Leader
Theater on Coney Island Avenue.

Supposed Erasmian "Phoebe" was played by the young Barbara Bates, who was highly
credible as an upwardly mobile Brooklynite. Her small part includes an iconic
moment when, in the film's last scene, she appears in full narcissistic glory,
preening in front of a triptych of mirrors as she tries on Eve's clothes. She
is reflected in multiple, infinitely regressing fragments. Bates, a native of
Denver, Colorado, did not, alas, live up to her early promise, but soon after
the completion of this film fell into bouts of insanity that came to an end only
when she took her own life in 1959.

But why Erasmus?  Because its graduates had achieved a reputation for fierce
ambition? Perhaps, but also because Erasmus (as Mankiewicz would well have
known) was even more provincial -- as only the outer boroughs of New York can
be provincial -- than Eve Harrington's childhood Wisconsin. "Phoebe" is another
Eve and equally naive and countrified. She's a doppelganger on deck, a secret
sharer in ovo, a Mr Hyde in the making; she's also defensive, megalomaniacal,
unsophisticated, slightly loony, and ruthless. And so it was an excellent
decision to root her in EHHS, where at least 20% of the students, if I remember
correctly, had almost exactly the same traits of character.

Source: 2011/05/shattered

Title: Amnesia in Film: Shattered (1991)
Date: May 20, 2011

The "neo-noir" film Shattered (1991) was directed by Wolfgang Petersen, who
elicited a mumble-mouth performance by Tom Berenger and an incoherent one from
Greta Scacchi. It's another in the endless parade of amnesia movies. In
this variant, the central character, Dan Merrick, goes over the cliff in his
Mercedes and emerges not only disfigured but, it seems, without the least
knowledge of his own person or past. The film clearly demonstrates that movie
amnesia can be just as flexible as a tricky plot demands. Amnesia in Shattered
has nothing to do with the real human brain and its gesture to the facts of
existence  is mighty perfunctory.

DOCTOR (authoritative, bearded): "We call it psychogenic amnesia. Patient
doesn't know his name, his family, his personal history. Everything else he
remembers. The year, who's president. He can drive a car, he can function
professionally, but anything personal is out of reach."

And now the gimmick (major spoiler coming up, so if you plan to see the movie
[which I cannot recommend], please avert your innocent eyes). Not only does
Dan Merrick not remember anything of his pre-accident past, he's not even Dan
Merrick!  He's Judth Merrick's lover, Jack Stanton, transformed by plastic
surgery into a simulacrum of Dan. And he doesn't have the least clue that he's
someone else.

There's a exceedingly complicated plot which involves voluntary and involuntary
impersonations, a private investigator out of Cliche Central, two murders and
three car crashes. The incredible upshot is that the villain (the temptress-
wife) is killed and that Jack permanently assumes the role of Dan.

Jack's amnesia is cured in the last scene, but not before it has been
mysteriously promulgated among  his friends, acquaintances, and business
associates, all of whom are utterly deceived by the plastic surgery and
seem not to notice that there have also been changes to his voice, his
walk, his manner, and his personality. These poor folks suffer from a
devastating manifestation of Hollywoodish forgetfulness. It could be called
"contact amnesia." An absurd idea, but not more absurd than the plot of
Shattered.

Source: 2011/05/eruv

Title: Reposted:  Antimylarmonofilamentarianism
Date: May 23, 2011

In 1895, my wise and courageous grandparents left the abysmal, backward Ukraine
and struck out for the new world. Nine years later, my father was born in a
cold-water flat in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. The date of his
birth: December 22, 1904, exactly at the winter solstice. "And they called his
name, Emanuel, God with us." If he had been born in the old country, before the
Russian authorities imposed legal cognomina upon us, he would have been named
Emanuel ben Isaiah -- his father's name appended to his own as a patronymic.

Despite his traditional moniker and his commitment to the essence of Judaism,
my father was fiercely hostile to the irrationalities of religion. His view --
and my grandfather Isaiah's even more strongly -- was that for a thousand years
our lineage had been kept in poverty and darkness not just by the czars and the
Cossacks but also by the rabbis. In politics my father and grandfather began
as socialists and became New Dealers; in philosophy, they rejected theological
doctrine and were among the children of the Enlightenment whom Moses Mendelssohn
had led to the promised land of evidence and reason. I doubt that any of my
ancestors knew Karl Marx's sentence that "the criticism of religion is the
beginning of all criticism," but they spoke and acted as though such wisdom
had been absorbed from the cradle. My brothers and I were taught to resist
the exclusivity, superstition, and ceremony and especially the triumphalism of
religion.

We now have a religious controversy in our peaceful, progressive, and largely
secular western town. A group of orthodox Jews have petitioned the city council
for permission to construct an eruv. What is an eruv? It’s a “symbolic
boundary that allows orthodox Jews to carry things, including their own
children, outside their home during the Sabbath." (Carrying is considered work,
and orthodoxy's strict interpretation of religious law prohibits sabbatical
labor.) A latter-day eruv is constructed out of fishing line that is strung on
utility poles; curiously, it may incorporate functioning electric and telephone
wires. If you're within the lines, you're "in" your home.

I know that my forbears detested eruvim and similar expressions of
irrational piety. I myself am not enraged by these useless but harmless
superstitions. Constructing an eruv does not endanger our species; it's not
like opposing contraception or prohibiting stem-cell research. An eruv consoles
the believers and doesn't much bother the rest of us. Yet if there is a spirit
in the sky, which I very much doubt, I would hope that he would not be so small-
minded as to issue ukases about carrying infants on Saturdays; infants should
be carried as much as they want, which is just about everywhere and always.
And if the god of Abraham and Isaac has become so narrow as to promulgate an
inside/outside-the-home rule, I would also hope that he would be intelligent
enough not to be flummoxed by such transparent trickery as hanging mylar
filament on poles.

I have no intuitive conception of god, but I think that the orthodox trivialize
our human and shared longing for transcendence when they sanctify such petty
practices. It would be far more pious for the orthodox to take every nickel
spent to appease the Ancient of Days and bestow it on a poor Jewish family from
Tashkent. If the eruvim-makers can't locate eligible Jews, there are Hondurans
and Sudanese a-plenty who deserve their attention. When the believers re-direct
their enthusiasm and their resources toward truly charitable enterprises, they
will honor the universal immigrant experience and they will also practice the
very worthy Jewish virtue of compassion. The effort spent to construct an eruv
is a foolish waste of time.

Here's my father's view:  "It took us hundreds of years to fight our way out of
the ghetto and they want to put themselves back in jail. If the rabbis had their
way," he would say, "Mahler and Bernstein and Gershwin would play accordion in a
klezmer band in Bialystok, Einstein would balance the books for a caftan maker
in Kiev, and a hundred and fifty Jewish Nobel Prize winners would squander their
intelligence davening in a dismal Vilna synagogue."

I think it’s in a Wallace Markfield novel that an old Jewish guy confronts
a group of twenty-something Jewish hippies/slackers in Miami Beach. After
a heated discussion, he admonishes them:  "And don't ever be ashamed that
you’re Jewish. It’s enough that I’m ashamed that you’re Jewish."

Which is pretty much how I feel about the eruvistas.  Well, not exactly
ashamed.  Embarrassed, perhaps, by their superstitious infatuation with the
"dark backward and abysm of time."

Source: 2011/05/reposted-philip-roths-pseudo-pastoral

Title: Reposted: Philip Roth's Pseudo-Pastoral
Date: May 25, 2011

A couple of years ago, when I had journeyed through roughly half of his
writings, I made some preliminary observations about the fictional world
invented by Philip Roth. In the course of discussion, I advanced two hypotheses.
The first was that Roth hated children, whom he regarded as encumbrances to male
freedom and pleasure. The second is that although Roth had invented a boatload
of adult male narcissists, he had not created a single mensch -- a caring,
responsible, mature man. In Roth's vision of the world, I suggested, "only a
schmuck would be a mensch."

After a pause for rest and rehabilitation, I've now resumed my upriver voyage to
the heart of the Rothworld. I've just finished reading American Pastoral (1997),
a novel set during the difficult, still-controversial Vietnam war. I must boast
that my hypotheses about children and menschdom are fully confirmed by the new
evidence provided by American Pastoral. In this novel, children are indeed
hateful, and the mensch who has at last made an appearance is nothing more than
a schmeggegy. Roth has given us Seymour "Swede" Levov, an archetypal mensch, and
behold, what a poor naive schmuck is he! Levov nurtures everyone he encounters,
but Roth works it so that his virtue leads directly to his downfall. Poor Swede
owns and manages an exemplary factory but he is betrayed by his workers; he's
loyal to Newark, so Newark riots and pillages; he loves and supports his fragile
wife only to discover that she's sleeping with his friend. Most of all, he
adores his daughter, unamusingly called Merry, who turns out to be, just as we
might expect, a devil child. She screams unaccountably from the moment of birth
and stutters through her awkward childhood (Roth seems to think that colic and
speech impediments are signs of inherent viciousness). At adolescence, Merry
transforms into an unhandsome Patty Hearst clone who participates in several
senseless but deadly political bombings. She then goes underground, only to
return secretly in Newark to haunt Levov all the more. Under this succession of
attacks, Swede Levov's carefully-crafted menschdom is little-by-little exposed
as naive schmuckhood. If only Levov had taken the Zuckerman route: love only
thyself, fuck 'em and forget 'em; abort when all else fails.

And now, for the benefit of younger readers, I pause for a few refresher
sentences about the historiography of the Vietnamese catastrophe. The
significance of this period is highly contested. For those on the left, the
war was a foolish attempt to block a peasant uprising against neo-colonialist
overlords. The Bundys and Lyndonites and Kissingers squandered fifty thousand
American and two million Vietnamese lives (plus moral authority and treasure
uncountable). Nevertheless, as the left sees it, the war provided an
opportunity for heroism: for the first time in human history, a free and
patriotic people, making use of peaceful assemblies, petitions, political
activism, boycotts, and resistance to the draft, succeeded in turning an erring
government from its mistaken path. On the other hand, the right wing knows an
entirely different Vietnam war. For conservatives, the war against communism
was lost because squishy liberals lost their nerve. Conservatives remember only
the excesses of the anti-war movement: the culture of drugs, the sexual freedom,
the violence, and of course, the bombings.

American Pastoral is firmly of the right-hand file. Roth has performed a
amazing piece of legerdemain.  He has written about the period of Vietnam,
but he has omitted (or suppressed) both the atrocities of the war and the
organized, largely peaceful opposition to it. In American Pastoral, resistance
is not political but personal. It's embodied in Swede's daughter Merry Levov,
who is vacant, violent, angry and disgusting. By stripping the novel of its
historical context and coloration, Roth reduces the opposition to the war to
an oedipal conflict between a demon child and her well-meaning but ineffectual
father.The novel lacks even the decent ambiguity that Roth might have created if
he had given Levov other and perhaps more reasonable children. But it's a good
guess that in a novel by Philip Roth, more children would have led not to a
widening of focus or to a richer novel, but only to more tsouris.

It's a shame that so skillful an artist (and one who is not generally a right-
winger) has written a novel that's only inches away from neocon propaganda.

Source: 2011/05/drood

Title: Re-reading Drood
Date: May 25, 2011

I can't remember when I last read The Mystery of Edwin Drood, but I'm certain
that it was before 1997.  It was in that year that I passed the age that
Dickens had attained when he left our planet, leaving Drood undone.

This time, I read Drood with a sense of Impending Doom. I think it's because
Dickens died far too young -- in the prime of his age.  Not, however, in
the prime of his genius  -- although one never knows what he would have
produced if he had lived to his allotted three score and ten. The novel struck
me as a tired and eneravated performance.  Too many of the characters are
recycled from the Dickens repertory company, the humor is too strenuous, the
clues and the red-herrings too obviously contrived.  It's only very near the
moment of truncation, when the splendid Mrs. Billicken makes her appearance,
that the novel feels inspired in the old Dickens way.

I also read in sadness. When we commit to reading a long, densely plotted
novel, we take it for granted that all its mysteries will eventually be
resolved.  Such is the bargain that the novelist makes with his readers. But
this novel is different, because Dickens didn't make it to the end. And so, we
read it always tentatively, knowing that its mysteries will remain mysteries
forever and ever. So this time, alas, Drood was a memento mori -- and goodness
gracious, I already have enough of those.

Source: 2011/05/my-new-campaign-for-city-council-

Title: My New Campaign for City Council
Date: May 30, 2011

It's election season once again. I'm thinking of making a run for city council
in our progressive western town. Here's my revised platform, voters.

1.  NO LEAF BLOWERS.  Rationale: it's a horrible noisy unecological machine that can easily be replaced with a broom. And everyone knows that single-stroke engines are major polluters.

2.  ALL MALL PERFORMERS MUST BE JURIED. Rationale: no more off-key singing. No more bad juggling.  No more ugly balloon animals. No more noisy drummers or whining didgeredoos.

3.  EVERY RESTAURANT MUST KEEP A PIG. Rationale: a perfect, ecologically-sound solution to the waste food problem. Come to think of it, let's require a piggery of all institutions with lunchrooms, such as high schools and hospitals. Let's fatten up those porkers, turn them into bacon and savory spare ribs.

4.  NO "HOLIDAY" LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce resources. Global warming. Bad taste. Bad theology. Bauble-olatry.

5.  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale: uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. (I reject out of hand those extremists who propose to celebrate Darwin's birthday on December 25. I'm a uniter, not a divider.)

6.  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897?  Death of Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music of any kind in an automobile that is audible outside the vehicle. Higher fines and jail terms hip hop and for excessively patriotic "country."

7.  NO SMOKERS.  Rationale:  lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, disgusting odor, cigarette litter on the sidewalk. Note: not "no smoking"-- "no smokers." No going outside of city limits to light up and then re-entering.

8.  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Why only "visible "tattoos?  Because whole-body inspections might be considered intrusive by squishy civil libertarians. Also, no nose rings, navel rings, or other bodily piercings. Except earrings. I rather like earrings. But no more than one per ear.

9.  ANNUAL JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PRAIRIE DOG SHOOT AND BARBECUE. Let them kids exercise their Second Amendment rights; eliminate them pesky varmints;  learn to cook. One platform position, three social benefits.

10. NO DOGS PERMITTED WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal dog attacks, dog bites, barking dogs, squealing dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs carrying on in parks and open space, the goopy indulgence of dog "guardians," the ecological disaster of dog food. But what about seeing-eye dogs, you ask?  Well, that's a slippery slope, ain't it. Sorry folks, no dogs (except for purposes of vivisection).

11.  NO MORE COLLEGE FOOTBALL. Rationale: I don't like college football.

12.  NO "FACILITATORS" WITH WHITEBOARDS OR FLIPCHARTS AT MEETINGS. Goodness gracious, am I ever tired of those things.

That's about it. I feel that I have my finger on the pulse of the
electorate. It's going to be a landslide. Tell me that life won't be better as
soon as we enact these new laws

Source: 2011/05/next-three-days-1

Title: The Next Three Days (2011)
Date: May 31, 2011

We watched The Next Three Days because we admired Paul Haggis's two previous
films -- Crash and In the Valley of Elah. This one is not quite as
innovative, but it's worth watching and is definitely the second-best English
teacher movie ever made in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Wonder Boys, based on the
Michael Chabon novel, is more engaging and original).  The story, in brief,
is that a woman is erroneously convicted of murder, her appeals fail, she's in
for life, but her husband breaks her out of jail.

The plot is hard to swallow, and is told with so much intercutting of pursuers
and pursued, red-herring clues, and car chases that it sometime seems like a
Bourne adventure. But it's also an endearing family values film -- husband
and wife and kid all cocooned up in the last scene.  Elizabeth Banks is
beautiful and expressionless and Russell Crowe is merely expressionless, but
they're sweetly devoted to one another. I fell for it, perhaps because I just
don't see all that many togetherness thrillers.

In Hollywoodland, 90% of English teachers are rigid, authoritarian jerks
who don't appreciate the brilliance of their eccentric students (who will
grow up to become successful script-writers), and exactly 9% are charismatic
and inspiring but a bit dangerous (Jean Brodie for example). Rare indeed
is the English teacher who outwits the cops, kills a couple of the bad
guys who get in his way, and makes it safely to Venezuela. Cop # 1 (with
admiration): "This guy's a teacher?"  Cop # 2:  "Yeah, at a community
college."

In the mandatory theme-enhancing classroom scene, our hero lectures
on Don Quixote.  As in quixotic. Get it?

Source: 2011/05/act-of-violence

Title: Act of Violence (1948)
Date: June 01, 2011

Act of Violence (1948) says as much about the immediate post-war years (and
my own first decade of life) as any film I know. In it, an ex-army-officer
who survived a German POW camp has acquired a pretty wife and a sunny suburban
California home, but he is guilt-ridden because while in the camp he
betrayed his fellow prisoners. He's pursued by a revenge-obsessed former
comrade. The film is not, for once, a melodrama.  Good and evil, innocence and
experience intermingle in the main characters, and, most rewardingly, in the
smaller parts. Mary Astor (otherwise Brigid O'Shaughnessy in The Maltese
Falcon) turns in a brilliant performance as a tired, opportunistic but
ultimately decent prostitute. In fact, women in this film (in addition to
Mary Astor, Janet Leigh and Phyllis Thaxter) are for once as complex and
cliche-free as the male leads (Van Heflin and the always pitch-perfect Robert
Ryan).

The story-telling is flawless and economical, the mood is sombre and
intense. The unsettling themes are the burden of the past, the menace of the
future, trepidation at the unknown, and the expiation of guilt.

Robert L. Richards, who wrote the spare screenplay, was fingered as a leftist
and blacklisted. He lost his promising career, became a carpenter, and
died, embittered, in exile. is it necessary to note that Act of Violence
is a not the least bit subversive?  It's a genuinely patriotic film. Fred
Zinnemann, the director, escaped from the Nazis but left both his parents
behind. They were murdered in the camps. Zinnemann was therefore
superbly positioned to bring to the screen an exploration of the "guilt of the
survivor."

Source: 2011/06/reposted-bezoars

Title: Reposted:  Bezoars
Date: June 08, 2011

I don't like gore. I’m the kind of person who won’t recklessly channel-surf
for fear that the changer gizmo will maliciously lock onto our 24/7 surgery
channel, where some poor soul's innards will be on garish hi-def display, And
yet, despite my squeamishness, I steeled myself and read right through Katrina
Firlik's Another Day in the Frontal Lobe,  which is a young neurosurgeon’s
bildungs-autobiography. Of course, I allowed myself the indulgence of zooming
through some of the more gruesome parts. How much does a guy need to know about
maggot infestations in the living brain?

I’m grateful to Firlik for her vivid stories, for the occasional moment of
black humor and also for offering a forthright glimpse into an alternative
world. Nevertheless, I'm sorry to report, Another Day is not a good book. It's
too transparently a package shaped by agent and editor for short-term commercial
appeal. The author is so anxious to be cute and to be loved –- she must have
been one of those front-row, admiring-eyes-glued-to-the-professor straight-A
pupils -- that whenever she comes up against a controversial topic, such as
the irrational funding of our medical system or the egomania of surgeons
or the morality of expensive, hopeless last-minute-before-dying surgical
interventions, she hints at concern but then swerves and punts. She doesn't
want to offend a single potential buyer.

Not a courageous writer, she is not an admirable being either: what can one say
about a highly-skilled professional who turns down job after job in the American
hinterland and elects to live in New Canaan, Connecticut, because, she admits,
it would be impossible to find a good Japanese restaurant in the sticks?, and
who in one sentence notes that her rich town has more neurosurgeons than all of
sub-Sahara Africa and in another reveals that she works on spines rather than
brains nowadays because spines are more lucrative.

Hey, Katrina, the next time you publish something, sacrifice some of that
royalty money and write directly from your heart (even though it's one cold and
stony organ).

Readers of this blague will not be surprised to learn that Dr. M. was much
intrigued by the book's medical vocabulary. Another Day serves up a feast of
beautiful and exotic words: venous infarct, dura, spicule, rongeur, neuroma,
glioma, glioblastoma (you don’t want one!), bone dust, debulk, pachygyria. The
ugliest of all: intubated.  My personal favorite, and a word that I've now put
in the running for Word of the Year: bezoar.

How could I have lived all these years without knowing the wonderful word
bezoar?  Could there be a surer index of my ignorance of medicine? A bezoar,
as everyone but me seems to know, is a concretion of indigestible stuff stuck
somewhere in the digestive tract – hairballs, medicines, bits of food.
Sometimes they can be dissolved, but on occasions they can only be removed by
surgery. A bezoar was formerly thought to be a magical antidote for poisons
–- so score another couple of strikes against our ignorant superstitious
ancestors. The most common kind of bezoar is the phytobezoar, which is a
collection of lignin, cellulose, or tannin of food fibers. Common sources
are celery, grapes, raisins, prunes, and pumpkins, all of which, if you’re
like me, you’ve probably unwittingly eaten without having given a thought
to their bezoar-potential and therefore neglected a splendid opportunity for
hypochondria.

A bezoar caused by eating persimmons (an especially dangerous fruit,
bezoarwise), earns its very own word-- diospyrobezoar -- an odd amalgam of
Greek and Persian linguistic roots and a word which, just as soon as a suitable
opening arises, I intend to enthusiastically insinuate into the conversation.

Source: 2011/06/another-great-moment-in-basketball-announcerese

Title: Another Great Moment in Basketball Announcerese
Date: June 09, 2011

It was an excellent win for Dallas. The series isn't over yet, but it's better
to be up 3-2 than down 2-3.  Terry, Kidd, Chandler, Marion, and Berea all
played beautifully. Dirk Nowitzki had another lovely game.

And in the booth, Jeff Van Gundy continued to mangle the language at a
yogiberra level: "Dirk Nowitzki is now a household name in every locker room
in the world."

Source: 2011/06/macbeth-ramachandran

Title: Brain Chemistry, Macbeth, Nihilism
Date: June 10, 2011

Our understanding of the human brain is mighty slim.  As a consequence our
therapies for insanity, for head injuries, and for dementia are primitive.

When John Donne was dying in 1633, his physicians tied pigeons to his
feet. Present-day medicine offers remedies for Alzheimer's sufferers that
are no more effective than pigeon tying. Brainwise, we linger in the dark ages
(which, by the way, has now been rebranded as "late antiquity"). Or the early
medieval period.

Not to say that nothing is known about the brain. There have been advances.

To bring myself up-to-date, I read The Tell-Tale Brain by V. S. Ramachandran,
a book which has been making a stir in pop-science circles. Ramachandran's
sensible thesis is that there are structures in the human brain that are either
undeveloped or that simply don't exist in the brains of apes. To posit so
is simply common sense. Human beings do things that apes don't: they study
themselves in the mirror, they compose and play piano sonatas, and they think
about their place in the universe.

Ramachandran is an ingenious experimenter but he gets beyond his depth when he
waxes philosophical -- which he does far too often. Here's an example of the
kind of thinking that rubs me wrong.

"I get chills," says Ramachandran, "whenever I hear Macbeth's immortal
soliloquy 'Out out, brief candle!/Life's but a walking shadow, a poor
player/ That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,/ And then is heard no
more. It is a tale/ Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/ Signifying
nothing.'"  He says that "these  words are one of the most profound and deeply
moving remarks about life that anyone has ever made!"

I don't question Ramachandran's chills, which are his own business, but I'm
bothered by his unthinking Bardolatry ("immortal solilquy"; "profound";  "that
anyone has ever made").  Poor Will doesn't need any more reverent cliches to
be shoveled upon him. He's already buried under heaps of them.

Bardolatry such as Ramachandran's obstructs thinking. What does it mean to say
that Macbeth's soliloquy is "profound... about life?"  Let's go to the tape.

When Macbeth says these words, he's under the spell of the witches, who are
"instruments of darkness."  At their suggestion, he's murdered his king,
murdered his closest friend Banquo and Banquo's son Fleance, and he's "savagely
slaughtered" Macduff's wife and children ("All my pretty ones...  All my
pretty chickens and their dam/ At one fell swoop"). Moreover, he's committed
uncatalogued atrocities innumerable: "Each new morn/ New widows howl, new
orphans cry." His brain is "filled with scorpions" and just before he utters
the soliloquy that gives Ramachandran the goosebumps, he learns that his wife,
burdened with guilt, has done herself in. Macbeth is not in a good way.

Macbeth is not a role-model and his philosophical ruminations are neither
insightful or profound. Quite the opposite. Though Macbeth is undeniably
eloquent, he's become a shallow nihilist. Life, in fact, is not "a tale told by
an idiot" and in Shakespeare's late-medieval religious universe, only someone
in the throes of the deepest despair, and certain that he is damned for all
eternity, would think so. Macbeth has learned exactly the wrong lesson. So,
apparently, has Ramachandran.

Gosh, great literature can sometimes be dangerous, can't it?

It's no secret that the universe with its billions and billions of galaxies
will go on very well without us.  Shakespeare, like everyone else, knew that
when looked at from the strictly scientific point of view, human beings are no
more than "many a thousand grains/ That issue out of dust."  But just because
we're tiny and it's enormous, we're not compelled to admire the despairing and
empty philosphy to which Macbeth subscribes.

Not while there are red wheelbarrows, winter love in dark corners, and "little
nameless, unremembered acts/ Of kindness and of love."

Source: 2011/06/my-teachers-1944-1956

Title: My Teachers, 1944-1956
Date: June 15, 2011

My first twelve years of formal schooling were pretty much a bust. I blame my
underachieving, unserious self. I was much more interested in punchball,
the Dodgers, comic books, and radio serials than in the lessons, which were
unchallenging and drab. At school I learned reading, writing and 'rithmetic,
for which I'm grateful, and also a little Latin. I was an autodidact, not a
student, right out of the gate. I liked to read and fortunately the Avenue J
branch of the Brooklyn Public Library (though only a storefront) was within
walking distance; so was the McDonald Avenue branch where, during high school,
I worked for 75 cents an hour shelving books. I was an omnivorous reader and
although I did not have a strong understanding or much of an imagination, I had
an excellent memory. Reading saved me. Reading rescued me. "If it hadn't been
for reading, we'd have been entirely at the mercy of sex."

I don't blame my teachers. A few had thrown in the towel, but most of them
tried their best. They were overworked, underprepared, unsupported, and in
occasional cases prodigiously ignorant even of the subjects they taught. The
conditions under which they worked were not propitious. At P. S. 217 classrooms
were designed (!!!) for 48 students (pupils, we were called in those days) but
on high-attendance days, there were always a few unenthusiastic kids lolling
in improvised seats by the window. In most classes, lessons were taught; but
in others, especially at Erasmus Hall High School, there was only disorder and
hubbub -- and sometimes a tad of danger.

My first grade teacher, Mrs. Callery was a diminutive gloomy woman. I remember
telling my mother, "Mrs. Callery doesn't like me." My mother said, "You must be
kind to her. She lost four of her boys in the war" (it was 1944). I remember
that I construed "lost" to mean "misplaced" and was therefore dumbfounded by
Mrs. Callery's forgetfulness. White-haired Mrs. Sherwood, in third grade, left
no impression except for her extreme old age (possibly 55), but Mrs. Cares
(Sarah Cares!!, great name for a teacher) was quite kind. Mrs. Finsmith in
fifth was a cipher, but Mrs. Donnelly, whose white hair was dyed a radiant
blue, made it her business to make life as miserable as possible for me, and
succeeded. My favorite teacher in those early years was extra-strict Mrs.
McNulty, who insisted that we memorize fractions, decimals, and percentages,
and taught us how to format a "friendly letter." In seventh grade, we went
"departmental." I remember Mr. Harry Shapiro ('the bald headed hero") who spoke
of "we scientists"; Mrs. Georgia Kieselbach, an aloof music teacher who had a
trained operatic mezzo; Mr. Maxwell Proshan, a pathetic incompetent, and the
twin (as I remember them) art teachers, Mrs. Nellis and Mrs. Ennis. At Erasmus
Hall, I had good instruction in Latin from old Miss Beulah Withee and even older
Mr. Gabriel Cussen (who I now realize must have been an ex-priest) but bad
lazy non-teaching from Harry Wedeck, a pretentious fake. Miss Edna Goetschius,
a biology teacher, complained to me more than once that I didn't know how
to stipple. Mr. Lindlar, an ineffectual physics teacher, would mysteriously
disappear between classes and return reeking of alcohol. My mathematics
teachers were competent (Mr. Ebersman), angry as all shit (Mrs. Altschul), or
suicidal (Mrs. Bonime). An English teacher who was well-read and competent,
Mrs. Harriet Felder, was an "Oxfordian" caught up in the conspiracy theory
that Shakespeare wasn't Shakespeare. Walter Balletto, who whiled away our time
teaching "Discussion English," was more interested in his own theatricality than
in any instruction he might have rendered. I later learned that he lived with
his mother and collected Kirsten Flagstad records, information which my 1950s
self could not even begin to assimilate. I remember also an art teacher, Mrs.
Schauben, who kept her protruding ears in check with a thin rubber band; perhaps
we weren't supposed to notice, but I've never forgotten. The gym teachers were
simple- minded jokesters, although I remember thinking even then that the
martinet Mr. Eis would have been more at home in the SS than at EHHS.

It was, in retrospect, quite a zoo. But I know that some of my coevals, who were
smart enough to choose their teachers wisely and take it all seriously, managed
to get themselves a decent education. I didn't; my only success was to get out
alive and then move on.

Here's a good picture of Erasmus Hall High School in the old days. A Gothic
pile.

Source: 2011/06/macbeth-brainswereout

Title: Why We Love Macbeth: Two More Reasons
Date: June 18, 2011

Pound for pound, Macbeth is of all Shakespeare's plays the most unrelenting and
horrifying.

One of its greatest moments occurs when Macbeth, seeking additional guidance,
pays a second call on the witches. "How now," he demands, "you secret, black,
and midnight hags!/ What is't you do?" The witches' response to his question,
though exceedingly laconic, is far scarier than anything the most computer-
aided-pixelbending horror movie could produce. They simply say: "A deed
without a name." Every member of the audience, and every reader, knows that
the witches are up to no good, but do they know how bad it is?  No. The
audience now learns that what the witches are doing is so loathsome that
there's not even a  word for it in the English language (and Shakespeare, of
all people, had English to spare). What could they possibly mean by "a deed
without a name?" Such a deed must be superlatively evil, worse than anything
that the most depraved reader or listener could possibly guess. The immensely
suggestive phrase "A deed without a name" pushes the limits both of imagination
and language.

Another magnificent moment comes when Macbeth imagines that Banquo, whom
he knows to have been murdered, has taken a seat at his feast. Macbeth
is startled and frightened, but he is also indignant -- so indignant that his
outrage becomes almost comic. He lapses into a reverie.

Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the
gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for
the ear: the times has been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their
crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.

Macbeth asserts that it used to be the case, both in olden times, before
Scotland became civilized, and even into recent days, that there was a natural
order to things. If you killed a man ("when the brains were out"), that person
had the decency to stay dead ("the man would die/ And there an end"). But
now, in these degenerate times, murdered men return and "push us from our
stools." Macbeth, who is under the spell of demons and who has committed
atrocity after atrocity, claims to be more "natural" than the spectre of
Banquo, who is "unnatural." In his eyes, killing people is the new normal,
and it goes against the grain when you kill a guy and he doesn't stay
killed. It's odd and lovely that Macbeth believes that he has a sincere
grievance with the world, especially when he's the one who has thrown things
completely out of whack. His exasperated complaint shapes itself into a weird,
ironic, perverse nostalgia for better days. We almost -- but not quite
-- feel for him.

Source: 2011/06/pazyrykrug

Title: The Pazyryk Rug
Date: June 23, 2011

I've been reading about rugs. I'm ignorant, but fortunately, there are dozens
of eaily-available and learned books, and I'm happy to say that our local
university library is going to keep me busy until my enthusiasm flags.

Everyone interested in rugs knows that the Pazyryk carpet (which I didn't
know about until a month ago) is the oldest known rug and about three thousand
years older than the next contender. It was discovered in 1949 near the
Mongolia-China border, in a Scythian tomb that had been flooded and frozen since
about 2500 BCE. It's magnificent and it's mind-expanding. It's been a long time
since something has created in me such a reverent sense of gaga-hood and wowage.

Although older than old, it's anything but primitive. Centuries, perhaps
millenia, of experimentation, learning, intelligence, craft, and effort
preceded its making. First our ancestors had to domesticate sheep, which,
I've learned, had to be selectively bred to become wooly rather than merely
hairy. Then came the invention of spinning and weaving. And dyeing, which is
a sophisticated and complicated art all of itself. Moreover, it's obvious that
the Pazyryk rug did not spring whole out of someone's brain --it's the climax
of a long artistic tradition. While some scholars detect Persian influences,
others think it wholly a creation of the steppes. The red dye, it's recently
been discovered, is Polish cochineal. How did the dye get to Mongolia?  I've
not read anything about the blue, but it looks like indigo, and if it is, the
process of getting wool to take indigo is extremely complicated.

The detail, though faded (fifty-five hundred years of refrigeration take
its toll) is worthy of the closest study: mounted horsemen, saddle blankets
and trappings, even the decorated manes of the horses, are rendered, knot by
knot, with great power.

And then there are the happy moose (or possibly elk, or some ungulate that I
don't know).

The rug now resides at the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg.  I intend to
visit it some day, but if the museum should want to put it out on permanent
loan to my living room, I would promise to treat it with the utmost respect and
appreciation.

Source: 2011/06/lessons-from-neolithic-malta

Title: Lessons from Neolithic Malta
Date: June 24, 2011

Neolithic Malta presents an exemplum and a warning. The island received
its first human inhabitants, who probably arrived from Sicily, some time
around 5000 BC. After about 3600 BC, trade and other links with  the outside
world waned. Over the next thousand years or so, the people of Mlata built
seventeen monumental stone temples unlike any elsewhere in the Mediterranean.

These are the remains of one of the seventeen.

Here's a view of another: There's something truly remarkable about these
megalithic temples, but it's troubling that a marginal and isolated culture
would make such a huge and economically unproductive investment. Indeed,
starting about 2300 BC, this native Maltese culture went into
precipitous decline. A major cause seems to have been the extreme
deforestation and soil loss when the population increased and resources were
overused. The best guess is that the Maltese experienced an economic and
spiritual crisis.

They did not, alas, confront the environmental problem; instead, the evidence
suggests that the people, probably led by an oppressive priestly caste,
continued to make greater and greater investments in religious worship, no
doubt hoping that their gods would rescue them from their predicament. "In
the end their expectations were not met and crisis ensued from which it took
centuries to recover" (Barry Cunliffe, Europe Between the Oceans, [Yale, 2008],
p. 172.) The population disappeared, the culture was extinguished and Malta
was deserted until the arrival of Bronze Age peoples around 2000 BC.

Let's go over this ground and make sure that we understand. The
neolithic inhabitants of Malta temporarily increased their population at
the expense of massive enviromental degradation, and then, as the standard of
living dropped, decided that the best way to deal with the crisis was to make
mammoth investments in priests and temples (rather than, say, birth control
and sustainable forestry and agriculture).

Is there a moral here.  We report, you decide. But I believe that I can hear
the debate. "We've already built fifteen temples and it hasn't worked. Perhaps
we should try something new, like planting trees."  "Nonesense, young
radical. We must look to faith. Faith will reward us. One more temple, this
one really huge. More stones over here!"

Source: 2011/06/a-brief-conversation-about-computers-and-also-about-good-and-evil

Title: A Brief Conversation about Computers and also about Good and Evil
Date: June 24, 2011

Vivian de St. Vrain:  "Why is my computer always breaking down. Why does it
get infected with these nasty viruses and trojan horses and stuff?"

NGP (my computer consultant):  "Because there are evil people in the world."

Source: 2011/06/carter-family-favorites

Title: Some Carter Family Favorites
Date: June 27, 2011

"Wildwood Flower," of course. The tune would have made Bach proud, the
story is classic, and the diction and metaphor absolutely perfect: "You've
gone and neglected your pale wildwood flower." "Single Girl, Married Girl,"
which I can never hear without tearing up (or coming very close -- depends
on my mood). No one has ever written a lyric that is more succinct or
more straightforward: "Single girl, single girl, she goes to the store and
buys,/ Married girl, married girl, she rocks the cradle and cries."  "Keep on
the Sunny Side," which is perfectly cheerful until it goes all faux-religious in
the last verse. If, on the other hand, you're looking for heartfelt religion,
there's "No Hiding Place Down Here," which was later and better realized by
Dorothy Love Coates and the Gospel Harmonettes. And also the very wistful and
lovely "Oh, I'm thinking tonight of my blue eyes/ Who is sailing far over the
sea/ I'm thinking tonight of my blue eyes/ And I wonder if he ever thinks of
me." But my favorite, nowadays, is, "Will You Miss Me When I'm Gone." The
lyrics are Victorian/goopy, written (by A. P.) in a highly artificial off-the-
wall literary and poetical style -- but yet, when accompanied by guitar
and autoharp, and song by Mother Maybelle, against all odds it comes out
quintessentially beautiful. "Will You Miss Me" taps into the common fantasy
of observing our own funeral. Her'e's the lyric:  Stanza 1: "When death shall
close these eyelids,/ And this heart shall cease to beat,/And they lay me down
to rest/ In some ?flowery ?boundary ?tree (the words are unintelligible).
(2) Perhaps you'll plant a flower/ By my poor unworthy grave;/ Come and sit
along beside me/ Where the roses nod and wave. (3) One sweet thought my soul
shall cherish/When this fleeting life has flown/ This sweet thought will cheer
when dying/ Will you miss me when I'm gone?  (4) When these lips shall never
more/Press a kiss upon my brow,/ But lie cold and still in death/ Will you miss
me then as now?" Chorus (after every stanza): "Will you miss me,/ Will you miss
me when I'm gone?" In its lugubriousitude, "Will You Miss me" is very like the
great Londonderry air, "Danny Boy."

There's something luxurious about a good gloomy wallow.

Source: 2011/06/new-words

Title: Words New to Me
Date: June 29, 2011

Regular readers of this blague know that Dr. M. is easily taken with odd and
unusual words. Well, the poor doctor has been enchanted again.

Here follows a wordhoard excavated from Barry Cunliffe's big book on
European archaeology. Perhaps some doctormetablogians know one or two of these
words, but I doubt anyone knows all of them, and I confess that each one is
absolutely new to me.

I'm embarrassed but it's the awful truth.

Dillisk,which sounds like a disk or circular form of dill, is in actual fact
a kind of sea lettuce or creatnach, an edible algae, much consumed during
the Neolithic. Carragheen, nowadays defined as "a family of linear sulfated
polysaccharides" was at one time the name of a food derived from red algae
-- apparently an ancient snackfood. Melitot is an alternative name for sweet
clover. Vetchlings are sweet peas. An ard is a early plough -- no more than a
spike that is dragged through the soil, most commonly by oxen. A lynchet -as
I'm sure everyone knows, is not a minor vigilante hanging but rather a "ridge
or terrace seen on the slopes of the Chalk,Oölitic, and Liassic escarpments in
various parts of England, especially in Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Wiltshire,
and Somerset." It's now public knowledge: Dr. M knows zilch about Oolitic
escarpments. A leister is a breed of sheep. A lur is not a way to catch fish,
but is an ancient bronze horn, precursor of the trumpet (though stopless). 
Here are a pair of lurs.

They look like high-end showerheads. I can't imagine what they sound like. A
cist is not a cyst. It is a small stone coffin or ossuary. An orthostat
is an upright stone used as a member of a larger structure (as opposed to
a menhir, which usually stands alone). Cob or cobb (or sometimes clom)
is a building material comprised of clay,sand, straw, water, and soil,
something like clench. A nuraghe is a megalithic structure found in ancient
Sardinia. Eight thousand nuraghi (mirabile dictu!) are still in existence.
Here's one:

A corbel is a stone that juts out of a wall to support a weight. If
it's not stone, but wood, it's called a "tassel" or a "bragger." A
currach is of course a kind of Irish boat, once constructed out of animal
hides, but now out of canvas. It is much smaller than a penteconter, an
ancient Greek galley which is the ancestor of the warlike trireme and the
fabled quinquireme. Strakes are the planks that compose the hull of a wooden
ship. Callais is a green stone used for bead-making in the early part of the
Bronze Age. Skeumorphism, my very favorite of all these exciting new words,
is "an element of design or structure that serves little or no purpose in the
artifact fashioned from the new material but was essential to the object made
from the original material." Archeologists apparently use the term in a more
restricted sense, as for example in the case of a bronze vessel which retains
and imitates features of an antecedent clay pot. Or, to take a wikipedian
example, "decorative stone features of Greek temples such as mutules, guttae,
and modillions that are derived from earlier wooden temples." What are mutules,
guttae, and modillions? I don't know, but they sure do set the logo-curious
mind all a-twitter.

Source: 2011/07/songs-my-mother-sang

Title: Songs My Mother Sang
Date: July 08, 2011

My mother had a pretty fair soprano and as a young adult performed in amateur
musicals. She sang in that high, quavering style that I associate with artists
of the 1920s and 1930s, such as Ruth Etting ("America's Radio Sweetheart").
I remember that sometimes, when she wasn't busy putting the laundry through
the wringer or scrubbing the sink or dusting under the beds, she'd sit at
the old Hardman piano and sing the songs of her youth. She sang tin pan alley
songs, Gilbert and Sullivan ballads, so-called "Negro spirituals," and
also what I now know to be Victorian parlor songs. Her taste was formed in
the earlier part of the century (she was born in 1905) and had as far as I can
tell ceased to change after about 1935 with the arrival of my older brother and
diapers. My mother sang, for example, 1919's "Look for the Silver Lining": "A
heart, full of joy and gladness,/ Will always banish sadness and strife./So
always look for the silver lining,/ And try to find the sunny side of life."
She sang "I've been Working on the Railroad" (first published in 1894) with the
refrain "Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/ Someone's in the kitchen I know/
Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/Strummin' on the old banjo."  Neither
she nor I knew that "Dinah" was a generic name for a female slave, nor did we
speculate about what the heck was going on in that kitchen. She sang "Oh, the
old gray mare, she ain't what she used to be,/Many long years ago."  She sang
a version of what I can now identify as Ed Haley's 1894 hit, "The Fountain in
the Park", with the familiar lyric "While strolling in the park one day,/ In
the merry, merry month of May,/ I was taken by surprise/ by a pair of roguish
eyes..."  Sorry, but I can't remember the rest. She sang, "Shine on harvest
moon/ Up in the sky."  And also "Aint She Sweet." And "Home Sweet Home" ("Mid
pleasures and palaces though we may roam,/ Be it ever so humble, there's no
place like home").

But the song that stands most vividly in my memory was "Bill" from
Showboat. It's a lovely song, but I took it wrong. When my mother sang "I used
to think that I would discover/ The perfect lover some day," I  decided that
she was finding fault with my father, to whom I was most loyal. In my mind, my
father was noble and manly and intelligent, and I resented her singing about
"Bill, who's not the type at all/ You'd meet him on the street and never notice
him." The refrain was particularly painful to my seven-year-old self: "And I
can't explain,/ It's surely not his brain that makes me thrill./ I love him
because he's I don't know,/Because he's just my Bill."

I've since learned about fiction, and make-believe.  I can forgive her.

Source: 2011/07/amnesia-on-film-mister-buddwing

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Mister Buddwing
Date: July 10, 2011

This 1966 black-and-white oddity boasts a distinguished director (Delbert Mann,
celebrated for Marty) and a group of excellent actresses (Jean Simmons,
Katherine Ross, Angela Lansbury and Suzanne Pleshette). It's ambitious and
sometimes imaginative. But frankly, even more than your run-of-the-mill amnesia
movie, it's a mess.

The amnesiac in this case is a young and puzzled James Garner, who comes to
consciousness in Central Park (there are good historical shots of 1960s NYC
throughout) and takes the nom d'oubli Sam Buddwing. We're not told how he
found his way to a park bench but movie amnesia is so commonplace and so
flexible that the audience has no difficulty going along for the ride. The rest
of the film tracks Buddwing through various encounters until he recovers his
memory with no more fuss than he lost it.

Amnesia is merely a plot device and not the film's true focus. The theme
seems to be "identity," which, if I remember, was a subject much in vogue in
the 1960s. Buddwing says, more than once, "I don't know who I am." But
so did all of us say the same thing, in those ancient days, even without
the provocation of amnesia. Buddwing's specific problem, as it gradually
reveals itself, is that he has made a series of "inauthentic" (as we used to
say) choices. He should have composed the octet rather than have gone for
the commercial money. He shouldn't have encouraged his wife to abort the
baby. And he certainly should have prevented both himself and Grace (note
signficant moniker!!) from drifting into infidelity and alcohol.

More "don'ts." The writer and director shouldn't have tried to imitate
Ingmar Bergman (the excrescent scene with the beggar who thinks he's God is
embarrassingly derivative). And they shouldn't have indulged all the Bergman-
derived religiosity. When a prayer "O God, let her live" is followed
immediately by a resurrection, it's not a film -- it's propaganda. Come to
think of it, the creative team should also have put some distance between
themselves and the Kafkaeque surreal. Moreover, they should not have allowed
the film to slide into an easy, superficial allegorizing. Buddwing may say
"I'm not everyman" -- but the film desperately hopes that he will be taken as
such.

Amnesia, it would appear, has the power to soften the brain of both writer and
director.

Source: 2011/07/more-new-words-

Title: More New Words
Date: July 11, 2011

I've been reading about rugs and therefore learning all sorts of new words. For
example, a yastik is a small rug or bag for designed to be sat upon and
therefore serves a different purpose than a mafrash, which is bag for
transporting small objects.  Here's a mafrash:

I have discovered that many of the terms used to describe the patterns of
"oriental" carpets are derived from architecture. Moreover, it turns out that
many of these words are entirely unfamiliar to me. For example, an ogive is
"the roundly tapered end of a object" such as an arch. It's a peculiar word
whose etymology is anybody's guess. The adjectival form is "ogival." "Ogival"
forms are common on Turkish rugs.

A merlon on a medieval castle is "the solid part of a parapet." I think a
picture is called for here. Merlons:

Such forms, like giant teeth, frequently appear in the borders of rugs. A
crenelle is a notch or open space between two merlons. So in the picture above
it's merlon, crenelle, merlon, crenelle, etc. Merlon Crenelle sounds like
the name of linebacker at Tulane or Louisiana State.  An even odder word is
squinch, which doesn't seem as though it could possibly describe a part of a
rug, but does. It sounds like a palatalized variant of squint (or Shakespeare's
squiny), or some sort of exotic citrus (would you mind passing me a couple of
those squinches?), but it is in fact "a piece of construction used for filling
in the upper angles of a square room so as to form a proper base to receive an
octagonal or spherical dome." It's a filler of sorts, and as such is occasional
knotted into a complex carpet, though I rather doubt that the women who wove the
rugs thought squinchwise.

A spandrel is a space above an arch -- as illustrated here:

There are four blue spandrels in this fancy silk Heriz carpet:

Kufesque is another word used to describe rug patterns, but it derives not
from architecture but from writing. Arabic was anciently written in Kufic,
an angular, upright script. Illiterate weavers copied and recopied Kufic
inscriptions until they became meaningless but still remained beautiful. Many
rugs have kufesque borders.

Strange to say, I had recent occasion to employ the word "kufic" in
conversation. It was my annual visit to the opthamologist. "Read the next
line," I was told. "Looks like Kufic to me." I believe the eye guy understood
that I couldn't read the line, but I rather doubt that he fully appreciated my
inspired and accurate answer.

Source: 2011/07/a-fair-comparison

Title: A  Fair Comparison
Date: July 16, 2011

"I imagine," said Big Al, "that he knows as much about Shakespeare as I know
about chainsaws."

Source: 2011/07/ladystallions

Title: Lady Stallions!!!
Date: July 17, 2011

Lady Stallions!?! Not only a New Jersey soccer team, but an oxymoron of
Shakespearean achievement. Not a simple oxymoron either, like Romeo's "cold
fire, sick health," but a figure of speech on the far frontier of Oxymoronia,
along with such classics as Utah Jazz and Christian Science. What, pray tell,
is a Lady Stallion?  Even in an age of gender fluidity, it's hard to get a
grasp on this one. Oh, I understand the principle -- the men's team is the
Stallions, and therefore it follows as night the day that the distaff team
acquires the same name, prefixed with Lady. In the same way, we have, out here,
the Buffs and the Lady Buffs. I would offer not the slightest demurral if the
men's team was called the New Jersey Horses and women's team was the New Jersey
Lady Horses. It's awkward but logical. Lady Horses may not be either a poetical
or an intimidating moniker, but it doesn't boggle the grammatical mind. But
a stallion is archetypically male, the snorting captain of his harem-herd of
equine odalisques, groupies, wives, mistresses, and girlfriends. Against all
challenges, he bites and kicks and if necessary injects himself with steroids
and horse growth hormone in order to maintain his macho primacy. A lady stallion
is therefore utterly impossible both emotionally and linguistically. The term
is a travesty. Better to call them the New Jersey Mares, which makes linguistic
sense. Or even better, the New Jersey Geldings (which are, in an odd  kind of a
way, no-longer-male stallions).

Although I myself would reserve the name Geldings for institutions named after
gentleman who have made the sacrifice and earned the right: the Origen Divinity
School Geldings or the St. Abelard Preparatory School Geldings. But that's a
horse of another color.

Although particularly egregious, Lady Stallions do not stand solitary in their
linguistic purgatory. Also competing are the Lady Rams (suggested alternative:
Sheep), the Lady Bucks, and the Lady Bulls (alternative: Cows). No teams named
the Goats. No Lady Boars (or Pigs either, for that matter). In defiance of
all logic, there are the Oregon Lady Ducks, which is truly an impossibility,
because properly, the men's team should be the Drakes, the women's the Ducks
(or Lady Drakes). There are no teams, as far as I'm aware, named either the
Geese or the Lady Ganders; yes, there are the South Carolina Gamecocks, but I'm
going to guess that the distaff side is not named the Lady Gamecocks. Wait,
I'll google it. OK, the South Carolina women's softball team is named ... the
Gamecocks, which is bad enough, but could have been worse, because in my world
of propriety, "lady" and "cocks" should never inhabit the same sentence.

Dogs are a problem. No one calls their team the Dogs. But there are some breeds
who are allowed to play. Bulldogs and Mastiffs and Greyhounds are in, Poodles
are out. The University of Georgia proffers the Lady Bulldogs, but not one
college, high school, or club has thought to give us either the Lady Dogs, or
whatever is that word by which female dogs are denominated.

Source: 2011/07/barmagillion

Title: Barmagillion
Date: July 19, 2011

A:  "What's that stand of trees that are down there by the brook?"

Dr. M:  "Cottonwoods.  I planted one of them must be thirty-five years ago.
The big one. They reproduce like aspens, underground runners. Turned into a nice
stand."

A:  "When I was working the sawmill, sometimes the locals would bring in a tree
they called "barmagillion" or "bahmagillion." I could never figure out what it
was. I looked in all the tree books. Never found it. We treated it just like
poplar."

Dr. M:  "Was it a poplar?. Cottonwoods are poplars."

A:  "It took me twenty years to figure out what 'barmagillion' was. Actually,
I didn't figure it out. Neill was here with one of those telephones that does
everything. He looked it up. It's actually "balm of Gilead."

(I looked it up also. "Balm of Gilead" is another name for what most people
around here call "balsam poplar."  It's not uncommon but not plentiful either,
at least in these parts. I didn't know that the buds are covered with sticky
resin used by bees to plug holes in their nests and by humans as a kind of
perfume).

"Barmagillion" is distantly related to "folk etymology," as for example when
arthritis is called "Arthur Wright."

Source: 2011/07/destination

Title: Another GPS Tale
Date: July 25, 2011

Hackett Hill Road is two twisty, depopulated, uphill-and-down miles long. It
is unpaved and seriously washboarded. If you didn't know for sure that it was
a public thoroughfare, you might think that you had accidentally turned into
someone's long driveway.

Most of our guests arrive from the South Road side of things, which is an easier
passage. We're just .2 from South Roadm a much easier ride than the long route,
off of Route 25. The GPS, which most people use nowadays, takes people the long
way.

Directly adjacent to the graveyard, which is the only obvious remnant of the
old community of West Bradford, lies our narrow driveway. It's inconspicuous
and steep, but we've posted a wooden sign with our street number. The number is
an innovation;  we didn't have one until 9/11 -- nor did we need one, because
there's no mail delivery on Hackett Hill. (We go to town to pick up mail; Muriel
at the post office takes good care of our occasional packages and flyers and
medical bills.)

Some friends, new to rural Vermont, traveling from Denver with their two teenage
daughters, came to visit us the other day. They were a bit intimidated and
possibly a little anxious as a consequence of their slow passage along Hackett
Hill Road. Although they were carefully following Sheila, which is what they've
named their GPS (ours is Dorcas) they missed our sign and overshot their mark.
Sheila, the idiot-savant, nevertheless announced, "You have arrived at your
destination, on left." On the left, of course, was only the cemetery with its
lichen-encrusted marble gravestones. They were surprised and amused --their
vehicle, I'm told, filled with hilarity -- but were poised enough to continue to
the end of the road, make a U, and initiate a most pleasant visit.

Source: 2011/08/hemlock-tale

Title: Hemlock Tale
Date: August 02, 2011

Dr. M.:  "The John Deere guy was over here the other day and he told us a story
about a fellow who had a 450 just like ours. He had the forks on the tractor,
the kind you use for picking up the round bales. He was working in his woods,
trying to bring down a big hemlock. He notched and cut it, but left a hinge and
the tree got hung up and wouldn't go over, so he tried to push the tree over
with his forks. Somehow or other, he got the forks on either side of the tree.
The hemlock came over, picked up his tractor, spun it 180 in the air, knocked
off the canopy, drove the upright right into his chest, killed him on the spot."

Big Al:  "I knew the guy. It was Howard Beck up in North Monroe. He was a low
wattage kind of guy. It's amazing he lived as long as he did."

Source: 2011/08/more-on-lolas-language

Title: More on Lola's Language
Date: August 09, 2011

Lola and I brought some windfall apples to the horses. The horses are Morgans,
very friendly, but intimidatingly large to a 22-month-old child. We stood on
one side of the gate, the horses trotted up to the other side as soon as we
announced our presence. They like to lean over the fence and look in our pockets
for apples.

Lola said, and I quote, "Back Mommy." I contrued this opaque construction to
mean "I believe that I would now like to rejoin my mother back at the house as
quickly as possible."

Lola is succinct, but she sure knows how to make herself understood.

Source: 2011/08/things-ill-miss

Title: Things I'll Miss
Date: August 10, 2011

I'm reconciled to the idea that death comes to all, but nevertheless, there are
a few earthly things that I'm genuinely going to miss.

Is there anything more wonderful, when you've been out early in the morning
in the rain or in a heavy dew, and your feet are wet and cold, than returning
home and putting on clean, dry socks, especially those excellent white cotton
ones that they sell at Costco?  Definitely a moment that makes life worth
living. And also: purchasing, opening and playing a new music cd -- preferably
one that you've thought about acquiring for a long time. Another: watching
young healthy athletic people run down the street, especially women with
long ponytails a-bobbing. Also: the perennially pleasurably sound of a bat
(wooden, not aluminum) connecting with a high, hard one. Rum raisin ice cream.
A well- made glazed donut. The sight of the first soft, red peony of the year
just as it breaks the ground. The waxy pink flower of the tamarack, always a
surprise. My Swiss Felco #2 hand pruner (which our cousins across the sea
call it a secateur), a friend for many seasons, which fits my hand perfectly
and which if you give it an occasional oiling and sharpening, cuts absolutely
true. The sound of rain on an uninsulated metal roof -- and also like the
clickety-clack and pinging of the roof on a cloudy day when the sun comes in and
out and the roof alternately expands and contracts -- it's an all-percussion
symphony. The old downtown of an old city that I'm visiting for the first time.
A one-year-old boy or girl learning to walk, at the stage when the strides
are of unequal and inconsistent length, the child hovered over by admiring
young parents, she with a hand outstretched, he recording the moment on tape;
the child the center of the universe, thoroughly doted upon, as is exactly
appropriate. A deep, luxurious weekend afternoon nap, so profound that when you
wake up you don't know, for five seconds, where you are or what day it is. A
sleep so deep that somnus imago mortis kicks in;  nothing more satisfying: the
kind of thing that makes a guy want to live a few more years.

Source: 2011/08/a-message-from-god

Title: In Which God Speaks Directly to Me
Date: August 13, 2011

The number of Republicans who are waiting for a signal from God about whether
or not to run for president  of the USA continues to grow. They're waiting and
waiting and waiting.

And meanwhile, surprising is it may seem, God the Father revealed himself to me
-- me! --just last night. He woke me out of a sound sleep (which is a kind
of miracle in itself because I had taken a double dose of Ambien). I have no
idea why I was chosen as the Vessel of His Wisdom, but, you know, God moves in
mysterious ways. I swear as I hope to go to Heaven that it was the one true God
Who spoke to me.

God said, and this is a direct, verbatim quote, "I do not want Rick Perry to
run for President." I asked Him why, in His Infinite Majesty, he was so
opposed to a Perry candidacy. He said (and here His Voice became so strong,
so 'out-of-a- whirlwind', that it actually rattled our windows --but they're
old windows and the points and putty could stand replacing), "because he's
a doofus, and also because of he could only earn a "D" in the Shakespeare
course at Texas A & M. Imagine that. A "D" in Shakespeare?" God was clearly
outraged. "You are aware," he intoned, "that according to Victor Hugo, 'after
God, Shakespeare has created the most?'"

It was interesting to me that God didn't look the way He does in the inspired
Michelangelo ceiling, which is what I would have expected. He looked more
like Shazam in the old Captain Marvel comic books. Old and bald, and kind of
indistinct. But it was definitely God. I could feel it in my gut. Trust me.

I asked Him if He had any other preferences in the upcoming
election. He sighed. "I don't want either Bachmann or
Palin either. They're doofae."  I wasn't surprised that God was so
adamantine about B and P, because of their shallow religiosity and deficient
knowledge of history, but I was truly shocked that God called them by the
faux-Latin feminine plural "doofae." I mean, doofus isn't even a real Latin
word, despite its -us ending, and so there's no singular feminine "doofa."  I
would have thought that God would have a better command of His Latinity. I was
so taken aback that I forgot to ask Him how he felt about Newt, whom I myself
would definitely prefer to be the Republican candidate. He's so adorable.

But the grammar of the Godhead is beside the point. The absolute true fact
is that He has spoken quite plainly. We mortals need to know no more but
simply to walk humbly in His ways, which means that Perry and the two ladies
should take heed of this authentic Divine Intervention and decline to pursue
elected office. For them to continue to press forward, at this juncture and
with this revelation, would be nothing short of blasphemy.

Source: 2011/08/downtown-bradford

Title: Downtown Bradford
Date: August 24, 2011

When we arrived in Bradford, Vermont in 1967 (during the troubled waning years
of the LBJ presidency), I remarked to Mrs. Dr. M., "this "downtown" looks like
it hasn't changed a bit since the 1920s." The downtown was one block long then;
it's no more extensive now, forty-four years later. And not much different.

We sat in the window of the Local Buzz, one of our newer enterprises (real
coffee comes to Bradford, at last!) and watched the folks go by. Couples, the
guy way too skinny and the lady way too fat. Young blonde guys, tattooed, trying
desperately to grow their scruffy beards. An occasional suit -- a lawyer or
insurance agent. Tourists in campers, looking mighty skeptical. An occasional
gaggle of bicyclists, coming from somewhere, going elsewhere, all a-helmeted and
bespandexed. But very few guys in "farmer greens."

Nor have there been any new buildings to compromise the 1920s time-capsule.
Stores have changed owners and purposes, of course. Gove (pronounced as in rove,
not as in glove) and Bancroft was an independent pharmacy (the kind of place
that had big old colored bottles in the window) that disappeared must be a
quarter of a century ago and has been superseded by the new Kinney's out at the
four corners (where also resides Orange County's only four-way traffic light).
Similarly, Gove and Morrill, an independent hardware store, has been replaced
with a shiny new Aubuchon (a northeastern chain). The old Gove and Morrill,
three decades dead, was a great place of a young fellow to purchase his hardware
needs. Lester Wakefield and Bart Morrill knew everything and gladly would they
teach. They also had a bit of a machine shop in the basement and would drill
out that rusted part for you, no charge. Their shop was a shrine of Yankee
frugality. The Aubuchon employs what looks like minimum wage help -- the kids
know how to run the Visa through the slot, but they know little else, so you're
pretty much on your own. I'm sure that Kinney's and Aubuchon make a better
profit than the stores that they replaced.

And speaking of chains, we now have a Subway, which, I must be the most
impoverished looking Subway in existence. Other eateries: Chan's House (the
poorest, least authentic Chinese restaurant in the entire occident).  And
another house, the House of Pizza, which replaced, many years ago, The Chimes
(a semi-glorified diner). In between the Chimes and the pizza place, there was
for a few controversial years at that corner location a breakfast shop that was
run by very very young, robotic Stepford girls, reputed to be members of the
harem of some charismatic off-brand far right Christian cultist. The food was
marvelously inexpensive but the place was o so creepy.

There's a second-hand bookshop, Booked Solid, that is loaded with romances
and "genre" paperbacks; trade books that find their way to the shelves are
accidental tourists.

Two banks where there used to be just one.

The Paradise Cafe, Bradford's first venture into culinary artistry, lasted a
year or two but then devolved into the Richardson Insurance Agency, though it is
my impression that Kermit Richardson himself has long since collected on his
policy. Taylor-Palmer insurance is  still in the same white clapboard house
that it inhabited half a century ago, and Hod Palmer, after a brief foray into
gourmet cooking, has been restored to the world of his fathers. The Colatina,
an out-of-the-can red-sauce Italian restaurant, is still in business, still
enticing those Dartmouth boys to drive half an hour for some north of Hanover
pizza. Perry Oil, which dominates its side of the street, is still going strong,
still filling those propane tanks, and still run by genuine Perrys. Hill's, a
kind of old-fashioned notion shop, like a Woolworth's  -- how come it hasn't
been obliterated by a Target or a K-Mart? The Bradford Public Library, now
reroofed, is a handsome Victorian Gothic building, but lacks books.

"All is flux," Heraclitus used to say. But then he'd never been to downtown
Bradford.

Source: 2011/08/advice-for-married-folk

Title: Advice for Married Folk
Date: August 27, 2011

Reposted from January, 2007, and just as pertinent now as it was then:

High on the list of The New York Times' "most e-mailed articles" is one that's
catchily titled "What Shamu Taught Me About a Happy Marriage," by a writer named
Amy Sutherland. Apparently it's a well-regarded, influential essay. I think
it's misleading and wrong-headed, and I think that couples who heed its advice
will soon find themselves not in a happy marriage but in one that's sterile and
empty.

Amy's column is at this address, and will be available unless and until the
strapped and greedy Times decides to put it behind a paid wall. A summary: poor
Amy is perpetually annoyed by Scott, her husband of twelve years. He loses his
keys and asks her help finding them; he keeps her waiting at restaurants; he
"hovers around her in the kitchen asking if she has read this or that piece in
the New Yorker." She's tried nagging, but it doesn't work. As it happens, Amy
is writing a book on animal training and she's watched people "do the seemingly
impossible," such as 'teaching baboons to skateboard" and "hyenas to pirouette
on command." She decides to adopt the animal model and "train" her husband. "If
he threw one dirty shirt into the hamper, I'd thank him. If he threw in two, I'd
kiss him." She rewards "approximations." She uses "least reinforcing syndrome"
in which the trainer doesn't respond in any way when an animal does something
wrong -- just stands and stares. When Scott loses his keys, she ignores his
pleas for help, and eventually he finds them by himself. By the end of the
article, Scott has changed. "After two years of exotic animal training, my
marriage is far smoother, my husband much easier to love."

What's so awful about this advice? Let's take the shirts-on-the-floor crisis.
Amy can imagine only two methods to deal with this problem. There's nagging,
which she now rejects, and there's re-training. But there are other responses.
The first is for Amy to gain a bit of perspective. Marriage isn't about whether
the dirty shirts are in the hamper or on the floor. People have had long and
happy marriages without resolving such issues. Amy seems to assume that getting
her way about the shirts is crucial. But when she and Scott married, they agreed
to love, honor, and respect each other; they didn't agree that every single
shirt would immediately find its way into a hamper. Perhaps Amy should re-think
her priorities and try to keep the larger picture in view. Secondly, Amy can't
seem to imagine any ground between nagging and animal training. But there is --
there's an enormous territory. There's discussion, negotiation, and compromise.
Amy: "It bothers me that you expect me to pick up your shirts." Scott: "I'll try
not to drop them. I'll pick them up myself." Amy: "And I'll try not to make such
a big deal out of it."

When Scott comes into the kitchen and wants to read to her from a New Yorker
article, Amy could say, if she had any imagination, "Oh, good. Scott wants to
involve me in his intellectual life. He wants to talk to me." But she doesn't
see it that way; she wants him out of the room so she can "concentrate on the
simmering pans." But what's important about marriage, or about life? Is it the
pans, or is it the conversation? Once again, Amy has it all wrong. She cares
about her cooking, and getting the soup exactly right, more than she cares
about the marriage. It shouldn't be beyond her ability to stir and to listen
at the same time; it's been known to happen. Amy is, let's face it, a bit of a
narcissist. She wants to make Scott into an extension of herself; she wants to
subordinate the marriage to her own convenience.

Readers and friends, here's my opinion. If your spouse comes to you and says,
"I've lost my keys, I'm distressed," you should stop whatever you're doing and
you should start searching. When you do so, you're treating your spouse with
respect and you're taking your marriage seriously. And if you happen to misplace
your own keys, it's perfectly fair to ask your spouse to help find them. Because
sometimes finding keys is a team activity. I'll go even further: sometimes it's
less important to find the lost keys than it is to search for them together.

But you should engage yourself with the problem of the keys, or the shirts, only
if you want a relationship of equals. If you think that it's so important to
train your spouse to stay out of your damn kitchen, then go ahead and follow
Amy's advice. But you might wind up with not with a husband or wife, but with a
pirouetting hyena or a skateboarding baboon.

Amy and Scott: here's some valuable advice. It comes to you courtesy of Mr.
Hart, who lived a couple of houses down from us. He died at age 90, in the same
month as his equally aged wife. The Harts had been married for 60 or so years.
"What's the secret of a long, happy marriage," he was asked. He said, "find out
what your wife wants and make sure that it happens." Which is, if you think
about it for a moment, only a variation of the traditional golden rule and of
its even more practical cousin: "do unto others as they want to be done unto."

Source: 2011/09/dog-faced-man

Title: Dog-faced Man
Date: September 15, 2011

Here's a sad childhood memory.

Just around the corner from us, on Ditmas Avenue, there lived the ugliest man
I've ever seen in my entire life. He was a small, always solitary old man. He
was not deformed, just plain ugly. His nose and mouth stuck way out, but his
chin receded; he had very long canine teeth and the world's saddest eyes. He
walked the ugliest little dog.

I confess that when we passed in the street, I looked away, even though I was
fascinated enough by his repulsiveness to steal a surreptitious backward glance.
I imagine that everyone else whom he passed averted their eyes as well, and that
the poor fellow lived in a world not only without friends, but even without eye
contact.

Later I learned that he made his living my exhibiting himself nightly at a Coney
Island freak show. He was the "Dog-Faced Man."

This was in the late 1940s or early 1950s. I hope that freak shows are a thing
of the past.

Source: 2011/09/trollope-on-the-kindle

Title: Trollope on the Kindle
Date: September 16, 2011

My first purchase for the new Kindle was a "set" of fifty novels by Anthony
Trollope for $4.95 -- or ten cents for each spacious, digressive, leisurely
book, many of which I have read in the past as three-volume baggy monsters.
Initiating a 21st-century electronic device with classic Victorian novels
tickles me.

The Kindle fits nicely with my latter-day anti-clutter neurosis. No need to buy
a new bookcase. No need, even, to dust the volumes.

It's a new way of reading, but whether for better or worse I can't yet say. The
Kindle is portable and easy on the wrist. There's a built-in light for cloudy
days and the middles of nights. But I'm used to knowing where I am in a novel.
How many pages I've read, how many to go are elements crucial to the experience.
I miss, frankly, the heft of the book, the gratification of accumulating all
those turned pages. (The Kindle notes the percentage of the book that you've
read, which is helpful but not satisfying. And when you buy fifty novels in a
bundle, the K tells you only that you started The Eustace Diamonds at, say, 26%
and finished at 29% -- information which is utterly useless.)

Can You Believe Her? clearly signaled that it was coming to an end, but Phineas
Finn, this time through, came to a conclusion that seemed to be far more
hasty than in previous readings. I was surprised that Trollope left so much
unresolved. But then, perhaps he had a sequel already in mind.

I need to remind myself that the first readers of these novels didn't read
them in book form. They read them as periodic installments in magazines. The
experience of reading a novel in the course of a year or eighteen months was
profoundly different from zooming through 800 pages in a few days. While
there's  nothing "authentic" about "kindling," the kind of Trollope-reading at
which I've had a lifetime of practice is  equally artificial.

Source: 2011/09/mr-kripke

Title: "Mr. Kripke"
Date: September 27, 2011

When I was in graduate school (fifty years ago, believe it or not), I enrolled
for a course called "Modern American Poetry." In the unthrilling days of
yesteryear, "modern" still meant the generation of Eliot and Pound. This
particular course, however, was so up-to-the moment that it might have been
called "last month's American poetry." Some of the poets whom we studied
turned out to be mere flashes in the pan, and none of them, I think, ever came
close to Yeats or Frost. Nevertheless, it was good to know about Olson and
Hall and Bly and Snodgrass and Levertov. There were major omissions to the
curriculum: Sylvia Plath had not yet flashed across the horizon, and Ginsberg,
Ferlinghetti, Corso and Duncan were far too rude to have been invited to this
particular party.

Our instructor was a genial man named John Lincoln Sweeney. Although he was not
a bristling-with-bibliography kind of academic celebrity, he knew everything
about the subject and was famous as a supporter of poets and artists. I knew
that he was "different" -- even my callow unsophisticated eye noticed the
elegant bespoke suits and the aristocratic mien. At the Woodberry Poetry Library
in Lamont, Sweeney was listed as "curator" but I have not doubt that he was also
patron. Woodberry collected not only books but also records and audiotapes and
films of poetry readings. It was a spectacular resource. There was a rumor that
there were poetry gatherings at Sweeney's mansion on Beacon Street, across the
river, but I was never invited. Why would I have been?

Here's a photograph of Jack and Maire Sweeney:

Sweeney's letters are now housed in the Trinity College, Dublin Library.
"Correspondents include Conrad Aiken, William Alfred, Padraic Colum, e.e.
cummings, Richard Eberhart, Leon Edel, T.S. Eliot, Robert Fitzgerald, Seamus
Heaney, Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath, Thomas Kinsella, Philip Larkin, Marianne
Moore, Edwin and Willa Muir, Wallace Stevens, and Richard Wilbur." The
paintings (Picasso, Modigliani, Matisse) were bequeathed to the National
Gallery of Ireland.

There were about twenty students in "Modern American Poetry." Nineteen of them
were regular; one was irregular. Whenever "Mr. Kripke," whom I remember as an
exceedingly scruffy young fellow, signaled that he wanted to participate in the
conversation, time stopped. Both the instructor and my classmates treated Mr.
Kripke, who spoke in halting, awkward, and oracular tones, with extraordinary
deference. "What's the deal?" I asked, privately. "He's supposed to be very
smart," I was told. I myself didn't understand a word that Mr. Kripke said
during the entire semester. Not a single word. When I don't understand, it's
hard for me to tell whether the speaker is spouting hot air, or I'm just not
smart enough.

"Mr. Kripke" dropped from my consciousness. But just the other day, I noticed
an advertisement in the NYRB for a colloquium honoring the achievement of Saul
Kripke, Distinguished Professor at Princeton and at the CUNY Graduate Center.

Here's the scoop: according to wikipedia, "a recent poll conducted among
philosophers ranked Saul Kripke among the top ten most important philosophers of
the past 200 years." Top ten?  This is no trivial praise. No wonder everyone
stopped to listen. It was like having Michael Jordan in your gym class.

Kripke was apparently a prodigy who made important contributions to modal
logic, whatever that is, while still in his teens. For example:

A Kripke model is a triple , where is a Kripke frame, and is a relation between
nodes of W and modal formulas, such that:

Which. frankly  I never doubted.

Mr. Kripke had a couple of branches of logic (and mathematics) named after him
before he entered college. No wonder I didn't understand (and still wouldn't)
what he was struggling to say. The most recent philosopher I can understand is
John Locke, and then only the easy parts.

In retrospect, that class in poetry had more drama than I gave it credit for.
Here was John Sweeney, civilized and be-boutonniered, acquaintance of Yeats,
friend to every important poet in America. And there was Saul Kripke, not
only a mathematical and philosophical genius but also the son of "the only
conservative rabbi in Omaha, Nebraska."

And then there was me.

Source: 2011/10/on-cults

Title: On "Cults"
Date: October 09, 2011

Megachurch Baptist pastor Robert Jeffress, an enthusiast for Governor Rick Perry
(the Texax governor for people who think that George Bush was way too bookish)
has labelled Mitt Romney's church (Latter-Day Saints) a "cult." Jeffress made
the charge while addressing a convention of right-wing "value voters."  (The
particular value which Jefress himself exemplifies is "smugness.")

According to Jeffress, Perry's church is a "religion" and Romney's is a
"cult."  By which he means, I suppose, that a "religion" is good and true and
"cult" is bad and false.

But to an outsider, like myself, it appears otherwise. It appears that
the one is older and the other newer.  The origins of Christianity (not
the Baptist part, but the religion generally) are decently obscured by the
mists of antiquity. The origins of Mormonism are o so transparent and
so unpersuasive. But on any rational scale, the religion (virgin birth,
bread-into- wine, three-in-one) and the cult (golden tablets, magic underwear)
are equally incredible. There's nothing that would allow one to claim
superiority to the other.

A cult is a new religion; a religion is an old cult. How does a cult get to be a
religion?  It absorbs a whole lot of converts. It becomes wealthy.  It asserts
authority -- such as the power to stigmatize newer religions as cults.

Similarly, a "myth" is an old but dead religion. A "superstition" is someone
else's religion.

Here's a related question:  what's the difference between a language and a
dialect?  The standard answer among linguists: "a language has a bigger navy."

Source: 2011/10/pride-and-prejudice-and-farts-

Title: The Famous First Sentences of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, This Time with Bodies.
Date: October 10, 2011

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a
good fortune must be in want of a wife, or at least a mistress, especially
if he does not wish to indulge with ladies of easy virtue, of which the
neighborhood enjoyed an ample stock.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first
entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the
surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property of some one
or other of their pining, inhibited, and frustrated daughters.

``My dear Mr. Bennet,'' said his lady to him one day, `have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?'' As usual, Mrs Bennet's stomach was
distempered with wind, which caused frequent eructations and annoying
flatulence.

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

``But it is,'' returned she; ``for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told
me all about it.''

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

``Do not you want to know who has taken it?'' cried his wife impatiently.

``You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.''  Mr. Bennet
was customarily cranky and irritable, perhaps because he had not enjoyed his
lady for the last fourteen years, or ever since the birth of his youngest
daughter, when Mrs. Bennet had declared that five pregnancies were sufficient.
He frequently retired to his room, where, pretending interest in his extensive
library, he surrendered to self-abuse.

This was invitation enough.

``Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a
young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on
Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it
that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before
Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next
week.''

``What is his name?''

``"Bingley.''

``Is he married or single?''

``Oh! single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or five
thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!''  He must be in the pink of
youthful vitality, and if we can only bridle his natural impulses until he has
been entranced by Jane or Lizzie, we might capture a prize.  Perhaps out of
excitement, Mrs. Bennet let fly an enormous, resonant fart.

``How so? how can it affect them?'' replied Mr. Bennet, pretending not to notice
that the air was rent with the sound and savor of the explosion.

``My dear," replied his wife, ``how can you be so tiresome! You must know that
I am thinking of his marrying one of them. He'll be so blinded by youthful lust
that he'll surely imagine himself to be in love.

More on Jane Austen and Sex.

Source: 2011/10/whats-with-the-necklaces

Title: What's the Deal with the Necklaces that Baseball Players are Wearing?
Date: October 11, 2011

What are those beads with which half of the players now accesorize?  Why,
they're magic titanium necklaces. "The necklaces... work by stabilizing the
electric flow that nerves use to communicate actions to the body. All of the
messages in your body travel through electricity, so if you’re tired or just
pitched nine innings, the electricity isn’t flowing as smoothly as it can,”
said Joe Furuhata, a Phiten (Phiten is the company that manufactures the beads)
spokesman. “Our products smooth out those signals.” Persuasive as all get
out, isn't he?  Nothing like smooth-flowing electric signals, though whether AC
or DC he doesn't specify. Here's some more science from the website: "Titanium
Necklace Benefits have been proven to be many. Some of these benefits include
alleviation from discomfort in your shoulders and neck, and it helps the whole
body to relax as well. Titanium necklaces are known to ease pains and aches of
the upper back, and also enhance the circulation of blood from the upper body to
the brain and other major organs. Included in the titanium necklace benefits are
that they have anti-radiation and anti-fatigue properties."  So it's not just
electricity: it's also pain relief and improved circulation, plus the beads ward
off radiation (a major problem in ballparks nowadays).

Gotta love the use of the passive voice: "Titanium necklace benefits have been
proven to be many."  Proven by whom?  Here I am searching for a citation, an
experiment, a demonstration, a study, even a minuscule perfunctory footnote.
But there's nothing. Not a whisper of evidence. Nor could there be: what sort
of double-blind experiment would it take to prove the efficacy of the beads. I
guess I'm a non-believer, once again. So is the chief of sports medicine at NYU,
who says, "it's all superstition."

OK, so baseball players are superstitious. No news there. But what are we
to think when Ron Washington, the manager of the Texas team, sports a magic
necklace?  Here he is:

Can you see the beads: trust me, they're not ordinary; they're genuine
"titanium-infused plastic."

Does "Wash" think that his beads improve the performance of managers, whose job
is of the brain rather than of the body?  "Wow, I never would have thought to
call for that double steal if I hadn't been wearing my magic beads!"

Altogether, the ubiquitous necklaces lead me into further despair about the
quality of American education.

Source: 2011/10/about-about-schmidt

Title: About "About Schmidt"
Date: October 16, 2011

I borrowed About Schmidt from our local library because I had seen and enjoyed
the Alexander Payne movie, even though it starred Jack Nicholson, who was once
again -- yet once more -- still another time -- reprising J. J. Gittes Redux.
There was however only the most marginal connection between novel and film.
In the film, Warren Schmidt is a insurance executive in Omaha whose nasty
wife has recently died and whose Denver daughter is about to be married to an
asbestos salesman. In the novel, Albert Schmidt.  an upper-class Harvard/New
York/Hamptons lawyer for a white shoe firm, has recently retired, and has lost
his beloved, talented and patient wife to a brain tumor. He fusses endlessly
about money, of which he has a more-than-ample supply. His major problem is
that he don't much like Jews, and that his daughter is about to marry one (a
young partner in his law firm). She (the daughter) teases her father with the
possibility that she's going to convert to Judaism. Schmidt has a nasty streak
but he's a good man underneath it all and one who can return blow-for-blow
and flirt for flirt. It appears that redemption from his narrowness will come
through an affair with a twenty-year-old Boriquena who doesn't much care about
money and who introduces him to a new world of modern sexuality. Just when
the novel seems unable to conclude, Schmidt receives a large enabling bequest
from his father's second wife and all his financial problems are solved.
Thesaurus ex machina, so to speak. Inasmuch as the novel seems to look askance
at Schmidt's money worries, it seems odd that it should end with a triumphant,
and I suppose comic, infusion of additional cash. I didn't find the conclusion
to be satisfying.

The relationship between Schmidt and his daughter is stressful and painful and
rings true -- it's the best thing in the book. It's a wonder that the movie
version neglected such rich material. My suspicion (I have no evidence to offer)
is that the perpetrators re-shaped the novel into a vehicle for Jack N. I hope
that Louis Begley, the author of this urbane tale, was amply rewarded for the
use of the novel's title, because the movie made almost nothing of the plot, or
the characters, or the dialogue, or the ambience.

It's a good book -- and  certainly intriguing enough to send me scurrying back
to the library for other novels by Louis Begley.

Source: 2011/10/slugs-two-reasons-not-to-eat

Title: Two Good Reasons Not To Eat Raw Slugs on a Dare
Date: October 18, 2011

Reason A.  Because slugs are hideous and disgusting.

Reason B:  Because slugs eat rat droppings which can carry a lungworm parasite
-- a nematode called Angiostrongylus cantonensis -- which causes fatal brain
swelling. According to the NYTimes, a 27-year-old Australian man "has been
hospitalized for more than a month after eating the slugs on a dare."

“We hope this will help to remind others to avoid eating raw slugs," said a
spokesman.

Source: 2011/10/re-thinking-slugs

Title: Re-thinking Slugs
Date: October 21, 2011

Yesterday's post was disrespectful of slugs. I'm chagrined to have been so
benighted and bigoted. After all, slugs have mothers too. In a comment, Mrs.
KKP --formerly Miss KKH -- (a food safety specialist) reports that many people
happily eat slugs, which are a great source of protein and surely taste just
like chicken when fried, or blended into a stew. They will no doubt serve
equally well in a fricassee or a ragout.

In my defense, I can only say that I've not enjoyed a good relationship with
slugs, so far. I remember my first encounter with the slimy tribe -- as a young,
innocent boy, in my father's garden on East 9th Street, where six-inch long
fat gruesome creatures violated the precious daylilies with trails of goo.
Slugs were unlike anything I had previously encountered and seemed to me to be
either extra-terrestrial or transplanted from a horror movie. "Just pick them up
and throw them into the bucket," my father said, optimistically. Squeamish, I
declined.

And then there were the foot-long slugs crawling up the outsides of the windows
on Mackinack Island and California's horrid banana slugs. They're all dreadful
and voracious beings.

Source: 2011/10/reposted-duke-duke-duke

Title: Reposted: Duke, Duke, Duke
Date: October 23, 2011

Ain't it shocking that Gene Chandler's excellent song is now almost half a
century old?  Seems like just yesterday.

This be the verse in its full splendor.

Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke,
Duke, Dukeof Earl

As I walk through this world Nothing can stop the Duke of Earl And you, you are
my girl And no one can hurt you, oh no Yes, I'm gonna love you Come on let me
hold you darlin' 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

And when I hold you You will be my Duchess, Duchess of Earl We'll walk through
my dukedom And the paradise we will share.

Yes, oh, I I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of
Earl.

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

1)  "Duke of Earl" is classic, though late, doo-wop. Therefore it's lineally
descended from songs in which a supporting male quartet sang meaningless
syllables: doo wop, wop, wop. In this revisiting of the genre, nonsense doo doo
doo de wop has been superseded by words that carry meaning of a sort: duke duke
duke of earl. Return we now to the pages of history: in their turn, doo wop
quartets were themselves secular offspring of gospel quartets, where a reverent
foursome would sing do lord do lord, do lordy lord (a good example: the unnamed
backup quartet supporting Georgia Peach in "Do Lord Send Me").

2)  It's a fascinating process: Gene Chandler's replacement of doo doo with
duke duke is in fact a return to the roots, except that the previous and
inherent religious content has undergone secularization. "Lord" has become
"Duke," while the heaven of gospel has transformed into the "dukedom" of doo-
wop.

3.  It's easy to deride the naive faux-aristocratic title "Duke of Earl";  but would the song preserve its meaning if it were "Duke of  Buckingham?" "Earl" may sound silly, but because it's a generic title  rather than a specific one it carries allegorical significance. "Duke of  Earl" is no one and therefore everyone.

4.  It's entirely likely that the word "earl" was chosen because of  it echoes "lord": liquids "r" and 'l" and unemphatic vowel.

5.  The first line of the lyric --"As I walk through this world"--  introduces a secularized religious motif (an inheritance from the song's  gospel forbears). Some will notice the echo of the initial phrase of the  most famous of all religious allegories, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1672):  "As I walked through the wilderness of this world." Gene Chandler,  walking through this world, is reborn just as Christian was reborn in  the classic allegory. Not religiously, but in a worldly way. He is not  saved; he is duked.

6.  Why the aggressive "nothing can stop me  now?" What obstacles stopped the Duke of Earl in the past, before his  duking? The triumphalist language is highly developed but the obstacles  remain vague and unarticulated. Audiences find their own meaning in  the lacuna, but indignities historically suffered by the black  underclass lurk only slightly below the surface of the lyric.

7.  The transformation from a previous but unknown and unarticulated  existence to an aristocratic, unstoppable Duke of Earl takes place  offstage, nor is any explanation offered for the metamorphosis.  It's  entirely magical.

8.  Because it's magic, it's pure fantasy. Pastoral fantasy in fact,  which, curiously, is simultaneously primitive ("paradise") and  sophisticated ("dukedom").

9. But it's a shared paradise: the duke along with his duchess. The  retreat to domesticity is almost Victorian: "ah love, let us be true/  To one another...."  This particular Duke does not know that "Two  paradises were in one/ To live in paradise alone."

10.  The Duke retreats to domesticity and yet he seems to stake  out ("nothing can stop me now") new territory to conquer, in which  regard the spacious lyric seems to embody contradictory or even  incoherent vectors of thought. However, the enthusiasm of the singing  obliterates the ambiguity of the lyric; in sum, the song is remarkably  optimistic -- which is just one of many reasons for its continued popularity.

Source: 2011/10/edward-gibbon-replacement-child

Title: Edward Gibbon -- Replacement Child
Date: October 28, 2011

By strict definition, a replacement child is one who is conceived because
an older sibling has died. According to the theory, such a child is at
psychological risk, especially if the dead child has not been adequately
mourned.

Because he was an oldest son, Edward Gibbon, the greatest of all modern
historians and the most brilliant prose stylist in the English language, would
not seem to qualify as a replacement -- except that in his own curious manner
of thinking, Gibbon “replaced” children who were born subsequent to him.

Gibbon preened himself on his status in the family. “From my birth,” he
said in his famous Memoir, “I have enjoyed the rights of primogeniture.”
But primogeniture was not so much a chronological fact as it was a pinnacle to
be defended. As he conceived it, Gibbon triumphed over would-be competitors to
his supremacy. “I was succeeded by five brothers and one sister, all of whom
were snatched away in their infancy.” Toward his dead siblings, and toward the
parents who endured the heart-breaking death of six of their seven children,
Gibbon was unnaturally cold and mercenary. “I shall not pretend to lament”
the loss of those who would “oppress my inheritance.” Gibbon lacked empathy
in part because he felt, with some justice, that his younger siblings were
favored over him by his father. How could this be?

The Memoir supplies an explanation. In an age of high infant mortality, Gibbon
was a very sickly child. His life was at risk while other, later-born children
seemed to be born healthier. As Gibbon himself puts it, “so feeble was my
constitution, so precarious my life, that, in the baptism of each of my brothers
my father’s prudence successively repeated my Christian name of Edward, that,
in case of the departure of the eldest son, this patronymic appellation might
be still perpetuated in the family.” This is odd indeed. In five separate
instances, according to the future historian, a male child saw the light, and
each time the child was named Edward. In one case after another, the outcome was
the same. The infant who might have “oppressed his inheritance” succumbed
and the heroic oldest son beat back the challenge. The first Edward therefore
“replaced,” so to speak, a series of subsequent Edwards who might have
superseded him. It's not hard to imagine that a sickly child, pursued by a
series of infants each christened with his very own name, would feel threatened
and might rejoice rather than mourn at their funerals.

Although Gibbon attributes the pattern of naming to his father’s
“prudence,” it is obvious that the phrase "my father's prudence” is an
irony that masks a true fury. Was it prudence or was it his father's hope that
the sickly child would be succeeded by a healthy one?  Hostility also shines
through Gibbon's jealous account of his mother: "to preserve and to rear so
frail a being [as himself], the most tender assiduity was scarcely sufficient;
and my mother’s attention was somewhat diverted by her frequent pregnancies,
by an exclusive passion for her husband, and by the dissipation of the world,
in which his taste and authority obliged her to mingle.” The irony of this
beautiful Augustan sentence conceals infantine rage: to translate into more
forthright English, Gibbon objects that his mother conceived other children,
claims that she should have preferred him to her husband, and asserts that she
should have withdrawn from society to nurse him.

To what degree Gibbon’s suppressed and ironic but still obvious anger toward
his parents contributed to his peculiar temperament is difficult to say, but
it is a fact that the bulk of his career was spent not only in tracing the
decline and fall of Rome, the father of all European civilizations, but also in
displacing an established patriarchal religion from its position of supremacy.
The irony that he directed against his parents in his Memoir is the exact
weapon that he learned to deploy against Roman failures and against triumphant
Christianity.

In addition, there's an untidy psychological wrinkle. Gibbon’s claim that
the male children who succeeded him were all named Edward is a crucial part of
his indictment of his parents. But it's an assertion that is not true and is
not substantiated by parish records. There was no endless series of Edwards.
Apparently, one succeeding child was so named but the rest enjoyed various
different appellations. The most scrupulous of historians either invented or
misremembered the dreadful slight that so wounded him. What psychological
mechanism caused Gibbon to yearn to be even more of a replacement child than in
fact he was?

Source: 2011/11/another-replacement-child

Title: Another Replacement Child -- Peter Sellers
Date: November 07, 2011

A "replacement child," narrowly defined, is a person who is intentionally
conceived because an older sibling has recently died. Such substitutes must
endure the lifetime burden of competing with a lost and often idealized
child. Because it is almost impossible for such persons to please their
parents, they easily become confused and frustrated, and in worst-case
scenarios, pathological.

One of the ways in which the "replacement child syndrome" manifests itself
concerns the matter of self-identity. An adult "replacement child" might
wonder, Who am I exactly?  He might find himself, especially if he has been
raised from his earliest days as if he were someone else, uncertain of his own
boundaries.

The great comic actor Peter Sellers, was a classic replacement child. At birth,
Sellers was named Richard Henry, but his parents, curiously, always called
him Peter, after an older stillborn brother. And Peter he remained. Why would
his parents do such a thing?  Would it not effect a child to be called not by
his own name but by the name of a missing brother?

Sellers is famous for his ability to subsume his identity into the role he
played.  He said that "If you ask me to play myself, I will not know what to
do. I do not know who or what I am" -- because even when not acting, he was
always Richard Henry playing the part of Peter.

To confuse him all the more, Sellers' father, who was Anglican, and his mother,
who was Jewish, sent him to Roman Catholic schools.

Source: 2011/11/even-more-on-lolas-language

Title: Even More on Lola's Language
Date: November 13, 2011

Let us understand what Lola (the exemplary two-year-old granddaughter) meant
when she cryptically observed, "Nay, no ba."

Nay --perhaps better spelled  neigh -- means horse or horses. "Ba" are of
course sheep. Lola watched them last summer when the two grazing animals shared
the same Vermont pasture. But when her father took her to a Virginia farm, she
noticed that there were no sheep among the horses. Hence her succinct formula:
"nay, no ba."

As Duke Vincentio says, "all difficulties are but easy when they are known."

Source: 2011/11/superlatives-meas

Title: "Paradise" in Measure for Measure
Date: November 14, 2011

The word to watch in a most riveting speech in Measure for Measure is
"paradise."

Young Claudio. whose head is scheduled to be lopped off tomorrow morning, is the
speaker. He panics -- and why shouldn't he? After all, his only slip is that
he has impregnated his ladylove Juliet. A venial sin, yet in newly-puritanical
Vienna, the act of love has led directly to the executioner with his ax and his
big black block. Although everyone, certainly including Shakespeare himself,
knew that there were many things far worse than to depart this vale of trouble
and tears, Claudio is so terrified by his imminent execution that he goes off
the philosophical rails. He argues the extreme position (and here comes the
speech and the crucial word) that "The weariest and most loathed worldly life/
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment/ Can lay on nature is a paradise/ To
what we fear of death." A "paradise?" Goodness gracious!

Although everyone can sympathize, no one should agree with
Claudio. Neverthless, the three-and-a-half lines of verse that contain the
climactic  word "paradise" (and indeed the long speech in which these lines
reside) are so brilliant and colorful that they almost persuade us to do so. One
of the reasons the sentence is so wonderful is because Shakespeare brings to
bear one of his favorite and most useful figures of speech. To depict Claudio's
hysteria, Shakespeare employs a full-throttle hyperbole.

The most transparently hyperbolical words are the grammatical superlatives
"weariest" and "most loathed." The hyperbole that resides in the word "paradise"
is less obvious but more potent. "Paradise" is the climax -- the word that any
good actor or reader must hit hard when he recites or reads the passage. An
hyperbolist less gifted than Shakespeare might have written "The weariest and
most loathed life is pretty darn good compared to dying," but our author pulls
out all the rhetorical stops. To lie in poverty, in pain, in prison is, Claudio
asserts, compared to death, a "paradise."

If, dear attentive and intelligent reader, you will now return to quotation, and
read Claudio's lines again, you will feel the hyperbolical power of "paradise."
Try it, please. And when you recite the sentence, you will also notice that the
initial "p" in climactic "paradise" is prepared for by the plosives in the words
that precede it -- "penury" and "imprisonment."

And if you are following instructions and reading aloud, you should be aware
that in Shakespeare's time, "ache" was pronounced "aitch" -- a pronunciation
that produces a strong and ingenious contrast between the affricates (age,
aitch) and the plosives (penury, imprisonment, paradise).

Claudio's hyperbolical lines bring to conclusion a speech which is querulous at
the start and panicky at the end.  Here they are in context.

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where.

To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;

This sensible warm motion to become

A kneaded clod, and the delighted spirit

To bath in fiery floods, or to reside

In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;

To be imprison'd in the viewless winds

And blown with restless violence round about

The pendent world; or to be worse than worst

Of those that lawless and incertain thought

Imagine howling.  'Tis too horrible.

The weariest and most loathed worldly life

That age, ache, penury and imprisonment

Can lay on nature, is a paradise

To what we fear of death.

("Cold obstruction" means that the body no longer moves -- as opposed to
"sensible" (i.e capable of sensation or feeling) "warm motion".  A "kneaded
clod" is what a "warm motion" is compressed or compressible into by death. A
"delighted spirit" is generally glossed as "formerly capable of delight" but is
better understood as "darkened" -- that is, de-lighted. "Viewless" means simply
"invisible.")

Shakespeare does not feel obliged to distinguish or judge between these
painful visions of an afterlife; instead, he prefers simply to heap together
naturalistic, Christian, pagan and "lawless" ideas.

Students of hyperbole will take note of the inventive phrase "worse than worst,"
where, it seems, "worst" is insufficiently superlative. Here Shakespeare pushes
against the limits of grammar. Bad, worse, worst suffices for most writers, but
Shakespeare invents a new adjectival category -- a comparative superlative.

Shakespeare's interest in the worstness of things will reappear in King Lear 
when Edgar, encountering his blinded father, realizes that he has not yet
touched bottom: "O Gods. Who is't can say "I am at the worst?'/ I am worse than
e'er I was." And then an worser insight comes to him: "And worse I may be
yet: the worst is not/ So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'" For Edgar,
of course, death, that so frightens Claudio, is understood to be a relief and a
liberation. Edgar's father dies "smilingly."

Source: 2011/11/goldbach

Title: Fermat's Room;  Goldbach's Conjecture.
Date: November 16, 2011

I reached my peak with numbers when I was a child at P. S. 217 (under the
tutelage of Mrs. McNulty).  Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division --
that's my area of expertise. Geometry, algebra, trig -- way too abstract for my
pedestrian brain. Calculus and up -- not the least chance.

Arithmetic yes, mathematics no.

Sometimes I try to read popularizations of mathematical theory, but I rarely
make it beyond the first few sentences. Once symbols start to appear, I'm done.
Especially Greek letters (in parentheses).

The consolation prize is that I'm better than most people at mental arithmetic .
I can do sums and approximations and other stuff in my head                    .

Last night, we watched Fermat's Room. It's the kind of movie that is often
called an "ingenious thriller."  It's also a member of a very small group of
films that concern mathematics or mathematicians:  Good Will Hunting, Stand and
Deliver, Antonia's Line, Straw Dogs.

Fermat's Room focuses on a possible proof of Christian Goldbach's Conjecture.
I suppose that I should have known about Herr Goldbach and his guess, but I
confess to ignorance. Goldbach's conjecture dates to 1742 and is apparently one
of the oldest unsolved problems in number theory. In brief, Goldbach theorized
that every even integer greater than 2 can be written as the sum of two prime
numbers. For example, 10 is equal to 3 plus 7, 20 to 17 plus 3 (or 13 plus
7), and 100 resolves into 47 plus 53. Although no one has found a number that
doesn't work, the conjecture can't be proved -- or, at least, hasn't been proved
because there are some very large numbers out there. In Fermat's Room, two of
the characters claim to have proved the conjecture. And they are consequently at
odds.

I had always thought of prime numbers as a kind of novelty or curiosity. But
if primes are a component of all even numbers -- well, that's something. 
Goldbach's idea raises the stature of primes in my perennially naive eyes -- in
exactly the same way that the Fibonacci series became more important to me when
I learned that the chambered nautilis is structured Fibonacci-wise.

While watching the movie (which is a good one), I ran through the even numbers
from 10 to 70.  Everything was in order. But why?

Later in the evening, I read that every even number can also be resolved into
the sum of a semi-prime (which is the product of two primes) and a prime. So 100
equals 77 (7 time 11) and 23. I spent a restless  night summing, in my bed,
semi-primes and primes from 10 to 100. All in order, once again.

Why should it be so?

Whether it should be, or not, it is.  I remember that I used to answer my
children and my students with the response, "That's not a why question?"
Goldbach's Conjecture is a fact, not a why.

It's like gravity. I understand that the apple falls to the ground and that
the moon doesn't head out into space and that it's harder to walk uphill than
downhill. But I still don't understand why. It works, and that's enough. For me.

Source: 2011/11/three-comments-on-books

Title: Three Observations on "Books"
Date: November 24, 2011

Charlie Dressen: "You  know something? I never read a book in my whole life...
I can read newspapers and magazines. But I never read a book. You think I
should?"

Jean Harlow (on her birthday): "Don't get me a book. I already got a book."

Anatole Broyard: "If it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely at the
mercy of sex."

Source: 2011/12/two-machines

Title: Landau versus Gottlieb
Date: December 02, 2011

While in the Bay Area, I visited SF's Museum of Asian Art,  where this
grotesque, beautiful piece of maximum conspicuous consumption was on display.

It's a silver Landau made for the Maharaja of Bhavnagar around the turn of
the last century.  Needless to say, I was utterly appalled by the waste and
extravagance though dazzled by the workmanship.

Afterward, I took a trip to Alameda's Pinball Museum. Here's a bank of classic
50's Gottliebs.

I played this magnificent piece of craftsmanship

and, still a master of the flipper, won three (3) free games.

I can't remember whether the silver coach was owned by this couple of dandies
(also in the Asian Art Museum) or one of their cousins,

but no one who looked like either a maharaja or maharani was playing with
Gottlieb's silver balls.  I didn't spy anyone at the pinball museum who was
nearly so well accoutered.

Source: 2011/12/newts

Title: Newt
Date: December 03, 2011

William Blake asks us to beware "venomous Newt" -- venomous because the skin
of this lizard-like creature contains the extraordinarily dangerous poison
tetrodotoxin  which it secretes through its granular skin glands. It is unwise
to befriend or embrace a Newt and they should never be swallowed. Tetrodotoxin
blocks sodium channels and can therefore cause heart arrhythmia or heart arrest.

Shakespeare did not love the Newt; among the ingredients in the witches' potion
in Macbeth, along with the fenny snake, toe of frog, wool of bat, tongue of dog
and owlet's wing is "eye of Newt."

In Timon of Athens, a list of "abhorred births" includes the "black toad and
adder blue" along with the  "gilded Newt." "Gilded," for Shakespeare, could
mean "gilt" but also "guilty" and sometimes even  "false."

In Monty Python and the Holy Grail, Second Villager claims that a witch has
transformed him into the most loathsome of critters: "She turned me into a
Newt." He then withdraws the charge: "I got better."

It's definitely better not to be a Newt -- or even to get too close to one.

Source: 2011/12/amnesia-on-film-blind-horizon

Title: Amnesia on Film: Blind Horizon
Date: December 05, 2011

For the record, Blind Horizon (2003) may be the most confusing, confused, and
derivative film ever perpetrated. It's a failed memory-assassinate the president
movie, a genre of which The Manchurian Candidate stands as head and font.

Blind Horizon offers one picturesque moment -- when a giant tanker truck
decorated with a Confederate flag and carrying a load of gasoline spills
across the highway and blows up. The truck could have driven through the
monstrous holes in the plot with room to spare. In fact, it would have been more
appropriate if the truck had been carrying a load of red herrings.

Once again, amnesia is whatever Hollywood says it is. In this case, the amnesiac
remembers that there's going to be an attempt on the president's life, but he
doesn't remember his own name, his occupation, or his fiancee -- an unlikely
scenario. He has flashes of memory that are copied, almost exactly, from the
Bourne series, which we must now anoint as the movie amnesia template of the
future.

Val Kilmer is wasted as the - wait, is he the would-be asssassin or is he the
Federal agent trying to prevent the assassination? I never did quite figure it
out. Neve Campbell is dark and mysterious and Amy Smart is blonde and perky --
that's the way women are packaged in this expensive turkey. If the writers (F.
Paul Benz, Steve Tomlin) were allowed to choose between remembering this film,
or amnesia, they should definitely go for the latter.

Hypothesis: the amnesia mcguffin liberates the screenwriter from any allegiance
to probability.

Source: 2011/12/occupied

Title: Being "Occupied"
Date: December 10, 2011

Here in peaceful, progrressive Boulder, two commissioners' seats are coming open
next election. Commissioners are important officers: they directly govern the
half of our citizens who live in unincorporated areas of the county, they employ
1800 people and administer a $300 million budget, they manage all the social
services, and they set policy on land use, open space, transportation, etc. They
also put out fires.

Even though we're six months away from the primary, campaigning is well under
way. And should be. Deciding on he right county officer is important. We're a
functioning democracy.

This afternoon there was a forum to allow the six candidates to answer questions
and state their views.  But just as the meeting was called to order, we were
"occupied."

About fifty or sixty people filed into the room, took up places around the
perimeter, interrupted the moderator and announced that they had a statement to
make, which they did in a peculiar and theatrical manner. Their leader read a
few words, and then the rest of the folks repeated the same phrase, in chorus.
Their demands were well known: control the big banks, put an end to corporate
dominance, stop the foreclosures, support the homeless, reduce pollution,
prohibit fracking, end uranium mining, and prevent any GMO crops from being
grown in Boulder County.

Then they left. Just vanished.

And so we got back to work.

What was so odd is that every single one of the candidates stated positions that
were at least as far to the left, and sometimes further to the left, than the
Occupiers -- which makes me wonder whether these very sincere folks wouldn't be
doing more good by helping us stuff the envelopes and do the lit drops and help
with the GOTV. To tell the exact truth, I found it just a little offensive to be
hectored so dramatically by political novices.

At very least, the "Occupiers" should give up the choral speaking, which sounds
not like thoughtfulness but rather like authoritarian groupspeak. A little
dictatorial.

As the political philosopher and social critic Doll Tearsheet long ago remarked,
"the word occupy... was an excellent good word before it was ill sorted."

Source: 2011/12/trollope-last-novel

Title: Trollope's Old Old Man
Date: December 10, 2011

Having just read the posthumously published An Old Man's Love (1884), I believe
I can now claim to have read every single one of Anthony Trollope's forty-seven
novels. Who would have guessed, when I encountered The Warden and Barchester
Towers back in 1958, that it would have taken fifty-three years to complete the
marathon?

I'm glad that I saved An Old Man's Love for last. It's very much a valediction
to love and to life.

William Whittlestaff, the "old man," is fifty years in age, which, to my
occluded septuagenarian eyes, seems barely beyond adolescence. He falls in love
with his ward, Mary Lawrie, who is a generation younger than he. She agrees to
marry him, but then her first love, John Gordon, returns from Kimberley, where
colonial diamonds have conveniently cured his poverty. Eventually, Whittlestaff
ungraciously concedes the bride to the younger man. Self-abnegation does not
come easy.

My interest focused on Mary Lawrie, who is so paralyzed by notions of duty and
honor that she cannot lift a finger in her own interest. It would be wrong,
in her conception (and in Trollope's), for her to imply, however slightly,
that her commitment to Whittlestaff ought to be re-assessed. In fact, to avoid
becoming the much-dreaded "jilt," she has to argue with herself against her own
inclinations. Gordon and Whittlestaff are allowed to be active in working out
their interests; Miss Lawrie remains entirely passive and therefore virtuous.

As is always the case in Trollope's novels, courting couples are not allowed to
engage in forthright conversation until after matters are settled.

Even after completing the forty-seven novels, I cannot help but marvel at this
strange Victorian ethic.

It's unfortunate that Trollope doesn't conclude by granting Whittlestaff an
avuncular or grandparental role toward the new couple and their putative
children. What would it have hurt him to have imagined a scene in which
Whittlestaff, a white-haired gentleman, walks the balmy Barset woods with nine-
year-old John and seven-year-old Mary Gordon?  No such event takes place, and
Whittlestaff therefore retains his gloom right to the end. Charles Dickens,
always warm-hearted, would have been more generous.

Source: 2011/12/onagers

Title: Onagers
Date: December 12, 2011

It's absolutely astonishing that I've lived all these years in total ignorance
of onagers. And would have presisted in abysmal onagerian oblivion hadn't read
David Anthony's fascinating monograph, The Horse, the Wheel, and Language
(2007). Anthony's thesis is that "proto-Indo-European" -- from which the Slavic,
Celtic, Germanic, Romance, and Indic languages, among others, are descended,
originated in the steppes north of the Black and Caspian seas. The inhabitants
of these areas domesticated horses and invented or adopted the wheel and the
wagon, which gave them the technological advantage to spread their culture
and language across the steppes eastward as far as China and westward to the
Atlantic. This same people also invented  the chariot -- a horse-drawn single-
axle vehicle, which, manned by a warrior armed with bronze-headed javelins, was
the principal engine of war for the thousand years that began about 1700 BCE and
ended about 700 BCE. It's a lovely hypothesis, bristling with the evidence of
hundreds of archeological digs.

Pre-proto-Indo-European speakers ate horses long before they domesticated them
and rode them before they learned to harness them to chariots and wagons.
However, horses weren't the only equid in the neighborhood.  There were also
onagers.

But all they could do with onagers was feast on them. The evidence lies in
the thousands of midden heaps that are loaded with onager bones. Here are two
onagers:

Onagers are half the size, or less, than the horses with which we are familiar.
They are apparently untamable, like zebras, but, uniike zebras, edible. (So
tasty, in fact, that fewer than a thousand of them survive in the wild.)

Anthony doesn't say so, but if there had been only onagers, and not those noble
and cooperative horses, we would certainly not be speaking and writing an Indo-
European language -- and, for that matter, we might still be trundling across
the wide Missouri in oxcarts.

From the Bronze Age down to the second decade of the nineteenth century, the
horse was the fastest and most reliable way to travel, the quickest way to
convey information, the backbone of armies, and the most conspicuous index of
wealth and status.

Horses are handsome and intelligent. Onagers are ugly, awkward, and stubborn,
and could never have taken part in the creation of complex civilizations. Poets
have celebrated "fiery Pegasus"  for millenia; no one, to the best of my
knowledge, has ever rhapsodized the onager.

Source: 2011/12/silly-dreams

Title: Silly Dreams
Date: December 16, 2011

In last night's dream, I was back in college anxiously sitting a final exam
in a literature course. I remember that the exam was titanically difficult
and unnerving but I can recall only one specific question. "Discuss Ernest
Hemingway's father's Buddhist leanings." I must say that my dreamatorium was
working overtime to come up with that one. Also on the exam: I was presented
with pictures and was asked to supply their literary significance. The one
I remember was a photograph of a generic urban street with five unoccupied
parking spaces. My answer to the question was this: "These spaces were left open
when Ernest Hemingway and four of his friends left for the bar in order to get
themselves soused." I remember thinking that my answer was pretty damn clever
and should get me full marks. I also dreamed a short-answer quiz. In this case I
can't recall the questions, but only that I gave as one of my answers the word
"praestorium." I have no idea what "praestorium" means, except that it sounds
like a portmanteau of the names of two ancient Roman officials (praetor and
quaestor) with an attached (and redundant) noun suffix.

It's sad that fifty years after the fact I'm still dreaming about examinations.
I'm thankful these recent dreams were foolish rather than nightmarish.
Nevertheless, I think it's time to read up on Hemingway, a writer to whom I've
clearly paid too little attention this last half-century. You never know when
someone's going to ask a hard question about Hemingway or his father.

Source: 2011/12/war-on-christmas

Title: "War on Christmas"
Date: December 18, 2011

If the profoundly Christian seventeenth-century founders of our country had
a single favorite Biblical passage, it might be the one in which the Lord
(speaking through His minor prophet Amos) severely condemned the empty vanity
of holidays. "I hate," said the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies." The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined
against the attempt to placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical
concern in Amos' time). "Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat
offerings, I will not accept them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts." Nor did He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but
He went on to condemn all musical tributes as well. Not for him any chants,
glees or carols: "Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not
hear the melody of thy viols." Our Puritan forefathers interpreted these lines
correctly and enthusiastically; they recognized that the Lord opposed not only
ritual sacrifice and music but all formal observance and rote piety. The Ancient
of Days made it abundantly clear that what moved him was not empty ceremony
but genuine morality. HIs solution: "let justice run down as the waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream." Taking these uncompromising sentences
as their guide, our founders dug in their heels against the ostentatious
celebration of all holidays, especially Christmas. Instead, they did as they
were enjoined: they looked into their hearts.

Would they not have been reduced to angry and impotent sobs by the grotesque
consumerism -- the burnt offerings and squeaking timbrels  -- that once again
this Christmas season displace justice and righteousness?  Could there be
anything more loathsome either to Amos or to our devout ancestors than "Silent
Night" amidst shopping-mall tinsel and gimcrackery? Or than the attempt to gin
up conflict or to gain a partisan political advantage by inventing a mythical
"war on Christmas"?

Further observations on the "holiday season" can be found here.

Source: 2011/12/birthday

Title: Birthday Gift Suggestions
Date: December 20, 2011

I've been studying (or more exactly being dazzled by) the illustrations in a
magnificent four-pound coffee-table extravaganza called The Horse From Cave
Paintings to Modern Art. It was first published in France (Cheval dans l'art)
in 2008 and came to me through the Abbeville Press on Varick Street in NYC and
also through the generosity of our local public library (it's too expensive to
purchase). The history of the horse in art begins with the Chauvet Cave and
includes thousands of years of wonders. But I don't write merely to extol the
book, however great it be.

I call it to your attention because I have a birthday coming up soon and
any number of my friends and relatives and readers of this blague have been
asking me what I would like as a gift. This book has given me a few ideas. At
the outset I'd like to say that I'm not really interested in the monumental
paintings that fill most of the pages of the book: battle scenes, hunting
scenes, royal processions. Not my cup of tea. Besides the fact that they are
too large for the condo, most of them are a little on the pretentious side, and
frankly. I don't think they'd work with our understated decor.

However, I'd like to suggest that friends, relatives and constant readers might
want to pool their pennies and present me with one of the smaller, more discreet
objects.

My first choice:

It's known as the Chariot of the Sun sculpture. It's bronze with a little bit
of gold leaf and was found a hundred years ago in a Danish bog, where it had
apparently sat for about 3500 years. It might be a little the worse for wear but
I don't mind. At three feet long and two feet high it would sit nicely on the
dining room table. No longer bog-bound, it presently resides in the National
Museet in Copenhagen but I'm sure the museum would entertain a reasonable
offer. I think you can assume that unlike the callous Danes, I would treat the
sculpture right and not stick it in a swamp somewhere.

If the Chariot of the Sun is unavailable, or the Museet (the phone number for
the "butikken" is 33 47 38 30) proves to be sticky to deal with, I have another
suggestion. It's not as good, but good enough.

It's Charlemagne.  A ninth-century bronze equestrian statuette. The picture is
misleading because the statuette is only nine inches tall, which makes it just
right for a window sill or the top of one of the stereo speakers. The rendering
of the emperor himself is a little stiff, and the sword that should be in his
right hand is missing, but the horse, imitating Roman models, is pretty damn
good. Charlemagne and his horsey are in the Louvre just waiting for an offer.
The statuette is so small that it shouldn't cost much.

And please, friends, no tacky reproductions.

Source: 2011/12/horsey-words

Title: New Horsey Words
Date: December 22, 2011

I'm sure that everyone but I knows these excellent words, but each one is an
absolute novelty to me.

A quadriga is a chariot drawn by four abreast horses. They must have been quite
a trick to control. Wide chariot, I guess, or skinny horses. Quadriga racing
was the nascar of the classical world. The "ga" in quadriga is from iuga, or
yoke, hence the biga, a word of predictable meaning that I would probably have
known if I did crossword puzzles or played scrabble. The ancient Greeks called
a quadriga a tethrippon, which was their privilege. I haven't encountered the
word, but I bet that there's also a triga, and if there is a triga, I imagine
that it's linked, somehow or other, to troika.

A cataphract was a heavily-armed horseman.  Here's an c. 440 CE Chinese statue
of a cataprhact.

I don't believe that horses had legs so stout in those days.  I suspect that
the medium (terracotta) required them.

Schabraque appeared in my horse book as an English noun, and perhaps it is, but
the only definition that I could find was in a French dictionary: nom feminin
singulier: 1  ancienne couverture de cheval de cavalerie 2  femme laide
ou sotte. I don't have the slightest idea how the two meanings are related,
but I'm glad to know them. And the next time that I encounter une femme sotte,
which isn't very often, I'm going to try to insinuate "schabraque" into the
conversation.

I'll try not to use the word quiff, which is a horse's forelock, especially one
hanging over the eyes, but which might easily be misunderstood by guys from my
old neighborhood.

And finally, the piaffe is a dressage movement in which a horse essentially
trots in place. A ridiculous word for a ridiculous performance. I don't know the
origin of the word and I doubt that it's related to French piaf, which, I think
I remember, is a demotic or slang word for sparrow.

Source: 2011/12/ghost-writer

Title: Polanski and The Ghost Writer
Date: December 30, 2011

The Ghost Writer, which I saw last night, is a very good "thriller." It's co-
written and directed by Roman Polanski and therefore inevitably dwells upon the
menace that lurks beneath quotidian events. Once again, Polanski offers us a
naif  who gradually comes to realize that the world is under the control of
dark, implacable, omnipresent forces of evil. In The Ghost Writer, it's the CIA
-- a most convenient bugbear.  Just as soon as the unnamed ghost writer cracks
the mystery, he's run down and killed in the street by a mysteriously summoned
agency vehicle. Ewan McGregor is convincing as the naive ghost, Jim Broadbent
is wonderfully malevolent as the string-puller behind the scenes, and Olivia
Williams steals the show as the intelligent angry betrayed wife the English PM.
But it's pure Polanski from start to finish.

In Shakespeare's Macbeth, the reign of the usurping tyrant is preceded and
succeeded by the benign and holy kings Duncan and Malcolm. In Polanski's 1977
Macbeth (in my opinion one of the few great Shakespeare movies), there's an
appended anti-Shakespearean coda: Donalbain (Malcolm's younger brother) goes off
to engage the witches. Polanski suggests that evil is not anomalous to the reign
of Macbeth but eternal and, so to speak, normal. The witches who control men's
fates are the medieval Scotland analogues of the CIA.

In Polanski's best film, Chinatown, J. J. Gittes is the naif who gradually
comes to discover that villainous Noah Cross controls all of Los Angeles.
Semi-demonic Noah takes bullet but like the witches and the CIA, he can't be
killed. In the original Robert Towne screenplay, Evelyn Mulwray had escaped with
her daughter/sister, but Polanski altered the ending to emphasize Noah Cross's
unassailable power.

And then there's Rosemary's Baby (witches) and The Pianist (Nazis).

Polanski's point of view cannot be a surprise to anyone who is familiar with the
story of his life.