

================================================================================Source: 2008/01/sticker-shock

Title: Sticker Shock
Date: January 05, 2008

We're in Manhattan (New York, not Kansas) where I'm suffering from two kinds of
sticker shock:  regular and newyorkish.  Regular:  at DIA, I treated myself
to a cylinder of Life Savers:  $1.35.  Life Savers, as everyone knows, were
invented by Hart Crane's father and are still manufactured to the formula that
has made them a gourmet delight for a hundred years:  "sugar, corn syrup,
high fructose corn syrup, artificial flavors (Red 40, Yellow 5, Blue 1)." 
But Life Savers cost, in my childhood, exactly a nickel.  Now it's $1.35
for a small package!!  Beyond belief!!  But if regular sticker shock is
bad, what about high-voltage newyorkish shock?  In my own lifetime, it was
possible to ride the NYC subway for 5 cents.  Now it's two count 'em two
bucks, making the lifesaverish increase seem like peanuts.  And what about
this morning's breakfast?  An omelet and a cup of coffee:  $17.23 plus tip. 
And the earmuffs at a boutique for brazillionaires on Madison Avenue:  $650. 
After an efficient deliberation, we decided against purchasing the designer
earmuffs. At a nearby shop, knockoffs just as effective were available at
$32.00, which, in context, seemed like a bargain. Only $16 per ear.  But
shouldn't a pair of earmuffs retail for $1.59?

Source: 2008/01/more-on-rothall

Title: More on Roth/Allen Doppelgangerism
Date: January 06, 2008

Michael Hollingsworth, associate professor of American Literature at Texas A & M
University, writes this:  "Dr Metablog:  you claim that Woody Allen and Philip
Roth are doppelgangers. I've got to tell you something you might not want to
hear: you're way behind the curve on this one. It's been well known in literary
circles for many years that Roth and Allen are two different presentations of
the same person. But there's lively disagreement about who's who. One group,
the Rothites, think that Woody is an invention of Philip. The Allenites, on the
other hand, are convinced that the Roth who very occasionally appears in public
is an actor hired by Woody and that Woody has written all the so-called Roth
novels. And then there's a more radical group (gaga conspiracy-theorists in
my view) who claim that both Roth and Allen are the invention of some as-yet-
unidentified third person, a prominent New York intellectual. This last theory
is just nuts"

Wow, this is exciting news. And here I thought that I had discovered something
original when I identified Roth and Allen as one and the same. Isn't it always
the case; you think you have an original idea but it turns out that someone has
anticipated your insight?  Stay tuned, loyal readers, as I bring myself up to
date on Roth/Allen doppelgangeritudinousness.

For a while there I was beginning to think that I was some sort of crank; now
I see that I'm part of the mainstream. How reassuring. And moreover, readers,
I think that I've already chosen my side in this battle. I'm inclined to be an
Allenite.

Source: 2008/01/the-art-that-hi

Title: The Art That Hides Art
Date: January 06, 2008

Today we paid a call on the New Museum of Contemporary Art.  It's an
uncompromising, vibrant building, all the more grand for being plunked down in
the rusty old Bowery.  The space is wonderful.  But the stuff on exhibition
is, in my less than humble opinion, ludicrous.  A mattress covered with
buttons.  A cage made of chain link fencing.  Fluorescent light bulbs 
arranged in a series of "Y" shapes.  Aluminum foil hanging from sticks. Broken
glass on a bench.  Cardboard boxes, some open, some closed.  Plastic pipe
threaded through a deck chair.

Three substantial floors littered with such artlessness.  What a dreadful,
terrible squandering of space and opportunity.

The unifying principle:  a conspicuous antagonism to craftsmanship.  Every
single piece of work left with rough edges and bad joins and unpainted surfaces,
as though not to complete the task is fundamental to the aesthetic.  If there
is an aesthetic other than fakery.

I don't get it.  I don't want to get it.  To me, it looked like the detritus
of a civilization in utter, hopeless implosive decline.  A decadence beyond
ordinary decadence.  In-your-face ugliness.

What is attractive or interesting or even repulsive about old clothes tied into
a tight bundle with an orange electrical extension cord?   It's still a bundle
of old clothes.  It's not art because it's in a museum, and if it's supposed to
be a critique of art, it's not not even remotely clever.  It's stupid.

There were lots of museum-goers who milled unexpressively around the various
objects.  Were we all pretending that we were looking at Vermeers?

One of the sculptures, so-called, consisted of a pile of chairs, randomly
arranged.  A four-year-old boy looked at the "sculpture" and announced, in
a very loud and clear voice, "It's a pile of chairs.  Very funny."  And he
laughed.  It was a great clothesless emperor moment.

Source: 2008/01/twenty-thousand

Title: Twenty Thousand Something-or-Others
Date: January 12, 2008

Today, or tomorrow at the latest, the blague Dr. Metablog will have been visited
for the twenty-thousandth time.  A milestone -- twenty thousand readers.

Well, perhaps not exactly readers.  It would be more accurate to say twenty-
thousand page viewers.  Twenty-thousand page views is considerably fewer than
twenty-thousand readers.  Actually, many of those page-viewers aren't readers
at all and only viewers by accident;  they don't stop long enough to read or
to view; page glancers, perhaps.  They just touch down to find out whether
whatever they've googled is what they want and then, disappointed, off they go
in a microsecond.  For example, Dr. M. once wrote an entry in which he made fun
of the overuse, in book titles, of the word "naked." Consequently, the blague
Dr. Metablog googles to the surface when someone types in "naked weightlifting"
or "naked skiiing" -- a search that is attempted oodles more often than in his
innocence Dr. Metablog might ever have imagined.  Internet pilgrims hoping to
find salacious portraits of naked hairy weightlifters are mighty crushed and
are off like a shot -- but they still leave their electronic trace.  Another
example:  Dr. M once wrote a tribute to Vladimir Nabokov's excellent novel,
Lolita.  Did Dr M. know that the word "lolita" is a term of art in the world of
sexual exploitation?  Pity the internet hairypalms and chicken-chokers, who,
searching for secret pleasure, encounter (gasp) literary criticism.

We here at Dr. M. could increase "traffic" simply by using such code words or by
listing body parts of a groinal or perigroinal nature, but we're too proud to do
so just to increase readership  --or viewership -- or glancemanship.

Nevertheless, all of us here at Dr. Metablog are overjoyed to reach the twenty-
thousand mark, whatever that number signifies.  So best regards to our
readers from regular staff members Vivian de St. Vrain, Otto Onions, and Amber
Feldhammer, as well as  occasional contributors Alan Saxe-Poppette, Michael
Hollingsworth, Professor Marion Morrison Ph. D., Spike Schapiro, and Otis
Jefferson Brown.

Onward to thirty thousand!

Source: 2008/01/rothallens-brea

Title: Roth/Allen's Breasts
Date: January 13, 2008

Michael Hollingsworth writes:

"Dear Dr. M.:  you're directly on target when you claim that Woody Allen and
Philip Roth are the same person, but you've unaccountably omitted to mention
the most pressing evidence.The year: 1972. Philip Roth published The Breast, a
fantasy about a writer transformed into one. Woody Allen released Everything You
Always Wanted to Know About Sex, in which a giant female breast wreaks havoc
upon the countryside.  Obviously, both "Roth" and "Allen" had recently read
Gogol's The Nose and Kafka's Metamorphosis. Just as obviously, "both" of "them"
were struggling with some seriously unresolved maternal issues. How fascinating
that both of their boundless cups of creativity "runneth over" so to speak, in
such similar ways. A coincidence? Hardly.

By the way, both "Roth's" and "Allen's" contributions are embarrassingly false
and flat."

Dr. M. responds:  "You know, Professor Hollingsworth, I think I support your
breast remarks. I'd been aware of both of these upwellings of mammariness but
I never put two and two together. If Roth/Allen aren't doppelgangers, they're
certainly developing along twin tracks.

And let me add my own reservations:  the short stories by Gogol and Kafka are
untouchable contributions to world literature.  Both writers create astonishing
fantasies; they also manage to skewer the particularities of, in the one case,
czarist Russia and in the other, early twentieth-century Prague. Frankly,
neither Roth's nor Allen's breasts are anywhere nearly as full or pointed."

Source: 2008/01/the-tarantass

Title: The Tarantass
Date: January 13, 2008

Here the all but preternatural patience of metablogian aficionados is solicited
as Dr Metablog quotes directly from an ancient (April, '07) posting on sex and
the horsedrawn vehicle -- the R-rated entirety of which can be found here:

"Regular readers of this blague are well aware that I have repeatedly indulged
my bemusement with the names of extinct or obsolescent horsedrawn conveyances. 
My point is that modern readers, who know precisely what is signified  -- in
design, in metal, rubber and plastic and other constituents, and especially in
social value -- by such words as Jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, and jalopy, know zero
zilch zip about "fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet,"
"sulky," "surrey," "curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler,"
"spring-van," "berlin," "barouche," "britchka," "troika," "wurt," "tandem,"
"caleche," "tilbury," "dog-cart," "wagonette," "go-cart," "victoria,"
"brougham," "diligence," "clarence" and "post-chaise."  If we notice these
words at all, we tend to savor them as archaic Victorian music rather than to
identify and evaluate them as specific forms of transportation."

My point is that we read Victorian novels with one hand tied behind our backs,
so to speak, when we don't know whether a dog-cart or a clarence or a wurt
delineates rich or poor, stylish or provincial, pretentious or aggressive or
modest.

Perpetually naive, I thought that I had pretty much exhausted the list of
nineteenth-century horsedrawn conveyances.  However, by a curious coincidence,
I just yesterday happened upon two more such vehicles.  The first is a "basket-
carriage," an example of which I observed with my very own eyes at the New York
Historical Society at Central Park West and 77th Street.  A basket-carriage
is a coach constructed of wicker.  The carriage on exhibit looked mighty
comfortable for summer travel but would be frigid and leaky when winter winds
are raging.   A second new conveyance materialized in Nikolai Gogol's story,
The Carriage.  It's the very versatile "tarantass" -- a horsedrawn coach fitted
with removable wheels so that it could be converted into a sled come winter. 
Are there still more to be discovered?  I wouldn't be surprised if there are.
Stay tuned.

Source: 2008/01/a-walk-with-ell

Title: A Walk With Ella
Date: January 22, 2008

Today it was my assignment to pick up the five-year-old granddaughter at the
local Montessori school. We walked home together.  It's a ten minute walk but
it took us more than forty minutes.  Here's why.

There was a patch of frozen snow on the ground. Ella pretended to skate back
and forth on it for a few minutes.  After a while she happened to push some
lumps of ice onto the sidewalk and decided to see how far she could kick them.
When the ice disintegrated, she went back for more clumps to practice her kick
upon.  She repeated this four or five times. But finally, searching for more
ice, she found a black and white feather (she collects feathers), which she
closely inspected and gave to me to carry.  After that she looked at a number
of leaves both on the ground and hanging upon the low branches; she gathered
a few of last year's brittle brown oak leaves.  Next she came upon a small
flock of English sparrows who were pecking at some seed; she chased them off
but waited to see how long it would take them to return. She decided to add
to her rock collection: she found a beautiful, potato-size rock that I was
allowed to carry home.  "Could I open it with a knife?  I'd like to see inside
it?"  Then it was time to dance on a brick retaining wall.  Finished with that
activity, she found two hunks of packed snow and scraped them together.  "It's
beautiful music," she said.  She stopped to practice her whistling, a newly
acquired skill. Then came an experiment:  what happens when clumps of snow are
rubbed on the trunk of a pear tree.  And so on.

Ella's world:  so various, so beautiful, and so new!

Source: 2008/01/the-chinese-bus

Title: The "Chinese Bus"
Date: January 24, 2008

As is our custom, we journeyed from New York to Washington (and back) on the
so- called "Chinese bus." It's a bargain: round-trip between Chinatown here
and Chinatown there for just $35. It's a non-standard, non-greyhoundish, no
frills experience. It's also shoestring capitalism in the raw. When a potential
passenger arrives at the East Broadway departure site, he/she will be accosted
by young female representatives of several different companies, each touting
her own organization. The ladies are aggressive but hard to decipher inasmuch
as they shout in Chinese and possess only the most rudimentary English. A
traveler must be careful to board the right bus at the right hour (the first
time I used this service, I was almost shanghaied to Boston). The buses are
not well marked and misrepresentation is rife. Leaving New York last time, we
talked with a number of travelers who were frustrated and angry. Some had been
told that the bus would set out for Washington at noon, some at 12:30, some at
12:45 -- whatever time would sell the ticket and get the luggage on board and
the passenger into a seat. Because there's no terminal and the streets are so
crowded, the bus had to run a loop around lower Manhattan. Each time it set out,
there was optimism, but then fifteen minutes later it would return to square
one to board more passengers. We circulated three or four times. At 1:30, which
was in fact the scheduled departure time, we were on the road, but with quite a
number of unhappy passengers in tow.

A few years ago, almost all the passengers were Asian. Nowadays, the news is out
and it's all complexions from ebony to ivory. Still, the dominant language and
the dominant food odors are Chinese.

Sometimes the driver bypasses a scheduled stop. Sometimes it's necessary for one
passenger to discipline a fellow passenger for surreptitious smoking. Amenities
are minimal. The waiting rooms are small, dank, and squalid. On the bus, the
john is unspeakably foul. BYOTP.

But it's inexpensive, it's fun, and it gets you there.

Source: 2008/02/cesspool-of-tal

Title: "Cesspool of Talent"
Date: February 02, 2008

Colorado's "flagship" football team has had unprecedented success signing up in-
state recruits.  In the paper this morning:  "If you look around we've just
got a cesspool of talent around here."

A "cesspool of talent?"  Here are two things that we know about the up-and-
coming young linebacker who is credited with that sentence:  a) he's never
come face-to-face with a actual cesspool, and b) he's under the impression that
"cess" means "large" or "deep."   Is he alone?  I'm afraid not.  A quick
googling retrieves sixty cesspools of talent, perhaps a third of which are
ironic.

Shakespeare uses "cess" to mean "measure."  A diseased horse, "Poor jade, is
wrung in the withers out of all cess."  Is it possible that our linebacker is
familiar with The First Part of King Henry the Fourth?  Does he believe that
"cesspool" mean "immeasurable pool?

In a related matter, one of my correspondents sends me this yahoo headline: 
"U.S. woman abducted in Afghanistan. A Taliban snatch."  Clearly, the writer
is ignorant of the demotic use of the word "snatch."  He should have consulted
Shakespeare, one of whose nastiest characters (Aaron in Titus Andronicus) uses
the word correctly:  "Why, then, it seems, some certain snatch or so/ Would
serve your turns."

Source: 2008/02/upper-west-side

Title: Upper West Side Then and Now
Date: February 03, 2008

From 1965 to 1969 we lived on Manhattan's Upper West Side. Now we've returned
for a month-long visit. In days of yore, we were the busy young parents pushing
our baby carriage down Broadway. Now forty years more 'mature, we step aside as
nannies maneuver the twins (without question there are both more nannies and
more twins) around and past us.

And the eternal West Side -- has it also matured? Certainly it's a more
prosperous neighborhood and a more crowded one. With scores of giant high-rise
apartment houses added in the intervening years, it's become even more densely
populated. Paradoxically, it's also safer. In the 1960s, received wisdom stated
that to wander onto 85th Street or onto Columbus Avenue after dark was to risk
death or at least a good mugging. Now the area is peaceful morning, noon and
night, and newly-fashionable Columbus Avenue houses dozens of trendy ethnic
restaurants. Forty years ago, it was foolish to venture across Central Park to
the aristocratic East Side, where, it was rumored, there lived people who were
fair-skinned and blond. Some areas of the Park, like The Ramble, were famously
dangerous and were visited only by those who were itching for action. Now,
single women jog without the least concern. We took advantage of the new freedom
by taking frequent jaunts to the row of fabulous museums along Fifth Avenue.
(In the 1960s, museums were difficult for West Siders to access but admission
was free; today, they're easy to reach but the ticket prices are staggering.)
In the good old days, West Side street-corners were gathering points for
enterprising drug-dealers. On this visit, I didn't spot a single dealer or a
single transaction. Moreover, the neighborhood used to be thick with policemen
on patrol; this time, police are scarce and apparently unnecessary. Why the
improvement in public safety? In a word, money. Only the rich can now afford to
live on the Upper West Side, and rich people don't need to knock you down and
empty your wallet. They have other fish to fry.

There's a new feature of transportation: droves of briefcase-bearing suit-
wearers are shuttled Wallstreetway in luxurious "private cars." Meanwhile, the
subway is as efficient and as filthy as ever, but nowadays we pay not with
tokens but with "metro cards." The New York Times, then 10 cents, is now $1.25;
it has fewer columns, a larger font, and poorer writing. More changes: in
yesteryear, a man shouting in public was very likely a paranoid schizophrenic;
now a noisy talker has a gimmick in his ear and a cell phone and he's doing
nothing more lunatic than snapping up undercapitalized mortgages.

Dogs, here as elsewhere, are horribly indulged. One day we peeked into a "pet
exercise" gymnasium and later were amused by a well-appointed van labeled "Pet
Limousine." Although there are many more curs, there are fewer piles of canine
poopery on the sidewalks; most dog-walkers make use of plastic bags. Thank you,
dog-walkers.

Affordable supermarkets have disappeared and there are only specialty food shops
where the prices are beyond astronomical. But where do the waitresses, cooks,
cleaning ladies, nannies, cashiers, shop girls, bank tellers, kioskers, subway
maintenance men, bus drivers, janitors, and policemen shop?  Where, in fact, do
they live? Not in the neighborhood; not since the entire West Side went condo.

It's still a polyglot world, but there's much less Spanish and a lot more
Russian, Chinese, Hindi and Arabic.

More novelties: there's a Duane Reade (sometimes two) on every street and
there's a second crowded Starbucks visible from the Starbucks where you sit
poring over your wireless laptop and nursing your gigantico skinny dry vanilla
latte. In the 1960s, there were seven movie theaters within walking distance --
including the New Yorker and the Thalia, the mother churches of cinema worship.
Now, there are none -- nor even a single dvd rental store. It's all Netflix and
downloads.

There's been a phenomenal growth of personal services: not just the barbershops
and hairdressers of old, but also whole galaxies of nail care shops. Who
could have imagined that in the new millennium, fingernails would become the
cornerstone of the economy? An economy of which I'm not a part; my nail care
consists of occasionally biting off a sliver of stray keratin and taking
a cosmetic nibble or two at the paronychium. I don't believe I've spent a
nickel, lifetime, on my nails, nor do I intend to do so. Nope, no manicures,
nor pedicures, nor medicures (what the heck is a medicure?) nor massages nor
aromatherapy for me. Nor will I have my ears candled (a process that one medical
website calls 'useless and dangerous") or my eyebrows threaded or any part of my
body, public or private, waxed. It appears that every facial feature and every
organ has an entire industry dedicated to its hygiene and its remediation. Is
the upper West Side experiencing an outbreak of good health? Or a triumph of
narcissism?

One final observation: since we lived here, many expensively-architected fancy-
shmancy private schools have appeared. Meanwhile, public schools have been
allowed to slide further into poverty. Ugly, concrete block buildings surrounded
by chainlink fence and razor wire -- not temples of learning, but prisons.The
gap between rich and poor, evident then, has become a chasm. Manhattan is safer
and more livable than it was (at least for the prosperous), but it will not
be truly healed until its citizenry moves beyond "private wealth and public
squalor."

Source: 2008/02/confessions-of

Title: Confessions of a Dysgeographicoid
Date: February 04, 2008

This post is written for members of the directionally dyslexic community.  Non-
members are welcome to read but they probably won't get it.

Some cities are easy to navigate;  others are nightmares.  In the small
western city where I live, the mountains are always visible, and they're always,
blessedly, to the west.   In addition, the streets that run north-to-south
are consecutively numbered.  I'm thankful that I live in a city where it is
difficult to lose your way.  Manhattan, where I spent last month, is pretty
good too, except for the confusing lower downtown.  Manhattan is on a grid. 
Ninety- fourth Street Street is always north of 93rd and 2nd Avenue is always
east of 3rd Avenue. The worst that can happen is that you walk one short
block in the wrong direction and then right yourself. But other cities are
impossible.  Take Washington D.C., for example.  Washington could only have
been laid out by a sadist whose aim was to drive the directionally-disabled off
their collective rockers.  It's those damn diagonals, which cut through the
grid at every conceivable angle.  A few steps along one of those diagonals and
the points of the compass become hopelessly shuffled.  And then Washington
throws in a few wayward, wandering streets that were added just to cause pain.

When we visit Washington, we stay at a home on Nevada Avenue that's a half-hour
walk from the Friendship Heights Metro.  I've memorized the route (I'm good
at rote learning).  But last month, we (that is myself and my spouse --
actually "guide" is the better term) -- set out on a different path from station
to home.  Why did we do so?  I don't know;  it wasn't my decision.  A
minute hadn't elapsed before I had lost my bearings and had no idea whether
we were heading north south east or west or how our improvised path stood in
relation to the route that I had mechanically mastered.  My guide, who is not
directionally- disabled, sometimes forgets, even after all these years, that a
few steps on the oblique and I'm completely buffaloed.

This time, I decided that instead of whining "where are we?" at every street
corner, I would just keep my mouth shut.  I pretended confidence, though I hung
back at every corner so as not to commit to a ludicrously wrong direction.  I
played follow the leader.  Sometimes we were on the grid, sometimes we took
diagonals, sometimes we took one of those eccentric curving streets.  My DD
compeers understand that at each of the thirty or so corners that we approached,
I had not an inkling whether my guide would choose left, or right, or straight
ahead.  But I was, let me tell you, oh so cool.  After a while, the terrain
began to grow familiar, but just between us, let me confess that it wasn't until
we were thirty feet from our target that I knew where I was.

So, friends, here's my new formula:  keep quiet, hang back, avoid humiliation.

Source: 2008/02/what-happened-i

Title: What Happened in Our Precinct
Date: February 05, 2008

The big news is that our caucus drew unprecedented hordes of voters.  Our site
is the local elementary school.  We're a "super-site" -- seven precincts in
one building.  In the past, we'd have ten or a dozen or at an absolute maximum
thirty attendees per precinct.  Tonight, at 7pm, when we were supposed to come
to order, there were still long lines of folks of all ages waiting patiently
to register. Eventually, the super-site drew 707 people! When our precinct was
finally able to get organized, there were an astonishing 129 people in the room
-- breaking all records by a multiple of four or five.  We voted 92 for Obama,
37 for Clinton and we divided our delegates 4-2.   It was exhilarating to see
so many unfamiliar young faces.  It was also, as dem events are likely to be,
chaotic, amusing, and enthusiastic.

I asked new attendees what brought had them out.  I received two answers. 
Most frequently, George Bush, who, I was told, has driven the country into a
ditch, broken the treasury, ruined the civil service, shredded the constitution,
exhausted the military, ruined the environment, packed the judiciary, fought
a senseless unnecessary, and endless war, and put loyalty to his wing of the
party ahead of loyalty to the country.  The second reason:  Barack Obama.  No
question but that Obama has given people in our precinct new hope.

My conclusion:  Colorado is looking good for the Democrats in November.

Source: 2008/02/forthcoming-swi

Title: Forthcoming Swiftboatery
Date: February 08, 2008

HRC, who is essentially a centrist Democrat, is widely perceived as a divisive
and polarizing figure. Why so?  Because she's a woman, because she's married
to Bill, but mostly because  for twenty years now, unscrupulous Republicans
have been investigating, castigating, and smearing her. Is there a more vilified
politician in the world? She's a murderess, a lesbian, an adultery-enabler, a
frigid bitch... etc. etc.

Barack Obama is not perceived as a divisive and polarizing figure, but only
because Karl Rove and his cruel band of conscienceless propagandists haven't yet
gone to work on him. I guarantee that right at this very moment there's a room
full of "conservative" operatives who are brainstorming the most vile imaginings
about Obama. Think Willie Horton, think swiftboat. They are forging documents,
photoshopping pictures; they're developing sick fantasies about Obama's sex
life, his wife, his children, his parents, his patriotism, his education, his
finances, and certainly, his religion. Don't dare to imagine that racism is
dead; the Rovistas will give it new life.

And don't think that you are able to anticipate the attack. It will be
disgusting beyond anything that ordinary people are capable of inventing. And it
will be cloaked by 527s or disseminated anonymously or leaked.

And then Obama too will become a divisive and polarizing figure.

Source: 2008/02/a-few-weeks-ago

Title: Philip Roth's American Pastoral
Date: February 11, 2008

A couple of months ago, when I had journeyed through roughly half of his
writings, I made some preliminary observations about the fictional world
invented by Philip Roth. In the course of discussion, I advanced two hypotheses.
The first was that Roth hated children, whom he regarded as encumbrances to male
freedom and pleasure. The second is that although Roth had invented a boatload
of adult male narcissists, he had not created a single mensch -- a caring,
responsible, mature man. In Roth's vision of the world, I suggested, "only a
schmuck would be a mensch."

After a pause for rest and rehabilitation, I've now resumed my upriver voyage to
the heart of the Rothworld. I've just finished reading American Pastoral (1997),
a novel set during the difficult, still-controversial Vietnam war. I must boast
that my hypotheses about children and menschdom are fully confirmed by the new
evidence provided by American Pastoral.

In this novel, children are indeed hateful, and the mensch who has at last made
an appearance is nothing more than a schmeggegy. Roth has given us Seymour
"Swede" Levov, an archetypal mensch, and behold, what a poor naive schmuck is
he! Levov nurtures everyone he encounters, but Roth works it so that his virtue
leads directly to his downfall. Poor Swede owns and manages an exemplary factory
but he is betrayed by his workers; he's loyal to Newark, so Newark riots and
pillages; he loves and supports his fragile wife only to discover that she's
sleeping with his friend. Most of all, he adores his daughter, unamusingly
called Merry, who turns out to be, just as we might expect, a devil child. She
screams unaccountably from the moment of birth and stutters through her awkward
childhood (Roth seems to think that colic and speech impediments are signs of
inherent viciousness). At adolescence, Merry transforms into an unhandsome
Patty Hearst clone who participates in several senseless but deadly political
bombings. She then goes underground, only to return secretly in Newark to haunt
Levov all the more. Under this succession of attacks, Swede Levov's carefully-
crafted menschdom is little-by-little exposed as naive schmuckhood. If only
Levov had taken the Zuckerman route: love only thyself, fuck 'em and forget 'em;
abort when necessary.

And now, for the benefit of younger readers, I pause for a few refresher
sentences about the historiography of the Vietnamese catastrophe. The
significance of this period is highly contested. For those on the left, the
war was a foolish attempt to block a peasant uprising against neo-colonialist
overlords. The Bundys and Lyndonites and Kissingers squandered fifty thousand
American and two million Vietnamese lives (plus moral authority and treasure
uncountable). Nevertheless, as the left sees it, the war provided an opportunity
for heroism: for the first time in human history, a free and patriotic people,
making use of peaceful assemblies, petitions, political activism, boycotts, and
resistance to the draft, succeeded in turning an erring government from its
mistaken path. On the other hand, the right wing knows an entirely different
Vietnam war. For conservatives, the war against communism was lost because
squishy liberals lost their nerve. Conservatives remember only the excesses of
the anti-war movement: the culture of drugs, the sexual freedom, the violence,
and of course, the bombings.

American Pastoral is firmly of the right-hand file. Roth has performed an
amazing piece of legerdemain. He has written about the period of Vietnam, but he
has omitted (or suppressed) both the atrocities of the war and the organized,
largely peaceful opposition to it. In American Pastoral, resistance is not
political but personal. It's embodied in Swede's daughter Merry Levov, who is
vacant, violent, angry and disgusting. By stripping the novel of its historical
context and coloration, Roth reduces the opposition to the war to an oedipal
conflict between a demon child and her well-meaning but ineffectual father. The
novel lacks even the decent ambiguity that Roth might have created if he had
given Levov other and perhaps more reasonable children. But it's a sure thing
that in a novel by Philip Roth, more children would have led not to a widening
of focus or to a richer novel, but only to more tsouris.

It's a shame that so skillful an artist (and one who is not generally a right-
winger) has written a novel that's only inches away from neocon propaganda.

Source: 2008/02/upon-upon-julia

Title: Upon "Upon Julia's Clothes"
Date: February 13, 2008

This pretty six-line poem is not nearly as naive as it first appears. But it's
a poem to savor and one that has richly earned its place in the anthologies.
It's often, mistakenly in my opinion, listed among the best "love poems" in the
English language.

Whenas in silks my Julia goes,

Then, then, methinks, how sweetly flows

The liquefaction of her clothes.

Next, when I cast mine eyes and see

That brave vibration each way free

O how that glittering taketh me.

The story, the "plot," is simplicity itself: a poet becomes infatuated with
"Julia's" garments.

"Upon Julia's Clothes" may be a poem about "love," but it seems severely
truncated, because every reader anticipates that, even though the poet
is attracted to his lady's adornments, he'll soon confess that he truly
desires Julia herself -- her hair, her eyes, and if he takes the well-trodden
path, her virtue, which he intends to overcome. But not this poet, not this
poem. "Upon Julia's Clothes" is exactly what it announces itself to be; a
sestet upon Julia's clothes. Readers learn nothing of Julia, and to tell
truth, almost nothing of her costume. The poet lays claim to no interest or
expertise in fashion. Instead, he offers a series of images of a silk dress in
coruscating, shimmering motion: its flow, its "liquefaction", its "vibration,"
its "glittering."

It's in this lovely, odd, and surprising sequence of nouns that the poem's
intrigue lies. The word "glittering" is troublesome. A ardent wooer would
be unlikely to claim that he was attracted to his beloved's "glitter.'' To
do so would be an admission of both his and her superficiality. Plus it's a
matter of record that all that glisters is not gold. The word "vibration" is
an equally curious choice. "Vibration" was brand-new to the language when this
poem was written and the Latin word from which it had recently been annexed
meant "shaking" -- as a spear or a sword is shaken in defiance of the enemy.
"Vibration" was more aggressive than it was loverly. "Liquefaction" -- the
most startling noun, was confined to an alchemical context. Taken together,
the series of dispassionate nouns dilutes any expectation that the poem is
an invitation to romance. The poet may have been "taken" --charmed -- by the
"glittering" -- but he's not all that pleased to have been so.

The contrary or anti-romantic tendency in the poem is realized in a subversive
metaphor so ingenious and subtle that it registers only subliminally."Upon
Julia's Clothes" is, figuratively speaking, about the sport of fishing. The
most overt hint is the employment of the phrase "when I cast mine eyes" which
replaces the more ordinary "when I look." Once a reader notices that piscatorial
"cast," the secondary meanings of other words become immediately clear --
especially when we recall that in those days, fishing line and fishing ties were
made of silk. The watery metaphors in "flows" and "liquefaction" provide the
stream, the "brave (extravagant) vibration" is an oscillating lure, and "how
that glittering taketh me" refers to the deluded poet, who has snapped at a
shiner and is now hooked. As soon as the metaphor bobs to the surface, "how that
glittering taketh me," which at first glance meant only "how that dress enchants
me," acquires a second meaning -- "how that lure hooks me." Julia's clothes, of
course, have been transformed into the dangerous lure.

The sestet is therefore not so much about love-longing as it is about confusion
and ambivalence toward women, toward sex and toward sexuality. Julia's clothes
captivate the poet, yes, but he's a poor fish, unwillingly enthralled.

And so the reader now understands why nothing much is made of Julia, the
supposed inhabitant of these silken, seductive clothes. It's because there is no
Julia -- that is, no specific warm-blooded woman worth the wedding, the wooing,
or even the sport. In her place, there is only an archetypical Dangerous Female
and a culturally-loaded intrapsychic battle between reluctant desire and the
deeply puritanical fear of desire.

Would it be possible to guess, strictly on the basis of this poem, that the
author of "Upon Julia's Clothes" (Robert Herrick [1591-1674]), was a clergyman
and a lifelong bachelor?

Source: 2008/02/car-chases

Title: The All-Time Most Tired Movie Cliche
Date: February 17, 2008

We watched, don't ask me why, the most recent Jason Bourne extravaganza  -- The
Bourne Hyperventilation I believe it was called. So-called "action" pictures are
not my cup of tea. In my view, it's a genre that is far too deeply infatuated
with its own cliches. The Bourne Mystification was not only prefamiliar but also
unusually tricky to follow. It consisted of swatches of flashback interspersed
with vigorous but interminable fight and chase sequences. The "action" was
delivered in a multitude of stitched-together one- and two- second slices,
which, even on the small screen, were vertiginous and almost barfitudinous.

The Bourne Hyperbole is a multiple car-chase movie. How many time do we need
to revisit this cliche? Cars spinning out of control, cars shouldering each
other for a place on the highway, cars ramming into each other, cars becoming
airborne, cars landing on their sides, cars weaving into the oncoming lane, cars
on sidewalks, sirens blaring, hoods flying open, windows shot out, guys shooting
pistols at each other while driving one-handed at 100 mph -- interspersed with
one-second glances at the speedometer, one-second glances of a foot on a brake
-- all followed by the inevitable noisy, multiple-vehicle crash where the nasty
hired killer winds up dead while our invincible hero emerges with only minimal,
symbolic scathe. Is there anything in movies today that is more hectic, more
predictable, or more boring?

Let me ask my readership this art-versus-life question -- what is the ratio of
your own participation and/or observation of real-life car chases compared to
the number of car chases that you've seen in movies?  Am I the only twentieth-
century American who has never been shot at or pursued? Never seen a fleeing
Oldsmobile pass just inches in front of the oncoming semi? Yet I've experienced
the film version of that very scene scores -- perhaps hundreds -- of times.

I think that in the next century, when movies will be studied by historians
eager to understand the great age of petroleum-based transportation (as well as
the golden age of film), our descendants will take it for granted that it was
absolutely ordinary for pedestrians out for a Sunday stroll to be driven from
the sidewalk by an out-of-control vehicle (usually a commandeered taxi trailed
by a gaggle of motorcycle cops). They will think that in our century, there was
never a time that a fruiterer put that last orange on top of his pyramid of
oranges that some sort of vehicle didn't barrel into the display. They will know
that any time, day or night, every plate glass showroom window in North America
was liable to have a station wagon hurtle through it. Often in slow motion.

So here's my proposal for a new rating system for movies. In addition to the
three or four stars, let's announce in advance how many car chases we are going
to experience  -- or better still, exactly how many cars were destroyed during
the making of the film. It would certainly help me choose my entertainment if
I were to learn that The Bourne Yesterday was a three-star, two-car chase, 197
exploded vehicles film.

While we're changing the rating system, I have another idea. Let's also have
a Cute Puppy warning.  I'm thinking of that scene where the hero and heroine
finally make it to bed and there's a reaction shot of Cute Puppy putting his paw
over his eyes. I never, ever, want to see that one again. Agreed: no more car
chases, no more Cute Puppies. Life will be richer.

One further exercise: let us divide the number of cases of amnesia encountered
in film by the number of cases of amnesia encountered in real life. And the
answer is: it's impossible to divide by zero.

Source: 2008/02/john-milton-and

Title: John Milton and Docosahexaenoic Acid
Date: February 19, 2008

Your “mature” brain has mind of its own. It is intermittently balky and
stubborn, reluctant to yield up its stored data.

Many years ago I memorized a few of John Milton’s sonnets.  These poems are
not only noble and politically engaged, they are also reflective, immaculately
crafted, challenging, and melodious  -- as good as any short poems in the
language.

One night, a week or so ago, insomniac as usual, I tried to recall one of the
finest of the sequence -- the great sonnet in which Milton condemned the ethnic
cleansing by Roman Catholic Savoyards of a colony of Swiss Protestants.

There was a time when I knew this poem like the back of my hand, but try as
I might, all that I could dredge out of my recalcitrant mind was the single
phrase “triple tyrant.”  (In Miltonese, the “triple tyrant” is the
Pope, wearer of a three-tiered crown.) It's mighty frustrating to have so rusty
a brain.

The next night, sleepless once again, I re-activated the tired old memory system
and was able to scrape up a few more words. I retrieved “where still doth
sway the triple tyrant.” (The word “sway” does not imply that the Pope
has taken to dancing but rather that the holy father “holds sway” over his
dominions.) In two days, I had assembled only a single line of poetry and still
needed thirteen more to complete the sonnet.  This sorry state of affairs cried
out for radical new approach to memory-jogging.

It is well known that Omega-3 fatty acids (i.e. fish oils) increase the rate
of transmission of certain brain waves that are linked to memory. On the third
day of my adventure in sonnet-recall, I swallowed a fish oil pill rich in
docosahexaenoic acid (commonly known as DHA). When I woke up next morning, there
it was on the tip of my tongue (or the top of my brain) -– another line and
a half of the sonnet:  “Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that rolled/ Mother
with infant down the rocks.” Did I do it all by myself? Or could it possibly
have been the DHA?

And in what part of the brain lay hidden this poignant line of poetry before
I was able to summon it?  In what chemical form?  Clearly the words were
in storage, so to speak, but why couldn’t I freely access them? Was I
unconsciously running some sort of failed search program?  Attention
searchers:  examine poetry quadrant for missing sonnets by Milton, John
[1608-1673]. Did the DHA shift the words from a dusty neglected old storeroom to
facility currently in us?

Does fish oil really lubricate memory?

The next day, I doubled my intake of the oily acid and, marvelous to say,
came up with the poem’s last line:  “Early may fly the Babylonian
woe” ("Babylon" is reformation code for "Rome"). On the fourth day of this
experiment, I took three fish oil pills and lo and behold was able to remember
the entire first quatrain of the sonnet:  “Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered
saints, whose bones/ Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold,/ Even them
who kept thy truth so pure of old,/  When all our fathers worshiped stocks
and stones.”  There it is: Milton’s agony and fury, his uncompromising
conviction, his contempt for pre-Reformation idol-worship, plus the confidence,
that, because he's something of a prophet himself, he can boss god around.

I continued to take the pills but I was scared to increase the dosage for fear
of provoking what Milton elsewhere calls the “fishy fumes.” After several
days of medication and head-scratching, I had conjured up this much of the poem:

Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones

Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold,

Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old,

When all our fathers worshiped stocks and stones;

Forget not:

in thy [blank], [blank] their [blank]

Who were thy [blank]

Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that rolled

Mother with infant down the rocks.

where still doth sway

The triple tyrant;

A hundred-fold

Early may fly the Babylonian woe.

And then, progress came to a halt. No matter how many glutinous pills I popped,
no matter how I greased my memory, I could recover nary another syllable.
Where was the rest of the poem concealed? Why couldn’t I fish it up? Had the
molecules of which memory is constituted long ago disintegrated?

I've now declared the experiment officially over.  Although the results are
inconclusive, I've decided to continue with the fish oil regimen.  It's obvious
that my brain needs all the phospholipids it can get.

And after a week of disciplined forbearance, I've now peeked at the text of
"On the Late Massacre at Piedmont."  Every word was familiar -- even the ones
that I could not recall.  Perhaps I might ultimately have brought them to the
surface;  I'm convinced that they were lurking somewhere in the inner recesses
of the brain.

I’ll re-memorize and hope for the best.  Perhaps my newly fishified
brain is ready for a renaissance.  After all, I’m a lot richer in
phosphatidylethanolamine, ethanolamine plasmalogens, and phosphatidylserine than
I was just a week ago.

Loyal readers: here you may find John Milton's masterful sonnet "On the Late
Massacre at Piedmont." Trust me, it's worth a look. In fact, it's worth
committing to memory.

Source: 2008/02/another-roth-de

Title: Another Roth Demon-Child
Date: February 22, 2008

Philip Roth's American Pastoral (1997) attacked home-grown resistance to the
Vietnam war and featured a child of unparalleled wickedness named Merry Levov.
I've now read I Married a Communist (1999) which ridicules the post-World War
II political left and gives prominence to an even more horrible demon-daughter.
This time it's Sylphid Pennington, an Iago-strength villain, who destroys her
mother's marriage to Ira Ringold. She does so by forcing her mother to abort
Ira's child, which, if it is born, she will "strangle in its crib." Roth's
hatred of children is persistent, intransigent and obsessive. Has there been a
writer since Thomas Kyd whose writings were so empty of love (except for self-
love) and so focused on vengeance?

Moreover, what does Roth's prominence tell us about ourselves?

Source: 2008/02/two-three-tens

Title: Two Three Tens to Yuma or Two Three Ten to Yumas
Date: February 27, 2008

I had trace memory only of Delmer Daves' 1957 3:10 to Yuma, a film that I had
not seen since the days of my youth. In my mind it was bracketed with a much
better morality-play western, High Noon (1952). I am, frankly, a little vain
that I was able to recall that Van Heflin played the Gary Cooper part of the
good man deserted by fearful townspeople while the clock ticks toward the
climactic arrival of the Iron Horse and while Frankie Laine strums and sings
off-screen. Of course, so much detail had evaporated from the ol'  tired brain
that the return to the 1950s was, once again, well, not mind-blowing, but
certainly eye-opening.

3:10 to Yuma is a remarkably spare noirish western -- not a classic, but
respectable and well-made. At its heart is the near-friendship that develops
between the bad guy Ben Wade as acted by smooth and charming Glenn Ford, and his
captor, the god-fearing impoverished settler Dan Evans, played by the ever-gruff
Van Heflin (reprising his role in Shane). As the two (Wade and Evans) test
each other, an odd mutual respect springs up between them. Wade has money and
authority and the perennial appeal of lawlessness while Evans is grounded in his
ranch and his family.  Each envies the other. The relationship is imperfectly
delineated and as a result the ending of the film is huddled and unsatisfying.

Slipping the DVD of the brand new 3:10 to Yuma into the machine, I thought,
ah, here's a chance to remedy the original. This time, get that off-kilter
relationship between Wade and Evans right;  clarify the ending. I wanted a
suspenseful film rich in psychological insights. I couldn't have been more
disappointed. James Mangold's reworking of 3:10 to Yuma is bigger, noisier, and
a ton more expensive than the original. It adds a lot of ruckus:  a fight with
Indians, a barn-burning, feuding townsfolk, a pair of sadistic monomaniacal
killers, a gruesome bullet extraction that belongs on the surgery channel, a
cursed pistol, thirty seconds of gratuitous torture, and most of all, hundreds
of fatalities. In terms of melodrama and gunfire, there's certainly much
more bang for the buck, but the characters themselves are flatter and less
interesting and the climax, problematical in the first 3:10 to Yuma, is totally
botched and incoherent. An opportunity squandered!

And yesterday I saw the acclaimed Michael Clayton, an eastern western. This
time the bad guy is a woman, chief counsel to a nasty polluting international
conglomerate. Will the good man, Michael Clayton, under financial and emotional
siege, resist temptation and stand up for the right, like Gary Cooper and Van
Heflin and Humphrey Bogart before him? What do you think? Will it spoil anyone's
appreciation of Michael Clayton if I hint that George Clooney finds his place in
the long line of inarticulate American heroes?

Here's the paradoxical upshot: there's less of the old 3:10 to Yuma in the new
3:10 to Yuma than there is old 3:10 to Yuma in the new Michael Clayton.

Source: 2008/03/cautionary-song

Title: "Cautionary" Songs of the 1950s
Date: March 03, 2008

A while back, I recalled that during the late 1940s and early 1950s, students
at P. S. 217 in Flatbush were force fed patriotic and religious music. I've now
remembered (perhaps it's the DHA) that we were also indoctrinated with songs
that could be called "cautionary."  For example: do not chase a bouncing ball
into the street, because while you could get a new ball, but "you can't always
get a new leg."

I also remember a lyric in which we were exhorted to solicit divine
intervention, and which contained these deistic lines: "Pray in any language, to
Him they all are dear/ Pray for it is music to His ear." It was this same song,
I believe, in which we were allowed the ecumenical freedom to pray "in temple,
mosque, or tabernacle,/ He won't need to search."  (I had heard of temples, but
the word "mosque" was beyond my ken and "tabernacle" was a complete mystery,
though it had warm associations with "pumpernickel.")

Does anyone out there in Bloglandia remember either of these songs?  Or other
cautionary songs from the old days? They don't google. Any information or
citations will be much appreciated.

Incidentally, despite the well-meant advice, I pursued many a rubber ball into
the street. Nor was I ever once moved to pray in a consecrated building, except
perhaps in Ebbets Field, and then only in tough ninth-inning situations.

Source: 2008/03/hoop-news

Title: Hoop News
Date: March 04, 2008

Extremely important bulletin:  Cornell's basketball team is going to the NCAA
tournament -- first time in a generation.  Twelve and 0 in the Ivy League,
Randy Wittman's son the main man.

Is the Big Red going to manhandle Kansas and UCLA and Duke?  I'm not, at this
moment, prepared to bet the house.  But Cinderelloid success is not beyond
possibility.

Let's hear it for Cornell, where I took my first timid steps into adulthood.

March 22.  Bad news:  Cornell played like a bunch of junior high-schoolers. 
They were nervous and intimidated.  Hey, Duke didn't do much better.  And is
that a rug that Coach K is wearing, or is he just using too much black shoe-
polish?

Source: 2008/03/sweet-and-lowdo

Title: Sweet and Lowdown
Date: March 08, 2008

Woody Allen's Sweet and Lowdown is a sentimental love story with an unhappy
ending.  Like most of Allen's works, it has become a far better work of art
with a few years on its back than it seemed on first viewing (1999) -- probably
because audiences habitually come to the Woodman's films with the mouth set
for wisecracks and one-liners.  Woody's films grow on you;  some day, when
the fuss has died down, their emotional range and artistry will be better
recognized.

The lovers in Sweet and Lowdown are Emmett Ray, who talks constantly but says
very little, and Emmett's girlfriend Hattie, who is mute but miraculously
expressive.  Emmett is a shallow, vain, brittle, damaged bit of goods who
exempts himself from emotion and human connection with the assertion that he's
an "artist."  Hattie is said to be dull-witted but whether she is or not we
don't know.  We do know that she's a woman of great appetites: for sex, for
food, for music.  Emmett cannot acknowledge that she's his best audience and he
runs like the wind when it's revealed that she loves him.  The climax of the
film is inarticulate: all Emmett can manage is "I've made a mistake."  Viewers,
however, can easily fill in the gaps.

It's a fine and lovely movie, well worth the re-seeing if only for the music and
the affectionate re-creation of the 30s jazz scene.  And also for the acting. 
Sean Penn twists his face into an expression of perpetual dissatisfaction.  His
Emmett Ray, except for a redeeming moment or two, is horrid and knows it.  On
the other side of the coin, Samantha Morton is transcendent as the vulnerable
but resilient Hattie.

See Sweet and Lowdown for what it is.  It's not a farce;  it's not raucus. 
Don't look to it for more than it offers or for something other than it
offers.  It's sufficient unto itself.

Source: 2008/03/away-from-herfi

Title: Away From Her/Fiona Andersson/Julie Christie
Date: March 10, 2008

Away From Her explores the infinitely sorrowful subject of early-onset
Alzheimer's. Fiona Andersson, in her vigorous mid-sixties, has begun to lose
her way and to forget names; she stores the frying pan in the refrigerator. She
thinks that she’s “beginning to disappear.” Fiona’s plight is worrisome
to every human being but it is especially disturbing to people of her own and of
Julie Christie's generation.

Here in our home we still manage to find appropriate places for the cooking
utensil, mostly.  Nevertheless, things happen. We set out to purchase six
items at the market and come home with just three. We have three errands to
perform and we arrive back home with two of the tasks undone. We put the camera
in a special secure place and then spend a couple of hours searching for it.
Keys and lists and books and tickets regularly evaporate or disintegrate or
dematerialize.  Are these forgettings normal or are we en route to something
that is too horrible to contemplate?

We exercise, we eat carefully, we gulp those horrid fish oil boluses. Perhaps
these defensive procedures have value. Perhaps we'll be the ones to dodge the
Alzheimer bullet.  Perhaps we won't.

It doesn’t help that we spend many hours a week at the facility where the Aged
Parent is incarcerated. We encounter people just like Fiona -- or the remnants
of them -- every day.  They're hollow shells, slumped in the wheelchair or
poking at the boiled-to-mush food. The angry ones, the ones with dead eyes, the
ones who moan all day long, “help me.” Better the Seconal and applesauce,
the ice floe, or the bullet in the brain than to live in such horrible oblivion.

In Away From Her, Julie Christie is entirely persuasive as the alzheimered
Fiona. But let me ask you, friends of a certain age-cohort, is it really
possible that that gray old lady was Julie Christie? Here’s a woman I’ve
known for forty-five years, ever since she was Liz for thirty incandescent
seconds in Billy Liar -- and feckless Billy was too much of a jerkass coward
to run away with her. Julie and I have had a long (albeit entirely one-sided)
relationship.  I was dazzled by her when she was the voracious Diana Scott in
Darling and I feared for her when she was Laura Baxter in Nicholas Roeg’s
scary-as-all-hell Don't Look Now.  She was my favorite Gertrude. But Fiona
Andersson is outside any recognizable trajectory;  she's too raw, too
dislocating to my tender sense of the way things ought to be.  No, Julie will
always be Liz to me.  I've held on to that first image for most of my adult
life.

I have no intention of progressing to the "second floor," or to sunset village
or to memory lane or to however they euphemize the place that they put the folks
with clogged synapses, but, if I should find myself in such a state, let's hope
that it won't be Fiona but Liz to whom the brain clings.

Source: 2008/03/what-happened-i

Title: What Happened at the County Assembly
Date: March 16, 2008

At the precinct caucus last month, I was chosen to be a delegate to the county
assembly.  The assembly is where we Dems nominate candidates for county-wide
offices (and do a lot of other business, using procedures that are obscure to
veterans and incomprehensible to first-time attendees).  Yesterday, we filled
the Skyline High School auditorium with 1600 delegates, at least three-quarters
of whom were young, impatient pro-Obama initiates.  It was exciting and even
more chaotic than usual.

All of the local Dem incumbents were re-nominated without opposition, but there
were some open and contested seats: a state senator, a university regent, and,
the big one, a congressman (our longtime representative Mark Udall is making a
run for the U. S. Senate).  And also the Clinton-Obama showdown, but that event
wasn't held at the morning county assembly but reserved for the afternoon county
convention, to which I was not credentialed.

I was in place at 7:15 A.M, handing out leaflets and stickers for Rollie Heath,
a candidate whom I'm supporting for state senator.  Politicking inures you to
rejection.  Some delegates for the other candidate, Cindy Carlisle, wouldn't
accept my piece of paper; they acted as though it would compromise their
integrity to read or even to touch my pamphlet.  Sometimes they were downright
and inexcusably rude, even though we're all Dems and all in the same family.

The new attendees didn't seem to realize that before we could get to Obama,
we had to carry out the business of local government.  I heard occasional
grumbling and a lot of puzzlement and confusion.  But in compensation there
were some rousing addresses:  Ken Salazar, our middle-of-the-road Senator,
adapting to his audience, emphasized his liberal side.  I'm skeptical of
Salazar, but better a centrist Democrat than a benighted Republican.

Eventually we voted.  The morning results were predictable.  My candidate for
state office came in second but qualified for the party primary, which is in
August.  The race will be a marathon.  But the good news is that whoever wins
the nomination won't have a Republican opponent -- the other side is punting on
state senator.  The Repubs are also surrending the congressional seat, where
Fitz-Gerald won over Polis;  there will be a three-way Democratic primary
(Shafroth is "not going the caucus route" but petitioning on -- I said that
it's  complicated).

In the afternoon, Obama had a smashing 3-1 win over Clinton.

Here's the million-dollar question:  will the Obama enthusiasm carry over to
the general election?  Will the young 'uns who turned out yesterday still
be around in October to donate, to walk the precincts, stuff the envelopes,
make the phone calls?  Or are they just in it for the glamor of the moment? 
Colorado's now in play; it's a swing state.  We could go blue. But not unless
Bush-disgust, Obama- love translates into weeks and months hard work.

Source: 2008/03/pmy-positionsp

Title: My Campaign for City Council
Date: March 16, 2008

It's election season once again. I'm thinking of making a run for city council
in our progessive western town. Here's my new platform, voters.

1.  NO LEAF BLOWERS.  Rationale: it's a horrible noisy unecological machine that can easily be replaced with a broom. And everyone knows that single-stroke engines are major polluters.

2.  ALL MALL PERFORMERS MUST BE JURIED. Rationale: no more off-key singing. No more bad juggling.  No more ugly balloon animals. No more noisy drummers or whining didgeredoos.

3.  EVERY RESTAURANT MUST KEEP A PIG. Rationale: a perfect. ecologically-sound solution to the waste food problem. Come to think of it, let's require a piggery of all institutions with lunchrooms, such as high schools and hospitals. Let's fatten up those porkers, turn them into bacon and savory spare ribs.

4.  NO "HOLIDAY" LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce resources. Global warming. Bad taste. Bad theology. Bauble-olatry.

5.  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale: uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. (I reject out of hand those extremists who propose to celebrate Darwin's birthday on December 25. I'm a uniter, not a divider.)

6.  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897?  Death of Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music of any kind in an automobile that is audible outside the vehicle. Higher fines and jail terms hip hop and for excessively patriotic "country."

7.  NO SMOKERS.  Rationale:  lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, disgusting odor, cigarette litter. Note: not "no smoking"-- "no smokers." No going outside of city limits to light up and then re-entering.

8.  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Why only "visible "tattoos?  Because whole-body inspections might be considered intrusive by squishy civil libertarians. Also, no nose rings, navel rings, or other bodily piercings. Except earrings. I rather like earrings. But no more than one per ear.

9.  ANNUAL JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PRAIRIE DOG SHOOT AND BARBECUE. Let them kids exercise their Second Amendment rights; eliminate them pesky varmints;  learn to cook. One platform position, three social benefits.

10. NO DOGS PERMITTED WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal dog attacks, dog bites, barking dogs, whining dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs carrying on in parks and open space, the goopy indulgence of dog "guardians," the ecological disaster of dog food. But what about seeing-eye dogs, you ask?  Well, that's a slippery slope, ain't it. Sorry folks, no dogs (except for purposes of vivisection).

11.  NO MORE COLLEGE FOOTBALL. Rationale: I don't like college football.

12.  NO "FACILITATORS" WITH WHITEBOARDS OR FLIPCHARTS AT OFFICIAL MEETINGS. Goodness gracious, do I ever hate those things.

That's about it. I feel that I have my finger on the pulse of the
electorate. It's going to be a landslide. Tell me that life won't be better as
soon as we enact these new laws.

Source: 2008/03/irene-nemirovsk

Title: Irene Nemirovsky's Fire in the Blood
Date: March 21, 2008

Irene Nemirovsky's spare but luminous novella, Fire in the Blood, is set in an
out-of-the-way French village a few years before the start of World War II. 
Just as the plot is beginning to come to a boil, the author interjects an easy-
to-overlook but very telling incident.  "A car full of Parisians arrived and
stopped in front of the Hotel des Voyaguers. 'It's so quiet,' one woman said." 
The automobile and its condescending passengers soon drive on and Nemirovsky,
speaking through her narrator, offers her readership a few words of guidance: 
"How many peaceful sleepy places they'll drive through tonight, how many sleepy
villages.... They'll pass silent sombre country estates and will not begin to
imagine the dark secret life within -- a life they will never come to know."

In Fire in the Blood, Nemirovky's subject is Issy-l'Eveque and its "dark secret
life."  As it turns out, there is as much mystery and passion in this corner
of rural Burgundy as in Paris or any other modern metropolis.  In fact, the
yearnings and loves and jealousies and inhibitions of these patronized village
folk soon achieve nothing less than tragic proportion.

Fire in the Blood resists easy classification. It's a satire, a novel of
manners, a mystery, and also a romance. Nemirovsky manages to depict an entire
society in little -- not only its ingrained customs, but the resistance to those
customs.

Not to spoil the story, but here's the situation: unmarried old Uncle Sylvio,
after many years abroad, has returned home to the village of his birth.  His
upstanding young niece Colette marries a local miller named Jean Dorin.  A
couple of years later, Jean Dorin falls into the river and drowns.  Uncle
Silvio happens to know that his niece has been carrying on an affair and he
also knows that her young lover has been visiting not just Colette but also
Brigitte Declos, an attractive woman married to an elderly farmer.  From this
beginning, the story takes a series of winding and unanticipated turns.  But
Nemirovsky is not content merely to complicate the plot. Her quarry is larger: 
it's the moral and psychological ramifications of Issy-l'Eveque's mysteries. 
Indeed, the story, the plot ends thirty pages before the novel comes to a close,
and revelations that at first seem like a coda became a climax. It's a little
miracle that Nemirovsky has created a story that manages to be both a wicked
satire of rural complacency and an exhortation to a more full life.

I've now read Fire in the Blood twice, the second time with great care.  The
novella was more intricate, more carefully plotted the second time than I had
noticed or appreciated.  Unless I'm deceiving myself, this is one heck of a
piece of writing.  I'm dazzled.

Irene Nemirovsky was thirty-nine years old when she was murdered at Auschwitz in
1942.  She wrote Fire in the Blood in 1940.  Thought to have been lost, the
manuscript was discovered in an old valise and the novella published for the
first time in 2007.

How many more stories might Nemirovksy have told?  How much more life might she
have lived?

Source: 2008/03/the-kent-theatr

Title: The Kent Theater/ Sex
Date: March 23, 2008

I can't recommend Marion Meade's The Unruly Life of Woody Allen (New York,
2000), which I too hastily snatched off the library shelf. Written at the
tabloid height of the Woody-Mia-Soon-yi fracas, it masquerades as a biography
but in truth it's nothing more than scandalmongery.

Before it gets down in the dirt, however, Unruly Life offers a quick summary of
Allen’s life, a matter of which I was largely ignorant. Of course I knew that
Allen was a Brooklyn boy who grew up in the old neighborhood. Allen Koenigsberg
attended P. S. 99 on East 10 Street near Avenue K (where my cousin Louie was
also a student). In addition, I knew, from Louie, that P. S. 99's principal was
Eudora Fletcher and that, in the very inventive chameleon movie, Woody gave Ms.
Fletcher's name to the psychiatrist who takes Zelig under her wing.

But cousin Louie did not know, or did not bother to tell me, that Allen was a
frequent patron of the Kent Theater on Coney Island Avenue and that it's rumored
that it was at the Kent that the interior scenes in The Purple Rose of Cairo
were filmed. I've seen Purple Rose recently and if it wasn't the Kent, it sure
looks like the Kent of my memory. The Kent, along with its sister theater, the
Leader, was one of my own childhood haunts. In fact, it was my father’s aunt
Manya, substitute cashier, who sometimes sat in the box office and took my
quarter.

It was not at the Kent but at the Jewel Theater on Kings Highway that Allen
encountered Ingmar Bergman for the first time. Well, not exactly Bergman
himself. It was Harriet Andersson disrobing in Summer with Monika that seems to
have caught Allen's attention. Unruly Life reports that Allen sat “with eyes
bulging” to watch this and other early Bergman films.

Allen’s protruding orbs brought to mind the impact that those shocking 1950s
Scandinavian films had on the days of my early adolescence. It was at the Kent
(aunt Manya must not have been on duty that day) that I once watched a Danish
film in which there was a very brief flash of a woman in naked silhouette. All I
can remember is that I sat through to watch the picture again -- it might even
have been a double feature -- and that by the time the silhouette appeared a
second time, my poor bladder was so swollen (I was afraid to leave my seat for
fear of missing the moment) that it was about to rupture. How embarrassing it
would have been to die of an aneurysm of the urinary tract simply to catch a
glimpse of Harriet Andersson or one of her friends.

In the 1950s, naked bodies were simply not on view. Never at all, at least not
in my slice of the universe. I doubt that anyone from the post-Vietnam, post-
sexual-revolution generation can imagine how nude-deprived were those severely
repressed years. Bodies, women's bodies, were so rare and mysterious that a
brief and evanescent flash of shadowed skin, circa 1953, could remain in the
memory for more than fifty years.

Which is why I retain the warmest feelings for Coney Island Avenue's Kent
Theater.

Source: 2008/03/aficionados-of

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Mutiny on the Bounty
Date: March 24, 2008

Aficionados of this blague will remember that Dr. M. occasionally revisits
books that were notorious in the days of his unnaturally elongated adolescence.
Here’s a small sample of the novels that Dr. M has reported upon: I the Jury,
King Solomon's Mines, The Caine Mutiny, Blackboard Jungle, The Amboy Dukes, Lord
of the Flies, Catcher in the Rye, Scaramouche. It’s quite the roster, isn't
it, of time-sensitive material.

Some of these novels have worn astonishingly well. Others are merely
astonishing: what in the world could I (or the drab Eisenhower-era sensibility,
for that matter) have possibly found worthwhile in most of these colossally
dated and inartistic fictions?

To extend my anti-nostalgia, I’ve now tackled, for the first time in more
than fifty years, a novel that enthralled the heck out of me back then. It’s
Nordhoff and Hall’s Mutiny on the Bounty, first published in 1932 but widely
read at least through the 1950s. Why was I so infatuated? Certainly not because
of the novelists’ skill. The story of the tyrannical Captain Bligh, the
Byronic rebel Fletcher Christian, the mutiny, the open boat, and the settlement
of Pitcairn offered the opportunity to engage all the important themes: family,
power, sex and love, religion, sanity, rebellion, technology, colonialism and
cultural conflict. But N and H fell far miles short of the mark – not only did
they write gawky sentences, but they also left gaping holes in the plot, created
disappointingly shallow characters, and failed to explore the opportunities for
thoughtful commentary. The novel is swift and superficial and clumsy.  It’s
not for all time; it’s for the supermarket checkout stand.

Nevertheless, there’s little mystery as to why the novel captured this
Brooklynites's youthful fancy. What adolescent would demand artistry from a
novel that is awash with exoticism, romance, and sex?

Let us consider the following piece of reheated anthropological observation.
Midshipman Byam (the story is cunningly told through the eyes of a juvenile
narrator) attends a Tahitian entertainment at which young women perform a dance
“believed by the Indians (i.e. Tahitians) to ensure the fertility of the
crops.”

The dress of the dancers consisted of no more than a wreath of flowers and green
leaves about their waists, and the dance itself, in which they stood in two
lines of three, face to face, was of a nature so unbelievably wanton that no
words could convey the least idea of it.

“No more than a wreath of flowers about their waists?”  Does that
mean…?  Holy smoke. “Unbelievably wanton?"  Exactly how wanton is that? 
What in the censorious world did these young ladies actually do?  They
didn’t…?   No, they couldn't. “No words could convey….”

What grand openings did N and H leave to be filled by an inexperienced but
lascivious imagination!

And how does Midshipman Byam deal with such provocations?  Good luck for him as
well as for all the randy young readers who identified with his circumstances. 
Byam takes as his eager concubine a young Tahitian woman. “Slenderly and
strongly made, in the first bloom of young womanhood, and with her magnificent
dark hair unbound, Maimiti made a picture worth traveling far to behold.”

OK, so I fell for it.  Sure it was contrived and manipulative.  But I was
thirteen or so years old, living in concrete, subwayed, bepigeoned Flatbush
where young ladies danced not in wreaths of flowers but in stiff and forbidding
crinolines. Exactly how many fertility ceremonies had I attended?  I was
exoticism-deprived.

I’m just slightly embarrassed to admit that I did not just read Mutiny on the
Bounty and call it a day.  Not at all.  Instead, I read everything that I
could find about Bligh and Christian and Pitcairn Island and even about Norfolk
Island, where the mutineers relocated after Pitcairn became overpopulated. I
became something of an expert on the geography of these islands. I also took to
reading about nineteenth-century sailing vessels, and though an arrant land-
lubber, I could accurately, in those days, define taffrail, yardarm, orlop,
lanyard, hawse-hole, gimbal, lanyard, poop, mizzen.

Nor was it all erotic displacement. Although I began with Nordhoff and Hall, I
later read Cook and Bouganville and eventually moved on to the writings of Mead
and Malinowski and others in that pioneering generation of anthropologists. 
Of course I didn't understand much and have long forgotten what I read -- but
neither Maimiti "with magnificent dark hair unbound" nor that unbelievably
wanton ceremony ever entirely evaporated from my susceptible, impressionable
young brain.

Source: 2008/03/a-parable-for-1

Title: A Parable for Teachers of Writing
Date: March 29, 2008

My good friend Professor L---- is an eminent scholar of American literature
and an upstanding  teacher at the University of C------.  A few months ago,
Professor L------ told me the following story. I repeat it unvarnished and
unadorned -- a curious but instructive anecdote from the trenches of learning.
Some years ago, on the last day of the semester, a student approached my friend
and gushed:  "Oh, Professor L-----, I just want to tell you what a great course
this was, and what a great teacher you are. I learned so much. Especially about
writing. I really really appreciated all the thoughtful comments you made on
my papers. You were so helpful. I feel like I've made a great deal of progress
with my writing. I have just one question. Why do you always write "frog,"
"frog," "frog" all over the margins of my essays?"This anecdote raises a number
of questions. The most obvious: if the student thought that Professor L -----
was afflicted with some sort of obscure batrachian obsession, why didn't she
raise the point with him or with the proper medical authorities?  Poor child,
she must have been both mystified and intimidated.However, it's not the student
but the teacher who should profit from this parable. Here are a few of its many
moralia.If you're a teacher of writing, don't assume that any student knows the
difference between a sentence and a fragment. Or even knows that there is such a
thing as a fragment. Don't assume that just because you have written something
that you think is helpful in the margin of an essay that therefore a student a)
reads it, b) understands it) or c) profits from it. Even more important:  don't
imagine that enthusiastic praise from a middling student has the slightest value
-- it's simple vanity to think so. In fact, better not to build any structure,
however slight, on a foundation of student regard.

And finally: mind your minims.

Source: 2008/03/news-from-alame

Title: News from Alameda
Date: March 31, 2008

We’re in Alameda, California, for ten days, visiting the grandchildren and
also their parents. The big news here is that the Alameda public schools
are in a money crunch. The root cause is Proposition 13, the granddaddy of
pernicious tax-limiting amendments (we have one in Colorado, too -- it’s
paralyzed us). The immediate precipitant of the Alameda crisis is Governor
Schwarzenegger’s plan to balance the budget by cutting brazillions of dollars
out of the education budget. Public-spirited citizens in the island city
have responded by proposing a supplementary “parcel tax” -- most people
say property tax –- of $120 per "parcel" of real estate to help the school
district survive these dark days. To me, the tax supplement is an imperfect but
obvious fix.  Public schools must be supported, and if the state shirks its
responsibility, local effort must ride to the rescue.

There’s the usual testy opposition: too much fat in the budget; teachers are
overpaid; school board is incompetent; bad planning. I know enough about public
education's lean diet not to be swayed.

What gets my goat is that some of the arguments against the supplement are just
plain mean. Here’s an example. A local curmudgeon named Guy Smith has written
a guest opinion in the Alameda Journal under the heading: “Make Parents Pay
for Child’s Education,” His gist: “It is no longer appropriate to tax
childless homes for public education.” And also:  people who support such
taxes suffer from “collectivist mentalities."

And here I thought that the American constitution had in its preamble a phrase
about promoting the “general" and not just the individual welfare. No doubt 
Mr. Smith would stigmatize Madison and Jefferson as early collectivists.

The argument that the childless need not contribute to education is flimsy  --
so slight that it’s hard to believe that it’s argued in good faith and is
not just a rationale for skinflintism. Does Mr. Smith think that he shouldn’t
pay for the fire department or the police department, except on the days that he
happens to use them?

Does he think that he doesn’t profit from the educational system because he
has no children in school. He can read and write. Did he teach himself?  He’s
sitting at a computer, designed by someone with an education. His chair and his
table and his coffee and the cup out of which he drinks his coffee were designed
or planned or imported or constructed or distributed by people who could read
and write and figure. Take away the learning of his predecessors and members of
his own age-cohort and Mr. Smith would be out there chasing squirrels with a
flint hand-ax. And whining about the cost of the clan-supplied flint.

The essence of  Mr. Smith’s argument is selfish and narcissistic  --
“I’ve got mine – you take care of  yourself.”  It’s shallow, vulgar
libertarianism.

It's a shame that these nay sayers need to be reminded that we’re all in this
together. We’re interconnected -- a tissue of tessellations.

Even Mr. Smith must know, deep in his heart, that when he promotes the general
welfare, he improves his own lot. In fact, the parcel tax will be the best
investment he’ll ever make.

Source: 2008/03/post

Title: P. S. 217 Graduating Class:  June, 1952
Date: March 31, 2008

On your left is the official photograph of the 1952 P. S. 217 eighth grade
graduating class, contributed by a classmate who now teaches in Brazil. (Click
to enlarge). It's quite the time capsule, isn't it -- the dated costumes, the
old-fashioned hairstyles, along with the clean-cut and dewy enthusiasm of far-
away-and-long-ago youth. What has become of these promising young people? Some
of them have long since left the planet and some are no doubt still engaged in
distinguished careers. Do any of them still live in the old neighborhood? 
Sent their children or grandchildren to the old school?

A panel of experts has tentatively identified some of the graduates. Some of
these ascriptions are sure to be inaccurate. Corrections, suggestions and
comments are very welcome.

FIRST ROW, left to right:  Carl Bernstein, Robert F. Cohen (now Robert C.
Forst, attorney, Montecito, CA), Michael Silver (ret. stockbroker, Queens),
Michael Gerber, Nicholas Antonucci (said to have died in Korea), Arne Neilson,
unknown, unknown, William Roberts, unknown, George Coven (entrepreneur, owner
of Score Oil and Zodiac nightclub, d. 1983), Ralph Tromba, supposedly living
in steamy Florida, Theodore (Teddy) Schorr;  SECOND ROW: Ira Bernstein,
Bernard Sandigorsky, Anthony (Buddy) Sogluizzo (semi-retired from a career in
librarianship), Elihu Pearlman (Boulder, Colorado), Helene Rosen, Sylvia Gordon,
Harold Jacobson, Fred Ljubicich, Donald Carbone, Michael Brody;  third row:
Ann Cacioppa, Ria De Castri, Claire Rabinowitz (now Claire Maret, formerly
Dominican Republic, now Orlando), Charlotte Meineke, Carol Gerber, Marlene Gold,
Ruth Rubinstein, Eleanor Troy, Sheila Katz, Carol Coniglio, Barbara Heiferman,
Maureen Haynes, two unknowns, Josephine Casalino, unknown, unknown, Mary Anne
Abrahams, Sandra Abrahams;  fourth row: Yvette Rosenthal, Beryl McLeod, Sandra
Roseman, unknown, Anita Friedman, Karen Scheer, Jeanne Boyce, Barbara Dinner,
Bridget Pugliese, Carol Zeitlin,  Marjorie Rennick, Selma Schnier, unknown,
Wendy Rosenberg, Mimi Shyko, Barbara Wolowitz, Evelyn and/or Norma Greenberg,
unknown, Leah Goodman, Rochelle Yasser, Ruth Wintheil, Beverley Leventhal, Lori
Katcher (now Laurie Lindner, psychoanalyst, NJ), two unknowns, Hilda Tarud; 
fifth row: Herbie Wessoly aka Percy Wessoly, Albie Luongo, Donald Schiebel,
Daniel Roos (Prof at MIT), Thomas Bellavita, John McKay, Alan Lipis, Robert
Goldstein (retired orthodontist, now of Asheville, NC), Alan Ihrig, Lester
Silberman (ret NE ob/gyn), Harvey Greif, Melvin Polay (CPA, died 1996) Howard
Nirenberg, Morton Kamienny, Eric Sanders, Herbert Damsky, unknown, unknown,
Melvyn Krauss, Martin Wallenstein;  SIXTH ROW:  Anne Perkins, Linda Bly,
Francine Hershkowitz, unknown, Diane Spatz, Appolonia Yacovelli, three unknowns,
Pauline Aridas, Estelle Tarman, Lisa Pomerance (finance, LA), Phyllis Mancuso,
Roberta Katcher, unknown, Janet Solomon, four unknowns, Marcia and/or Virginia
Gargiulo, unknown, Evelyn Fleishner, unknown; SEVENTH ROW: Stuart Blickstein
(now a South Carolinian), Allen Guday (longtime Israeli), Paul Citron, Stuart
(Sandy) Stillman (atty, Southampton and Scottsdale), Donald Caress (MD), Carl
Sprung, Norman Young, Jonathan Guliner, Michael O'Gorman, Stephen Lewin (ret
from a career in publishing), Edwin Lawlor, Stanley Weinberg, George Molinari,
Allan Stern, Robert Jaclin, unknown, Fredric Litto (Prof in Brazil), Fred Hohl,
Richard Schwartz, Stephen Richard Conn (Cornell grad; deceased); EIGHTH ROW:
Barbara Williams, Marcia Katz, Judith Peretzman, Norma Harris, Diane Wert,
Marilyn Snow, unknown, Dolores Bormann, Rosalind Simons, unknown, Loretta
Tillman; top row:  Alfred Podhurst, Michael Welch, unknown, Ira Blum, Herman
Bressel (USN ret, Long Beach, CA), Norman Kaufman, unknown, unknown, unknown,
Kenneth Tucker aka Drupiloff, Gary Steinberg, Charles Gillen.

May 14, 2008.  More names of members of this class have been recovered.  They
can be found at this site,  Match the name to the face and win the eternal
gratitude of your classmates.

Source: 2008/04/tamim-ansarys-w

Title: Tamim Ansary's West of Kabul, East of New York
Date: April 02, 2008

Some months ago, I reported on Hosseini's very popular novel of Afghanistan, The
Kite Runner. I thought it was a must-read-bad-book, that is, a book that is so
informative and interesting that we should overlook its inferior construction
and prose. I've now read another Afghan-American story and I have come to much
the same opinion. Tamin Ansary's West of Kabul, East of New York (FSG, 2002)
is swift and likable and necessary, but oh so very disappointing. Ansary is an
author of children's books, and, perhaps out of habit his prose is so guileless
that it seems aimed not at adults but at a junior high school audience.

Ansary's is the familiar story of an immigrant (this time half Afghani, half
Finnish-American) stranded between two cultures. His transformation may be a
little harder than most because Islam can be an inflexible integument. It's sad
to read that Ansary's brother has become a fanatical fundamentalist who has
embraced some contrary-to-reason, contrary-to-the facts-of-history dogmas. It's
even more discouraging to read of Ansary's encounter with an Egyptian cab-driver
in New York City, who says, "Thank God for the Taliban. I hate America. The
sluts.The booze. The filth. In Egypt, I am a lawyer. I can't earn enough to
support my family, so I come here for six months a year. But I never bring my
wife. I don't want her to get polluted. One of my friends brought his wife
here, and you know what she said to him. 'Don't touch me anymore.' You know
what I would do to my wife if she ever said that to me. I would take her to
the country, I would dig a hole, I would put her in that hole...."   Ansary
is a responsible and rational being and of course he's appalled and I think
embarrassed by the hatred and misogyny that he encounters in that cab. Let us
hope that it's not the angry cabbies but the Ansarys who will prevail  -- in
Islam as well as in closer-to-home religions.

Source: 2008/04/a-corner-in-ala

Title: A Corner in Alameda
Date: April 04, 2008

Over there on the west side of Alameda, at the intersection of 9th and Santa
Clara, plunked down right in the midst of an otherwise residential neighborhood,
is a most intriguing commercial island. Once upon a time, I'm sure, it would
have consisted of (let me guess) a hardware store, a mom-and-pop grocery, a
haberdashery or a shoe store, and a gas station. Now it's a fully  contemporary
American mish-mash.

The gas station has been converted into the Islamic Center of Alameda. Where
there would once have been a sign advertising Esso, there's now the harder-to-
parse motto "there is no God but Allah, the self-sustaining, eternal."
Directly across the street from the mosquette is a second store-front worship-
opportunity, the Love Fellowship Church of God in Christ. Here pride of place
goes not to Allah but to "Pastor Elder Samuel Butler," or "Pastor Elder Samuel
Bulter," depending on which hand-painted sign you put your faith. Kitty-corner
to Love Fellowship is Dance 10, no longer a shoe store, but now a venue where
budding toe-tappers are instructed in "Hop. Lyrical. Modern. Musical. Theater.
Jazz. Tap. Ballet. Acrobatics. Hip-hop."  On the fourth corner, there's a
"convenience" store, where outsized neon signs advertise "Budweiser" and
"Tecate."

It's a comprehensive assemblage: feed your soul (for them as believe they have
one), feed your feet, feed your gullet.

Source: 2008/04/advice-for-writ

Title: Advice for Writers
Date: April 13, 2008

One of this blague's more inquisitive readers is a talented young journalist who
knows that before Vivian de St. Vrain morphed into Dr. Metablog, he had spent
a lifetime either bent unproductively over the ball point or wearily pounding
on the word-processor. The young reader has asked this question:  what have
decades of practice taught you, Dr. M., about the craft of writing?  And in
response, Dr. M. has peered soulwise and discovered -- not a heck of a lot.

Yet in all fairness, the curious reader's question is flattering and deserves
a response. And therefore Dr. M. has pondered and pondered and has now refined
the drossy deposits that clog his brainal synapses into as much wisdom as he
feels qualified to dispense. (Let us be clear -- the advice that follows is not
meant to be argumentative or prescriptive or know-it-all. Different writers do
things in different ways. The precepts that are offered here may not apply to
all writing; they describe only the Way of the Metablog.)

Let us assume that the seeker of advice brings to the table intelligence and
information and a point of view -- but needs a little coaching on tactics. Point
one:

Just as I respect the first tenet of real estate -- location, location, location
-- so I subscribe to the most important (but often neglected) rule of writing,
which is

A)  plot, plot, plot, plot, plot. The writer must tell a story. People
relish stories, respond to narrative, and are most engaged when they pursue a
plot's twists and turns. Just because it's non-fiction, doesn't mean that the
story- teller's bag of tricks cannot be accessed. Fortunately, every piece of
prose from the briefest anecdote to the most convoluted intellectual argument
can and should be structured as a narrative. In non-fiction, the first rule
of plotting is to "establish the enigma." The enigma need not be a formal
question, but it's indisputable that every essay answers either an explicit or
an unspoken question. Is not every writer free to shape that implicit inquiry
to his own purposes? And in the process of delivering an answer, is he not also
free to sprinkle clues (some of them red herrings) along the path? And also
at liberty to let his readers dangle until the moment comes to gratify their
curiosity--and while they dangle, to let them endure suspense; suspense that can
be intensified by teasing the reader about what's going to happen next? And
every once in a while, to spring a surprise by veering off on an unanticipated
or even misleading tangent? Nor is there anything wrong with the judicious
flashback, the flash forward, or the deceptive digression -- tricks of the trade
that have won the laurel since the bronze age, centuries before the time when
"establish the enigma" became the watchword. Remember: "all writing is fiction,
especially non-fiction."

Connoisseurs of storytelling know that the most indispensable element in any
narrative is climax. Because climax is so essential, it must be exploited to the
full, not just on the universal level but also on the particular, and therefore

B)  every sentence should achieve climax. As a general rule, the climax should
come in the sentence's last phrase, or better still, in its final climactic
word. The crucial, contributing part of every sentence, the idea which it
strives to convey, the very target of its forward motion, should, whenever
artistically feasible, come dead last. When this precept is honored, each
sentence becomes an arrow aimed at its own natural target. And it follows
as night the day, that every paragraph should also come to climax--and that
the climax of the paragraph should be its own last sentence. So designed,
sentences and paragraphs carry within them both the exciting pressure of forward
motion and also coherence of argument. There's an ancillary benefit: when a
sentence terminates in a climax, transitions become less awkward, because the
intellectual content (or logic) of sentence B begins just where sentence A left
off, and the logic of sentence C starts where B concludes. Sentences and logic
coalesce and become as one. This maxim, true for sentences, is even more true
for paragraphs. And therefore it follows that a practiced writer, making deft
use of climax, can easily

C)  avoid ungainly mechanical transitions, such as "nevertheless," "moreover,
"on the other hand," and even that offensive bit of pop neojargonianism, "having
said that" -- for these fillers are words that constrict the thoroughfare of
thought. Of course there will be times when such connectives usefully signal a
switch in direction, but for the most part, transitions between sentences and
paragraphs should not be mechanical, i.e. by the use of conjunctive phrases and
adverbs, but logical. Logical transitions need not rely on distracting howevers,
however easy and tempting it might be to employ them. The best transitions
are transparent or, even better, invisible. If a writer studies his sentences
and is compelled to admit that they are only linked by banausic connectives,
then he must judge whether the argument he offers is truly coherent or whether
its logical weaknesses have been plastered over with rhetorical flimflammery.
Any writer who wants his prose to be persuasive will profit by examining his
connectives. And while the writer is engaged in such scrutiny, he should also
check to see that he has

D)  transferred important concepts from nouns and adjectives into verbs. And
by verbs, I mean verbs of vigor--not copulatives, passives, or colorless
neutral words like seem, appear, make, or do. I mean verbs with punch, or
better still, verbs that punch. In revising a sentence, it's a good idea to
determine whether it's the nouns and their modifiers that bear the brunt of
the argument. If they are doing more than their fair share of the labor,
then it is mandatory to reconfigure the sentence so that the verbs strain and
lift and carry. A paragraph rich in colorful verbs is active and infectious
and engaging; a paragraph loaded with nouns and modifiers can be clotted and
static. Strong verbs keep things moving. They keep the plot in gear. They add
grit and heft. And so does the related process whereby

E)  generalizations and abstractions are replaced by instances and examples.
Let me provide an example. A friend, a large man who has always savored his
sauce Bearnaise, wrote this sentence to me: "My doctor--an Asian woman who
weighs about fifteen pounds--has been hectoring me about my reluctance to
subsist on twigs and grasses." What an excellent sentence -- not just because
of the colorful verbs ("hector," "subsist"), the ironic faux-hyperbole ("about
fifteen pounds") or the fact that the sentence rises to a splendid climax,
but because of the specificity of "twigs and grasses." A lesser writer might
have, instead of "subsist on twigs and grasses," employed a bland formula such
as "go on a diet" or "become a vegetarian." But by using the concrete "twigs
and grasses" for the abstract "diet" or "vegetarian," my correspondent has
not only caught our attention and amused us, but he has created a metaphor.
"Twigs and grasses" is specific and visual and memorable. While these nouns
stand for "diet" and "vegetarian," they also stand for whatever penumbra of
meaning my friend's readers bring to the interpretation of these words. In my
own case, it's a irresistible vision of a big guy metamorphosed into a large
twitchy-nostrilled rabbit nibbling the bark of willows. Such is the paradox
of the metaphor: the more specific the word, the more spacious the liberty of
interpretation. Poets know this instinctively; that's why they're poets. But
remember, writers: metaphor is only one of a bucketload of figures of speech.
The astute writer does not limit himself to metaphor alone, but remembers
to     F)  use figures of speech of all kinds: pun, simile, alliteration,
oxymoron, parataxis, hyperbole, understatement or litotes, irony, metonymy
(where an individual stands for a class), synecdoche (where a part signifies the
whole), aposiopesis -- I could go on and on!  It's the figure of speech that
keeps things lively, that makes prose sparkle and that make readers, already
enthralled with plot and dazzled by recurrent exciting climaxes, fully engage
with the written word.  After all, writing has no value unless it attracts and
holds the reader. And so it follows that a writer must, finally,

G)  know and respect his readership. He must provide all the information that
a reader needs to follow the argument. Yet at the same time, he must resist the
temptation to be over-explicit. Let readers do some of the work. Let them
complete the connections that the writer only suggests. It will keep them on
their toes, make them feel intelligent, and retain their interest. And while
they're so engaged, the writer might remind himself of another precept, which
is to try to

H)  make syntax and logic work together. Get them on the same track. Put the
main idea in the main clause, put subordinate ideas in subordinate clauses. Put
the parenthetical idea in a parenthetical clause. Put parallel ideas in parallel
clauses, but when ideas are not parallel, emphasize their incompatibility by
using contrasting syntactic structure. Syntax is a tool. Sentences in which
logic is chugging onward and syntax is all over the map can be confusing and
even impenetrable. Alexander Pope said about poetry, "The sound should be an
echo to the sense."  In prose, the syntax should be an echo to the sense; or
rather, the sense should be an echo to the syntax; or even better, the syntax
and the sense should take each other's hand and dance the same dance. And
finally (and this time the "finally" is not meant to be misleading),

I)  scrutinize every word and see if it is necessary or whether it can either
be omitted or made more precise. When in doubt, throw it out. Or amend it. It
should be a maxim that in good writing, no one ever "walks down the street."
And by "walks down the street," I certainly do not mean "walk down the street."
"Walks down the street" is a metaphor for a colorless expression. Why should
someone walk down the street, when he can totter, or saunter, or sashay, or
hurtle, or trot, or swagger, or stagger, or promenade down an avenue, boulevard,
lane, causeway, footpath, or promenade?  English overflows with words that are
specific, evocative, and suggestive. Let's have fewer street-walkers and more
sidewalk-promenaders. Keats said the the poet should "load every rift with ore,"
and so should the writer of non-fiction. But be careful not to overload; don't
allow prose to slide toward the baroque. And at last

J)   feel perfectly free to ignore the canard that you were taught in grade
school  --that every piece of writing needs a conclusion.  It doesn't.  As a
general rule, avoid formal conclusions.

Source: 2008/04/two-separate-ti

Title: Williamsburg Bridge/ Naked City
Date: April 14, 2008

On two occasions this year the Williamsburg Bridge (from Manhattan to Brooklyn)
has made a guest appearance in the plot of my life.

In January, as faithful readers know, we set up shop in Manhattan. One day we
strolled over the bridge from the Lower East Side to the Williamsburg section of
Brooklyn. The bridge is a splendid monument of nineteenth-century technology and
the view from above is spacious and commanding. It's a restless, busy path from
one side to another; all around you, automobiles, subway trains, bicyclists,
runners, baby carriages -- the works. NYC in a Victorian nutshell.

Then, a few days ago, came the news of the death of Jules Dassin. Dassin is
famous for Never on Sunday and Topkapi, but as movie-lovers know, he was a
polished director of films noirs during the 1940s -- before Nixon, McCarthy,
and the blacklisting boys drove him into exile. We decided to embark on a
Jules Dassin festival and tribute right here on our very own giant TV. Our
first choice was Naked City (1949), a highly un-subversive policier, markedly
patriotic but disturbing because all the bad guys are vaguely "ethnic." The
climactic scenes of Naked City were shot in the Lower East Side (just where the
Williamsburg Bridge hits Delancey). The murderer/wrestler/harmonicat Willie
Garzah attempts to flee. A voice shouts, "he's on Norfolk near Rivington."
Right where we had just a few months ago wandered! It's right off the bridge!
And then Garzah panics and tries to escape by running across the Williamsburg
into Brooklyn. Police in pursuit, squad cars, pistols, shouting, shots. Garzah
climbs the girders--the very same girders, which, just a few months before, I
had decided to honor my acrophobia by not climbing. And then he's wounded, and,
as always in the movies, falls theatrically to his death.

It's peculiar, isn't it, when a store or a street-corner that you know in real
life appears in the movies. Does it mean that film tells the truth, is real,
or does the celluloid appearance provide us with some evidence that our own
life is genuine? Why should the movies sometimes seem more substantial than
the reports of our own five senses? How can art validate life? And at the
same time, don't we feel a little cheated--in the sense that our privacy--our
uniqueness--has been violated and the things and stuff that are personal to us
have been delivered over to an unappreciative anonymous world? It's odd and
disorienting when a familiar non-fiction bridge plays a supporting role in a
fictional film.

Naked City is a good, solid, intriguing piece of work, well-paced and well-
written. I'm not entirely happy with the way it treats women or the working-
classes, but then, many such films are far more culpable. I liked best the
authentic, unstaged street shots of Manhattan as it was sixty years ago.
Delancey Street was nostalgic and poetic (although the shop signs, then lettered
in Hebrew, are now mostly Chinese).

The Williamsburg Bridge, solid and substantial, has weathered the years
extremely well. It's well positioned to star in many another film.

Source: 2008/04/an-irish-airman

Title: W. B. Yeats, "An Irish Airman Foresees his Death" (1919)
Date: April 19, 2008

I know that I shall meet my fateSomewhere among the clouds above;Those that I
fight I do not hate,Those that I guard I do not love;My country is Kiltartan
Cross,My countrymen Kiltartan's poor,No likely end could bring them lossOr leave
them happier than before.Nor law, nor duty bade me fight,Nor public men, nor
cheering crowds,A lonely impulse of delightDrove to this tumult in the clouds;I
balanced all, brought all to mind,The years to come seemed waste of breath,A
waste of breath the years behindIn balance with this life, this death.

Whether the Germans or the British win the war is a matter of utter indifference
to Yeats's Irish airman. Even his own death is of no particular concern. The
pilot's detachment is Olympian. Why then does he participate in the war? The
motive, he says in the poem's most challenging phrase, is "a lonely impulse of
delight."

There is more than one historical resonance to the word "lonely." Primarily,
in this poem, it's the individual who feels himself to be separated from the
mass of mankind, which in late Romantic thought transforms him into some sort
of nascent artist. But "lonely" arises out of a second context: the solitude
experienced by the self-sufficient warrior. In this second sense, "lonely"
expresses a nostalgia for the days of chivalry or single combat that survived
into the early twentieth century only in the skies when one skilled pilot faced
another (on the ground, it was all inglorious machine guns, barbed wire, poison
gas, trench warfare, and death by dysentery). "Impulse" is also a word with
Romantic roots. Readers will recall Wordsworth's famous and extraordinarily
irrational assertion that an "impulse from a vernal wood" could be a source
of moral learning, where an "impulse" stands superior to clarity of thought
or to consistency of logic. An "impulse" is a feeling or sentiment, not an
argument, and so functions in this poem also, where the motives traditionally
advanced for going to war (loyalty, patriotism, evidence that one's country is
endangered, profit, law, duty, politics) are specifically disclaimed. For the
Irish airman, a Wordsworthian "impulse" is sufficient -- especially if it's an
impulse of "delight." "Delight" signifies the thrill of the game as opposed to
the dreariness of ordinary life, which is twice dismissed as merely "a waste of
breath." "Delight" is a word that harks back to the art-for-art's-sake movement
of Yeats's youth, though even the most prescient would not have foreseen that it
would come to describe the death-defying or, in this case, suicidal artistry of
the fighter pilot. In "An Irish Airman Foresees his Death," a "lonely impulse of
delight" counterbalances other and more conventional experiences and patterns of
thinking. Some will find the airman's reasoning immensely sad, others will judge
it to be invigorating. Yeats himself does not tip his hand.

Source: 2008/04/poem-for-my-nei

Title: A Poem for my Neighbor, concerning his Cat in my Backyard
Date: April 24, 2008

Your cat comes

on silent haunches.

It shits, polluting both

arbor and garden

with catty scat,

and then goes home.

Source: 2008/04/book-report-the

Title: Book Report:  The Dean's List by Jon Hassler
Date: April 24, 2008

I had never heard of the novelist Jon Hassler, who died last month. The
obituaries took me by surprise: Minnesota's best artist, more significant than
the Coen brothers, or Bob Dylan, or Garrison Keillor. Or Sinclair Lewis. How
could I be so ignorant?

Off I trotted to the library, where there was a nearly pristine shelf of Hassler
novels. They were clearly virgin and untouched  -- so I'm not the only diligent
reader who is ignorant of Hassler.  From the shelf I plucked The Dean's List
(1997) and attacked it with great expectations.

I'm very sorry to report that this particular novel is a lot less exciting than
the ecstatic obituaries would have led me to believe. The Dean's List is an
academic story with a familiar cast: a  harried dean, a celebrity poet, an
overbearing mom, an elusive girlfriend -- nothing that David Lodge or Malcolm
Bradbury hasn't done with more wit and verve. Or Robertson Davies, for that
matter. Too many quirky characters; too many satirical targets. Perhaps I made
a mistake and chose the wrong Hassler novel. I'll borrow another one and report
back.

Source: 2008/04/crockery

Title: Crockery
Date: April 24, 2008

I'm not a person who cares terribly about material objects. Some of the
evidence: I've now written two hundred and fifty essaylets on this blague, and
nary a one of them took as its subject a purchase or a possession.

What I've read, what I've thought, where I've traveled, people I've known, yes;
what I own, or bought, or didn't buy, no.

But in these last weeks, we're in the process of discarding and giving away
while we prepare to move to much smaller quarters. The things we own, and there
are too many of them, have been front and center. The general rule here is,
"when in doubt, throw it out."  But yesterday, I didn't throw away, I packed
and preserved.

We have two sets of crockery. The first was part of the 1960 wedding loot. It's
a perfectly fine set of dishes, and we've used it on formal occasions for half
a century. It's Franciscan china, very 1950s abstract-modernist in design.
Entirely sufficient. Why, then, is there a second and redundant set?

Because when I was a boy, my folks owned a handful of pieces of flowery Charles
Field Haviland china that came out of storage once a year, at Thanksgiving, to
eke out the festive board.  I thought, and still think, that these plates were
simply beautiful. In addition, because they were so seldom used, they had very
specific and warm Thanksgiving-y associations -- food and drink and laughter and
conviviality  -- that were once-a-year events in our not-particularly-sociable
household. When the folks died, I inherited the Haviland remnants:  a few
hand- painted plates, some of them chipped; a number of saucers and a few
very delicate coffee cups. A decade ago, at age sixty, feeling nostalgic, I
decided to make it my business to fill in the set. It wasn't easy. I located a
couple of cups at an antique show and by mail-order acquired some plates from a
"replacement warehouse" in Georgia. But one day, browsing Ebay, I discovered on
auction a complete -- serving pieces and all -- set of dishes in what I had come
to think of as "my pattern." I bid, I was nervous, I won. The design exceeded
my hopes. It's a handsome bunch of crockery and it's now standard for our
occasional parties and our annual Thanksgiving. We'll carry the Haviland with us
to the new home.

What to do with the old? The next generation expresses utter and uniform
indifference; the generation that follows is far too young to care. Nor can we
sell or discard -- there are just too many fond memories. But here's what I'm
thinking. Suppose one of the offspring comes to feel, as I did at sixty, an odd
longing for objects that carry familial resonance. That set of Franciscan china
might become valuable to them. I don't mean monetarily valuable, but genuinely
valuable, in the ways that matter.

So I've carefully packed the crockery. It's multi-newspapered and double-boxed.
If not preserved for all eternity, it's certainly packed in a way that will
outlive every member of my age cohort.  It's labeled. It will go into the
"storage unit" in the basement of the new condo. It will sit there for an
unpredictable but not infinite length of years.

We'll let someone else decide whether to retain or discard.

Source: 2008/04/the-helene-mull

Title: The Helene Mullins Mystery
Date: April 26, 2008

We're still cleaning out and throwing away (as I reported a couple of days
ago). Today I discovered, in amongst a small cache of books that I inherited
from my father, a volume of poems called Earthbound. I'd never heard of the
poet, Helene Mullins, but I traced her via a 2001 The New York Times obituary.
"Helene Mullins Johnson, a poet, died on Oct. 26 at her home in Manhattan. She
was 92 years old. She died of congestive heart failure. Mrs. Johnson first had
her poems published in The Pagan, a Greenwich Village magazine, in the 1920s.
After Thornton Wilder introduced her to his publisher, Harper's published her
first novel, Convent Girl, and her first volume of poems, Earthbound, in 1929.
Her final collection of poems, Mirrored Walls, was published in 1970. There are
no survivors." Google provided me with another couple of facts. Helene Mullins
was born in 1899 in New Rochelle, New York, and educated in "convent boarding
schools." In 1935, she was so severely injured in an automobile accident that
she lay unconscious for three weeks.

And also: the library nearest to me that owns a copy of Earthbound is the Dakota
State University, in Madison, South Dakota, which is precisely 502 miles from
where I sit.

The poems are, in my view, brimming with pre-Raphaelite fervor. The precursoress
whom Mullins most resembles is Christina Rossetti, though there's an occasional
dash of Ernest Dowson, and every once in a while, a gesture borrowed from the
early Yeats. The poems are as intense and agonized and spiritual as Rossetti's,
and were, even in their own time, composed in an extremely old-fashioned style.

What does the world offer a hard-working but not brilliant poet who was clearly
ambitious and tense, and who poured all her strength and feeling into her
writing? There she was, a young woman fleeing the convent and shocking her
family by taking up residence in Greenwich Village, where she lived near
Thornton Wilder and other 1920s gentlemen of literature and where she frequented
the irreligious offices of The Pagan. I mourn for the struggle and yearning and
effort that went into those long-forgotten poems.  And which, all said and
done, earned her little beyond a  perfunctory obituary in the Times.

But what in the ever-living universe was this volume doing in my staid father's
library?  It's implausible that he could have found anything empathetic in
such poems as "St. Theresa" and "The Boy Christ."  Especially since Earthbound
was the only volume of "contemporary" poetry that he seems to have possessed.
In 1929, when Earthbound hit the streets, my father would have been a buoyant,
studious young fellow of twenty-five -- a diligent bachelor law clerk with still
a year or so to go before he would find Lilly. Helen Mullins herself was just
thirty years old. Is there a story here? Am I missing something?

There are no clues; not even a single pencil mark. Nothing from one end of the
book to the other. Something doesn't compute.

Source: 2008/04/a-blaguer-is-hi

Title: New Words
Date: April 30, 2008

Dr. Metablog, like all bloggers, is his own editor. With the new freedom comes
a downside: lapses of coherence and flaws of grammar, along with the occasional
typos and printos that an editor's eye would catch, now go uncaught. But
independence is also beneficial. In my former incarnation, I was regularly
disciplined by stern editors who called me on the carpet for undermining
academic prose by smuggling in a smile.

Once upon a time I composed an encyclopedia entry on the earthy and entertaining
seventeenth-century English diarist Samuel Pepys. Pepys was an extremely
diligent writer who kept his voluminous diary for nine years, rarely missing a
day. To appreciate Pepys's art, it's wrong to rely on snippets; a reader has
to swallow whole large hunks of the diary.   recommended, therefore, that
nouveau- Pepysists engage in "deep and promiscuous reading" of the volumes.
My joke, weak though it may have been, played on the fact that most people
read Pepys not for illumination so much as for the frank revelations about his
vigorous sexual life. I was not sent page proofs of my contribution to the
encyclopedia, and so I was surprised when I cracked open the spruce new book to
discover that, for the words "deep and promiscuous," a vigilant but unsmiling
editor had substituted "wide." What can I say? The editor batted last and had
more clout.

It was perpetually curious to me that the editors would give a pass to
incomprehensible jargon but would go to the mat against playfulness.

A few months ago, on this blague, I parodied the curious language of literary
criticism in an entry on the imperialist romance King Solomon's Mines. I
did not invent the ridiculous vocabulary that I poked fun at, not even
"multichronotopic" or "hybridity."  Now that I have no glum editor peering over
my shoulder, I'm free to play my own game of word-coining. I'm not alone;  Is
it my imagination, or is English vocabulary going through an internet-fueled
growth spurt?

Reviewing my own posts for the past few months, I see a number of words that
I can claim to have invented.  I'm proud of "precursoress," "soulwise,"
"brainal," "neojargonianism," "flimflammery," "mosquette," "skinflintism,"
"bepigeoned," "scandalmongery," "baubleolatry," "alzheimered," "cinderelloid,"
"prefamiliar," and "barfitudinous."  Can I guarantee that I'm the first
user of these contributions to linguistic variety? Of course not -- I've
no doubt been anticipated in most of them. But I attest that each one of
these novelties came to me in a thrilling burst of clarity and light.  I'm
especially fond of my jekyllian word "menschdom" and its hydish antonym
"schmuckhood," of "swiftboatery," "dysgeographicoid," "wallstreetway," and
"gigantico."  My favorite, and here I'm 99% sure that there can be no other
claimant, is "antimonofilamentarianism", defined as opposition to certain recent
manifestations of orthodoxy in religion. I also claim "eruvista," (a person
who adheres to these particular beliefs). Only time will tell if one of these
novelties turns out to be a nonce word (or as the classicists say, a hapax
legomenon), or a word that sneaks into our working vocabulary, its origin as
well as its proud originator obscured by the mists of time.

Source: 2008/05/the-springless

Title: The Springless Kibitka
Date: May 01, 2008

No, despite appearances, I'm not obsessed with nineteenth-century horsedrawn
vehicles, although I do love those classic novels in which our hero dashes to
the rescue in one kind of coach or another.

It's just that I have this little bee in my bonnet about the fact that we
gasoline-era moderns understand the exact social significance of jeep, Jaguar,
Jetta, and jalopy, but we are, except for specialists, utterly clueless as to
the valence of barouche, basket carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard,
buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, coupe,
croydon, curricle, cutter, dearborn, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, four-
wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, jaunty car, jersey-wagon, landau,
phaeton, post-chaise, rockaway, shandrydan, shay, spider-phaeton, spring-van,
stanhope, sulky, surrey, tandem, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika,
victoria, vis-a-vis, wagonette, or wurt. Which of these words tells us that
the driver is rich or stylish, and which of them implies that he is vulgar and
tasteless?  Or downtrodden?  We don't know, and so we read our traditional
literature with a handicap.

It is good fortune that when in Don Juan (a comic epic well worth the
revisiting), Byron trots out a kibitka (a vehicle new to me), he tells us
all we need to know: "And there in a kibitka he rolled on,/  (A cursed sort
of carriage without springs,/ Which on rough roads leaves scarcely a whole
bone...."  [IX, 234-6]). Byron testifies that the kibitka is down there in
the horsedrawn slums. An online dictionary is less poetic but more detailed
than Lord B: "a kibitka is a rude kind of Russian vehicle, on wheels or on
runners, sometimes covered with cloth or leather, and often used as a movable
habitation."

Definitely not the kind of vehicle out of which Sir Plantagenet should step when
he opens Parliament or accompanies Lady Glencora to the ball.

May 10.  My friend W. S. wants to know if history provides an instance in which
a "a cabal of kibbutzniks kibitzed in a kibitka?"  A good question to which I
am at present unable to provide an answer. May 19.  Professor Marion Morrison
wants to know why I prefer Russian vehicles to "les voitures hippomobiles."
Whoa, Professor M. Time to get off your high horse!

Source: 2008/05/a-truly-romanti

Title: A Truly Romantic Poem
Date: May 09, 2008

The poem that might entrance you when you're young might not be the poem for
your older years. In my "mature" phase, poems that I earlier ignored take on
new significance. I'm now quite taken with Tennyson's "Ulysses,'" a dramatic
monologue that meant nothing to me until a few years ago. "Ulysses" celebrates
perseverance, a late-onset virtue.

Another poem that I've latterly come to love is Robert Burns' jaunty "John
Anderson my jo, John." To me, in my present incarnation, it's the most romantic
poem in the English language (or, to be precise, the Scottish language).  While
most love poems celebrate desire and longing, "John Anderson," takes as its
subject continuity and longevity. As opposed to more conventional works that
come to climax with a wedding, "John Anderson" situates itself near the end of
life and glances happily backward over a life well lived. Its frankness about
bodily changes is comforting (especially to readers who may no longer glow with
first youth). John Anderson may be bald and gray and tottering, but he's still
loved and loving.

The cheerful woman who speaks the poem has lived "hand in hand" with John A. for
a lifetime.

John Anderson, my jo, John                            dear

When we were first acquent,                         
 acquainted

Your locks were like the raven,

Your bonnie brow was brent;                           smooth

But now your brow is beld, John,                      bald

Your locks are like the snow;

But blessings on your frosty paw;                     head

John Anderson, my jo.

John Anderson, my jo, John,

We clamb the hill tegither.

And many a cantie day, John,                          happy

We've had wi' ane anither.

Now we maun totter down, John                      must

But hand in hand we'll go,

And sleep thegither at the foot,

John Anderson, my jo.

Source: 2008/05/more-p-s-217-19

Title: More P. S. 217 1952 Graduates
Date: May 13, 2008

Searching the out-of-the-way corners of this ol' house that we are leaving
behind after thirty-five years, I discovered a mutilated copy of The Log, an
eight-page mimeographed pamphlet produced by students of P.S. 217 in June of
1952.  The entries seem to have been written not by the students but by the
teachers and  were designed to inculcate a moral. For example: "Class 8-1 has
made many things in cooking, shop, sewing and arts and crafts. The girls under
the supervision of Miss Willig have baked many good cookies and cakes while
the boys, under the supervision of Mr. Kaminsky have made expertly constructed
pieces of furniture. In grammar we have learned to diagram long sentences and
are beginning to excel at it. On Graduation Day, when the girls wear their
beautiful organdy dresses which they themselves made, they will be very grateful
for the instructions they received from Mrs. Ennis." The bottom line: "you may
have run wildly amok, you horrid little creatures, and created ruckus after
ruckus, but some day you'll appreciate us, we hope hope hope."

Also In The Log,  and far more interesting and useful than the forced feeding
of pre-nostalgia, is a list of the 1952 graduates of our fabled elementary
school.

A month or so ago, I posted on this blague a formal picture of the assembled
graduates, and, with the help of a committee of distinguished volunteer
mnemosynists, was able to identify about half of the members of the class.
With the discovery The Log, I am now able to to list the remaining students
who graduated from P. S. 217 that last Truman June.  Here's hoping that
my enthusiastic comrades will now be able to assign faces to the following
seventy- seven most musical names: Carol Berse, Diane Goldberg, Norma Harris,
Rosalind Symons, Sheila Slovis, Dorothy Steinfeld, Sara Steinman, Harriet
Young, Robert Derwin, Harold Schienkoff, Myron Sklar, Maryann Abrahams, Sheila
Carp, Ria DeCastri, Anita Friedman, Ricki Gottlieb, Marcia Katz, Sheila Katz,
Sandra Kopelton, Rochelle Miller, Diane Spatz, Janet Solomon, Eleanor Troy,
Appolonia Yacovelli, Carole Zietlin, Thomas Bellavita, Donald Carbone, Joseph
Cassano, Robert Cohen, John McKay, Arne Neilson, Toby Anker, Renee Dickson,
Sylvia Gordon, Francine Herskowitz, Marguerite McGinty, Florence Rosenthal,
Yvette Rosenthal, Doris Sippel, Hope Steuer, Michael Gerber, Alan Lipis, Stuart
Stillman, Stanley Weinberg, Michael Welch, Carol Coniglio, Carol Gerber, Marline
Gold, Leah Goodman, Evelyn and Norma Greenberg, Laurie and Roberta Katcher,
Selma Schnier, Edith Snyder, Robert Goldstein, Leslie Shernoff, Barbara Bider,
Ann Cacioppa, Sheryl Jerome, Patricia McCabe, Marilyn Snow, Barbara Williams,
Ruth Wintheil.

Identifications as well as news of our friends and companions are solicited. 
Who are these people?  What paths in life, glorious life, did they tread?  Did
they embark on careers of baking, or furniture making, or sewing long dresses? 
Did they ever truly excel at diagramming long sentences? Your contributions are
most welcome.

Source: 2008/05/dying-etc

Title: New News
Date: May 13, 2008

My friend Bob, with whom I've shared many a pleasant lunch, went outside to fill
the bird-feeders and never returned. Was it heart attack, aneurysm, or stroke? 
Bob had taken early retirement a few months ago to spend more time with his
ladylove, from whom he had been forced to live apart by circumstances. His
sudden collapse was untimely, but not more so than the death of Edward Peter,
who had a bad reaction to a flu shot, or Rubin, who drowned while fishing, or
JB, whose testicular cancer went to his lungs, or Phyl, whose stealth ovarian
cancer finished her after nine dreadful months, or my brother Gene, dead thirty
seconds from the onset of whatever it was that leveled him. It's all happening
much too frequently and and much too fast. Nowadays, I read the obituaries first
and I keep my one respectable suit, my funeral suit, cleaned and pressed. I do
not like this trend among folks of my own years.

Source: 2008/05/what-we-read-in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Ox-bow Incident
Date: May 15, 2008

Walter van Tilburg Clark's 1940 western, The Ox-bow Incident, was required
reading in English classes at Erasmus Hall High School during the Eisenhower
years.  I assume that I studied and possibly even answered some assigned
questions about the novel, but judging by the minute shards of information that
my porous head has retained, I’d be hard put to swear yea or nay.

The Ox-bow Incident is still in print and apparently still part of many
curricula, which is a surprise, considering its racist caricaturing and taboo
language. For those who can overlook its offenses, it raises some peculiarly
American questions about violence and personal responsibility. It's not a
beautifully-crafted novel: it takes a long time to get going, leaves gaps in the
continuity, and although just a couple of hundred pages long, is peopled by more
characters than I could easily track. The principal defect is that the narrator,
a young cowpoke named Art Croft, is never forced to choose between the good guys
and the bad.

Despite these defects, The Ox-bow Incident proved to be well worth the re-
reading, largely because of the story, which is inventive and which takes a
number of surprising, unexpected turns. It's an anti-western, I now realize, in
which readers wait in vain for a white-hatted hero to ride to the rescue and to
wing the black-hat and bring the gang of bad guys to justice. Instead, thugs
and bullies drag the weaklings down to their own level. Although I had already
read my share of Zane Greys, I’m sure that I did not understand that Clark was
toying with the conventions of the western genre. Nowadays, The Ox-bow Incident
seems less kin to Riders of the Purple Sage than it is to Lonesome Dove.

Clark wrote when Hitler was menacing the world and he clearly aimed his shafts
at temporizers and appeasers. I suspect that at Erasmus, my teachers understood
The Ox-bow Incident in the context of the anti-communism that was the religion
of the 1950s. I would not be at all surprised if the novel is now taught as
anti-Jihadist, but it needn't be, because it's not so much anti-this or anti-
that as it is about decency and the need to stand firm for law and justice.
"Because most men are more afraid of being thought cowards than anything else,"
says the author, and because "real" men, so-called, believe that it's manly to
take the law into their own hands, the cowboys and shopkeepers and drifters who
cohere into a necktie party are defenseless against masculinist demagoguery.

While Clark never uses the word "honor," he implies that the cowardly-fearful
would think it dishonorable to back off from their commitment to violence.

I think it was Spinoza who said that "honor" was a "slavish dependence on the
opinion of others." His definition could serve as a an epigraph to this novel.
Honor, as well as law, justice both domestic and international, masculinity, and
violence, are all matters of contemporary debate, and as a consequence, The Ox-
bow Incident hangs in there quite nicely.

I've now seen the 1943 William Wellman-Henry Fonda-Dana Andrews-Anthony Quinn
film of The Ox-bow Incident. It's faithful, much too faithful to the book. I
found it plodding and prosaic, inoffensive, but far too moralistic. It was just
the merest tad more optimistic than the bleak novel. The political semi-allegory
was barely there.

Source: 2008/05/ccny-basketball

Title: CCNY Basketball Ups and Downs, 1950-51
Date: May 18, 2008

My friend Otis Jefferson Brown reminds me of the crushing sports-and-morals
tragedy of our joint childhoods. It all took place in 1950/51, when I was a
creeping like snail to sixth grade in P. S. 217 and Otis, a child of Bay Ridge,
was trudging his shining morning face to P.S. 102. Our guys, our local heroes,
the CCNY basketball team, won both of the major basketball tournaments, the NIT
as well as the NCAA. The city -- New York City, especially Brooklyn  -- was
electric with excitement. Headlines, victory parades, and demonstrations in all
the neighborhoods.

The twin wins -- it never had happened before and will never happen again --
were great events in the public sphere but of even greater moment in our 9th
Street home.  Back in the 1920s, my father had attended CCNY for a year, but
like so many of the sons of impoverished immigrants, had to drop out to help put
potatoes and black radishes on the family table. While at City, he had played on
the freshman basketball team. Would he have made the varsity? Who can tell? He
was a strong man, a fine natural athlete, very graceful in his movements even
into his 70s, and very serious about basketball.

His coach had been Nat Holman (one of the earliest stars of professional
basketball), and Nat was still the City College coach twenty-five years later.
So whenever CCNY played, everything in our family came to a halt, and we all
gathered around the wooden Philco to listen as my father's team went down to the
wire against Bradley or Kentucky or Toledo. My father, generally a restrained
man, was as partisan and as jubilant as I ever knew him to be. Not only were the
victories a fulfillment of his own hopes, but they were all achieved by a bunch
of local players -- Jews and "Negroes" from the Bronx and Brooklyn who, in those
days, would not have been welcome at most of the big basketball powers. Ed Roman
and Ed Warner and Irvin Dambrot and Normie Mager and Floyd Lane were household
names as familiar and as admired as those of Koufax and Campanella.

It was the very next year that it all blew up in our faces. The CCNY players, or
many of them, confessed to taking bribes from the gamblers and bookies and to
shaving points and managing the spread. There were indictments, "perp walks,"
headlines, indignant editorials. O the shame!

My father was devastated. Although in size he was just a scrappy guard, in
person he was a tower of rectitude, and it was beyond his ken that our guys,
even poor guys who desperately needed cash, would compromise their integrity and
their futures for a few bucks.

My father turned the disgrace into a morality play. Every day, for years it
seems in retrospect, I listened to still another passionate sermon about keeping
to the straight and narrow. (Not that there was anyone in the world who would
pay me to miss a shot; I could miss shots on my own. But I knew what he meant.)

I've now read Charles Rosen's Scandals of '51, how the gamblers almost killed
college basketball [New York, 1971]). It's a shoddy, melodramatic, disheartening
book, but it does help to put things in perspective. Rosen makes it clear that
there was more than a little American nativist glee about taking CCNY and its
upstart culture down a peg. It was sad to read that players from many other
colleges were also indicted (I hadn't remembered), but discouraging to learn
that their defenders were happy to extol heartland values and to scapegoat the
corruption onto big city immigrant depravity. It was also sad to be reminded
that the only basketball player who served hard time was Sherman White, the
biggest, the best, and the blackest of all the athletes. Nor was it pleasant
to discover that although there were apparently point-shavers at St. Johns, a
Catholic college, DA Frank Hogan brought no indictments because the evidence
against the Red Men was "inadvertently" destroyed.

The events were a blight on my basketball-loving childhood. And still a great
sadness after all these years. But I must say that we, as a family, engineered
a strong comeback. It was only a few years after the scandals that one of those
13" black and white TVs with the rabbit ears made its first appearance in our
home. And along with the Zenith came the NBA. I think that my father was on
perpetual alert for signs of malfeasance, but our faith in the game and in
humanity was restored by a new set of New York heroes: Harry Gallatin, Connie
Simmons, Carl Braun, Dick McGuire, Bud Palmer, Vince Boryla, Sweetwater Clifton,
Max Zaslofsky.

Source: 2008/05/yesterday-in-a

Title: Family Matters
Date: May 21, 2008

Yesterday, in a long-buried collection of file folders, I found some papers of
my father's that were written during those last painful years when he was a
widower. Some of the pages comprise a "commonplace" book, the theme of which is,
'why am I still alive when my wife is dead?'  In addition to the lamentations,
there are two anomalous paragraphs of reminiscence  -- constituting the sum of
my father's known autobiographical writings. For the benefit and edification of
my own children and grandchildren and family, I now put these writings on the
record.

My father writes:  "My maternal grandmother was a thin, almost gaunt  woman
about 5 ft 5 inches tall. Although I am sure she loved all her children &
grandchildren, I cannot remember her ever showing any overt sign of affection.
We children always knew when grandma was to visit us. My mother would go into
a frenzy of housecleaning. All the curtains would be washed and re-hung; the
kitchen floors scrubbed and the silverware washed and polished. Her [i.e. my
father's grandmother's] face was unwrinkled, the skin drawn tightly. Her most
dominant feature was her eyes, piercing, direct, demanding. There would be
Grandma, wearing a little hat, glancing around the room while she slowly took
off her gloves. If she was satisfied with what she saw, she would give a little
nod as if to say, 'well done.' We would all relax."

A historical footnote:  my grandparents came to this continent in about 1895
and the events that my father remembers are all turn-of-the-century and pre-WWI.

Until I uncovered this paragraph, I thought my grandparents came to North
America on their own.  I did not know that they were accompanied by this
formidable great-grandmother. Although she herself was long gone when I came on
the stage, I certainly encountered those piercing black eyes in other faces, my
father's in particular.  I wonder why my father (who was born in 1904) never
mentioned his grandmother to me -- she certainly made an impression that lasted
to the end of his life. Come to think of it, why the heck was my family so
entirely tight-lipped about their ancestry?

But wait.  There's more.

"My grandparents (that would be the ferocious grandmother and her equally
unknown-to-me husband), had 5 children, 4 daughters and one son. There were
born to their children in a space of 10 years, 18 grandchildren.  Each one of
these children were delivered at home. My grandmother attended every one of
these births.  About 2 weeks before the expected date of birth, my grandmother
would appear wearing her little hat and gloves & carrying a small satchel; she
immediately took charge of the household. The expectant mother would be freed of
all household obligations."

From this evidence it would appear that in addition to his three siblings (Max,
Sol, and Molly), my father had fourteen cousins on his mother's side of the
family.  Why didn't I know about them?  Why did I never meet a single one? Or
even hear their names?  Or the names of their progeny, if there were any?

Also in my father's hand, scribbled in a corner of the paper, is a
calculation:  Mom - 4, Manya - 6, Nadya - 3, Mary - 2, Maris (or Saris, or
Norris) -3.  And then the sum:  18.

So, children and children's children and collateral descendants, you now
understand a piece of the family history.

And readers:  if there's anyone out there in internetland who had a strong,
perhaps dictatorial great or great-great or great-great-great grandmother who
came to assist at births armed with a satchel, a little hat and memorable black
eyes (first name unknown but surnamed Hessel), and who knows that his or her
ancestry includes a woman whose maiden name was Mary Hessel or Manya Hessel or
Nadya Hessel, or if there's someone who's descended from Noris or Moris or Saris
Hessel, hey, cuz, take a moment and add a comment to this entry and I'll get
right back to you.

Source: 2008/05/embarrassment-i

Title: Embarrassment is Forever
Date: May 28, 2008

One of my childhood friends confesses to me that his otherwise peaceful early
years were marred by a perfectly unnecessary bit of fighting -- which he
himself initiated. "We were in the middle of a softball game in the P. S. 217
schoolyard and I struck out with two or three men on base. One of my teammates
said something uncomplimentary to me and started to walk away. Humiliated and
frustrated, I charged after him and jumped on his back. I'm not sure what I
intended to do (my fighting skills were even worse than my softball skills)."

This less-than-earthshaking softballmachia occurred somewhere between fifty-five
and sixty years ago. It is impossible that anyone in the known universe
remembers either the score, the sides, the game, the strikeout, or one boy's
vault onto the back of another -- no one, that is, except the perpetrator
himself, who goes on to confess that he is "embarrassed and ashamed even now." 
I do not doubt for an instant that he's telling the exact truth, because even
though glaciers have receded and oceans of water have passed under the bridge,
embarrassment is forever.

Like my friend, and like many another poor suffering mortal, I too retain
ancient memories that make me cringe.  A few of these acts, I'm sorry to say,
are, like my friend's, instances of unjustified and petty violence. A larger
category: the recollection of saying something stupid at a party or over dinner.
Or a lame, feeble, failed witticism. An irony that was misunderstood and taken
to be serious. A mispronounced word. The realization that my presence was
unwelcome or that I had overstayed my welcome. The largest category of all:
something that I did or said that was vain or pretentious or self-aggrandizing.

My Better Half, who knows that often, half-asleep, I will suddenly recall
an embarrassing moment and will vent a profound sigh or pound my fist into
"Everyone who heard what you said has been dead for years. Go back to sleep."
It's a good protocol and is moderately effective. But the hallmark of authentic
embarrassment is that even though the offending act was performed in public,
it will be recollected in solitude years later to disorder our tranquility and
to disturb our rest. Whether the witnesses have long since forgotten the event
(if they noticed it in the first place) or even if they've been underground for
decades doesn't seem to moderate self-flagellation.

In point of fact, embarrassment is the only natural phenomenon that has tempted
me to believe, even slightly, in an afterlife. If anything is eternal, it's
embarrassment.

It is sometimes said that Western society has evolved from a shame culture
to a guilt culture. In earlier ages, social disapproval kept the lid on our
transgressive impulses. Nowadays, the theory goes, we've been psychologically
transformed and have learned to internalize shame as guilt, so that we regulate
ourselves without our fellow tribesman crying tut-tut and shame, shame, shame.
Perhaps there's a bit of truth to this formula, but it's simplistic. In my own
fragile ego, guilt has not supplanted shame; both emotions are thriving rather
nicely, thank you very much.

Embarrassment is neither guilt nor shame, but a third thing that combines the
two emotions -- as for example in the case of Joey Valachi, mafia hit man and
stool pigeon, who once told an investigating committee, and I quote verbatim,
"you can imagine my embarrassment when I killed the wrong guy." An awkward
moment for Joey V., but whether its memory would be sufficient to disturb his
pleasant dreams is not for me to guess. It is certainly embarrassing to all
concerned that he would classify a murder as an embarrassment. Compare Macbeth
in the same situation:  "O full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife."

I guess I should be happy that my sleep is troubled by social gaffes rather than
by crimes. Mini-scorpions, so to speak.

Source: 2008/05/another-novel-b

Title: Another Novel by John Hassler
Date: May 29, 2008

Last month, I reported that I had read The Dean's List and that I was not
sufficiently impressed to enroll myself in the John Hassler fan club.  But
inasmuch as Hassler had been so celebrated upon his death, and I felt negligent,
I thought it only fair to give him a second try. Now I've done so: I've read
The Staggerford Flood (2002). It's a congenial satire that concerns itself with
an aging group of small-town Minnesota Catholics. It's intermittently witty,
but either too subtle or too fey for me. Hassler has been praised as a great
regionalist, but in my view can't hold a candle to the upper New York state
chronicles of Richard Russo and isn't even in the same league with the inventive
and often very beautiful Baltimore novels of Anne Tyler.

Source: 2008/05/what-is-a-cut-1

Title: What is a Cutter?
Date: May 31, 2008

Regular readers of this blague should be able to anticipate Dr. Metablog's best
and favorite answer to the important question, "What is a cutter?"

Familiar with Dr. M's lifelong passion for baseball, the king of all sports,
an informed reader might be tempted to say that a "cutter" is short for a "cut
fastball" -- a variation, baseballophiles know, of the two-seamer -- perfected
by the likes of Mariano Rivera. Or one might think to guess that a "cutter" is
a skilled craftsman in the garment trades. Good answers both, but not the echt
metablogian answer.

How about a utility knife or box cutter, prominent in the new world of
terrorism?  Or a small fore-and-aft rigged sailing vessel, junior to the
sloop?  Or one of those self-destructive teens who inflicts injury upon
himself?  A shaper of gems?  An unlicensed, underworld surgeon?  A film
editor? A queue- jumper? A quarry worker from Bloomington, Indiana?  A mohel?

Good answers all. But Dr. M, in a moment of ultra-metablogism, is proud to
announce that the properest answer can be found in William Dean Howells' 1882
novel, A Modern Instance:

"On a Saturday evening in February, a cutter, gay with red-lined robes, dashed
away and came musically clashing down the street under the naked elms. The young
man slackened the pace of his horse, as if to still the bells.  The girl took
the hand he offered her when he dismounted at the gate, and as she jumped from
the cutter, 'Wont you come in?', she asked.  'I guess I can blanket my horse
and stand him under the wood-shed,' answered the young man, going round to the
animal's head, and leading him away."

The answer: a cutter is a nineteenth-century horse drawn vehicle.

Howells doesn't bother to mention whether it runs on wheels or on runners. He
assumes that his readers will know.

Source: 2008/06/flagrant-greenw

Title: Flagrant Greenwashing
Date: June 02, 2008

A new and useful word is "greenwash," which is what happens when a can of ozone-
destroying chemicals comes to be decorated with cute bunnies. Corporations have
perfected this kind of propaganda: it's cheaper to portray the company as green
than to cap that smokestack.

The Bushies have brought greenwashing to politics and given us Clear Skies
(which clears the skies of birds) and Healthy Forests (which would more
accurately be called Healthy Seedlings, because that's all that remains after
the forest has been clearcut).

Anti-environmental candidates frequently cover themselves in greenwash. Here's
a particularly flagrant example. Former U. S. representative Republican Bob
Shaffer, who scored just 5% on the League of Conservation Voters' scale and has
been targeted as one of 2008's "dirty dozen," is running for an open Senate seat
in Colorado. In addition to being in Jack Abramoff's pocket, Shaffer supported
the Cheney-led initiative that gave $33 billion in tax breaks to big oil. He
opposed incentives for developing alternative fuels and dug in his heels against
fuel efficiency standards for automobiles.

Schaffer was Vice President of an oil company, Aspect Energy.  Here's his brief
biography on Aspect's website.

"Bob Shaffer is Vice President for business development at CHx Capital,
LLC, where he is involved with a variety of energy, mining and education
projects. Additionally, Bob is actively involved in international business
development activities for Aspect Energy, including sourcing and development of
international oil and gas exploration opportunities for the Company."

Hold on.  That WAS his biography until a couple of days ago. Now that he's been
nominated for the Senate, his history has been greened up. Here's the substitute
paragraph:

"Bob was involved in a variety of wind power investments, international energy
opportunities, and education projects. Bob worked to improve the US Wind
Industry. Specifically, he worked to increase entrepreneurial opportunities
for small business owners by ensuring that wind-specific tax credits could be
utilized indirectly by wind developers classified as small business owners. Bob
helped educate Congress about the benefits of wind power including its positive
impact on the environment, job creation, and its importance in making the United
States less dependent on foreign sources of oil."

Truly amazing. One day he's prospecting for foreign oil;  the next day he's a
fanatical supporter of windpower.

Ooh, ooh, ooh, what a little greenwash can do.

Source: 2008/06/news-from-nebra

Title: News from Nebraska
Date: June 09, 2008

Today we covered 200 miles or so of Route 34 of western Nebraska, the reddest
part of one of our reddest states.  We started in the high steppes and
finished in fertile (when irrigated) farmland.  Here are some of the roadside
highlights.  Nine reassuringly green John Deere dealerships, evenly spaced
along the route.  A number of llama farms, producing either wool or llamchops,
I don't know which.  Outside Benkelman, a large roadside sign:  "Birthplace
of Ward Bond."  Entering Funk, Nebraska (pop. 204), a sign, "Welcome to
Funk."  The curious slogan of the small community of Minden:  "The Christmas
City"  (for which act of arrogance Minden should be rechristened "The Chutzpah
City").  Just west of McCook, a giant billboard:  "In God we trust, not
Hillary."  A challenge to logic, I think.  Or perhaps, a challenge to divine
exactly what the billboardist was thinking.  Are we supposed to imagine that
Hillary Clinton is conceived of in McCook as the anti-Christ?  And finally,
just east of Hastings, for some years the residence of Willa Cather, the largest
of billboards, viewable for miles:  "Don't Beat Your Kids -- God."   An
admirable sentiment to be sure, and one to which we can all subscribe.  Alas,
the words that God put on the record are these:  "He who spareth the rod hateth
his son: but he that loveth him correcteth him betimes (Proverbs 13:24) and also
"Withhold not correction from a child:  for if thou strike him with the rod,
he shall not die.  Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from
hell" (Proverbs 23: 13-14).  The amateur theologican who composed the words on
the billboard offers a paraphrase of God's words which is, how shall I say this
kindly, somewhat loose.  Revisionist even.

Source: 2008/06/its-not-just-se

Title: An American "Victorian" Novel
Date: June 09, 2008

It's not just sexual prudery that makes a novel "Victorian."  The more of these
novels I read (and trust me, I've read my share), the more clear it is that the
heart of the matter is that hero and heroine are kept apart not by Mrs. Grundy
but by paralyzing social constraints.

To demonstrate my point, I will now invent the plot of a generic "Victorian"
novel.

Lydia Armstrong, who is charming and rich and has been greatly improved by her
singing and drawing lessons, loves handsome, intelligent Reginald Cockerell,
but she can't hint that she does so for fear of appearing forward. Besides,
her parson father looks down on the upstart Cockerells, who made their small
fortune in trade.  Meanwhile, young Cockerell feels that his first enthusiastic
courting of Lydia was awkward and unwelcome;  moreover, he's been informed
that she loves Bentley Rayburn, an empty-headed aristocrat who drives a mean
barouche.  As a result, Cockerell emigrates to Australia, and although presumed
to have been shipwrecked, returns after nine years and 650 pages to discover,
quite inadvertently, that Lydia has been pining for him all the while she has
sat patiently sewing and providing French lessons for her numerous adoring
nieces and nephews.  After a few more chapters and much agonizing, he at last,
awkwardly, affirms his longstanding affection.  Much glee; as W. S. says, "the
more delayed, delighted."

Why the heck didn't Lyddie and Reg sit down and talk things out before he left
for the Antipodes?

Because frankness is impermissible;  it's insufficiently "Victorian."  The
rules don't allow it.

Although there must be a quarter of a zillion variations on the theme, the
essence remains constant.  All those Lydias and all those Reginalds are kept
apart by the social artifices that exalt and fetichize propriety and inhibit
self-realization and pleasure.

I've been indulging these sour thoughts because I've just finished reading
William Dean Howells' high-Victorian (1882) domestic novel, A Modern Instance.
Howells is often described as a "realist" novelist.  I suppose he is, if by
realist is meant that in A Modern Instance the central figure, Bartley Hubbard,
is a rotter, a gambler, and an opportunist, the hero Ben Halleck limps, and
the heroine, Marcia Gaylord has a foul, jealous temper.  But take away these
flaws and the so-called realist novel looks typically Victorian.  The crux
(here come spoilers) is that the scamp Bartley marries Marcia and then deserts
her.  A divorce follows.  Our upstanding friend Ben Halleck has loved Marcia
unselfishly for many years, but he can't propose to her because he has violated
the rules by loving her even in the years when she was married.  Will the
sanctity of wedding vows and all of western civilization come crashing down if
he marries a previously-loved divorcee?  Howells even goes so far as to kill
off Bartley, but he still can't see his way clear to allowing any happiness to
Ben and Marcia.  How does the novel end?  Well, it doesn't end;  it just
stops, with Marcia rusting in Equity, Maine, and Ben puzzling and paralyzed down
in Boston.

Howells, though an American, a "realist" and an excellent craftsman, cannot
resolve the dilemma he has created.  He is incapable of bringing his novel to
satisfying close because he is as deeply Victorian as the characters to whom he
has given life.

Victorians are often called Puritans, but it was the most radical of the
Puritans, John Milton, who, in the 1640s, two hundred and fifty years before
Howells, first advanced the thesis that divorce should be legal and that
marriages should be based not on sacrament or law but on mutual love.  And
although he doesn't say so, I'm sure that Milton would have been perfectly at
ease if Ben Halleck and Marcia Gaylord had talked about the divorce, found their
way to bed, and lit out for the territories.

Source: 2008/06/my-new-career-

Title: My New Career - II
Date: June 11, 2008

Regular readers of this blague will remember that last year I made myself
available for the NBA draft.  I'm sorry to report that not a single one of the
general managers was daring enough to gamble on me.  It was disappointing and
inexplicable.  I would have suspected that at least one or two of the teams
would have read my official statement.   And jumped at the chance of adding me
to their roster.  I was depressed for a couple of weeks, but now, every day for
eleven months, I've been working on my inside moves.  Baby hook with both the
right and left hands.  My basketball is worn smooth from the concrete driveway.

I now believe that I have discovered the reason that I was not snatched by the
Lakers or the Celtics or another one of the elite teams (frankly, I'm not all
that enthusiastic of starting my pro career in an off-brand situation like
Memphis or Denver).

Last year, I was scrupulously honest about listing my height.  It was exactly
"five feet ten and one-quarter (formerly five feet ten and three-quarter)
inches." How naive I was!  Apparently, guys are exaggerating their credentials,
and I now discover that chicanery and bloviation are rife in the hallowed halls
of the basketball-draft world.  For example, Michael Beasley of Kansas State,
supposedly 6' 10", measured only 6' 7" even wearing sneakers.  Derrick Rose of
Memphis dropped from 6' 4" to 6' 1".  You see what's happening -- I'm playing
the draft game fair and square and so I don't get the same kind of publicity
that the guys do who tweak their credentials.

So there will be some changes on my application this year.  a) I'm taking
out all references to my atrial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy -- it hasn't
bothered me for months and certainly doesn't stop me from playing at my peak
for periods of 3 or 4 minutes at a stretch.  So that's gone.  b) I'm also
going to list my height at 6' 2 1/2".  A slight exaggeration but I doubt
anyone will notice because I play big.  Also, I'm wearing thick soles. c) In
the interest of absolute truth, I'm going to admit that I've put on a couple
of pounds during the last year.  Not a deficit -- an asset.  I'm getting to
the point that I could be described as a "widebody"  -- very rare in the NBA
--and much coveted.  Also, my cataracts are stable and, though I take the
prostate medicine every other day, there's no sign yet that it will compromise
my ferocious aggressiveness.  And let me be perfectly clear -- there's not the
slightest bit of truth to the rumor that I will have to frequently leave the
field of play to make use of the restroom facilities.

Source: 2008/06/stepping-eastwa

Title: Stepping Eastward
Date: June 14, 2008

It's just about 2000 miles from our residence in Colorado to our summer quarters
in Vermont.  Early this week I made my 33rd drive from the one to the other. 
We were lucky -- we sidestepped both floods and tornadoes, though fields were
flooded throughout Iowa and there was impressive and nasty twister damage in
Aurora, Nebraska.  There were the remnants of dwellings and big hunks of metal
roofing lying on the side of the road.  Nevertheless, it was one of our easier
trips:  four solid ten- to twelve-hour days of driving.  As usual, I was
impatient for the first hour  -- It takes a while to get into the swing. 
But after a while I went into a "zone"  -- otherworldly, attentive, resigned,
content.  It's another state of being.

It was only at the end of the trip, along narrow and undulating Route 4 from
Rutland to Woodstock, when for twenty miles I trailed the Executive Director of
the Slow Drivers of America, that I lost my equanimity.  I was just about to
metamorphose into the Incredible Hulk, vault from my vehicle and toss the guy
and his Plymouth into the Ottaquechee River, when I found an opening to drop
into third, floor it, and zoom by him.  Ah, what satisfaction!

It's an amazing trip -- an ever-changing and fascinating landscape.  Some
people claim that the mid West, with its astonishingly large cornfields, is
boring, but those who think so are just not paying attention.  It's a long
book, to be sure, but every page is different.  Despite the pleasure of it all,
I'm relieved to get out of the vehicle, stretch the old legs, and get going on
the gardens.   With nothing on the driving horizon except an occasional trip
to town for supplies.

Source: 2008/06/something-of-a

Title: Something of a Fairy Tale
Date: June 19, 2008

My granddaughter Ella, who is pushing six, is here for a brief visit. 
Yesterday, after catching four salamanders, kicking the soccer ball, planting
the yellow snap beans, and running in exuberant circles, she asked me to tell
her a story.  I'll report only the gist of my long, detailed, but uninspired
narrative.

A young princess is born with a birthmark on her back in the shape of a red
heart.  Her parents consult a wizard, who tells them that their daughter is
destined to marry a powerful, handsome prince.  The parents are elated and the
princess grows up with the guarantee of a blissful marriage.  However, one day,
when the princess is in high school and trying out for the swimming team, one of
her friends notices the birthmark and asks her why she has a birthmark on her
back in the shape of a diamond.  "A diamond?" says the princess.  She consults
the wizard who tells her that she's not going to marry a prince after all; 
instead, she's going to have to carve out her own career.  She'll have to study
her French, take her piano lessons seriously, learn arithmetic and work very
hard in school.  So the princess takes the advice and becomes a very diligent
and hard-working young girl and has many successes.

I was now putting myself to sleep with this highly moral and improbable tale,
so I asked Ella whether she would finish the story.  "Sure," she said, " one
day the diamond turned back into a heart and she married the prince and lived
happily ever after."

So much for contemporary, enlightened fairy tales.

Source: 2008/06/bone-in-the-ear

Title: Bone in the Ear
Date: June 20, 2008

The new clerk at the local Aubuchon has a green Mohawk.  The non-Mohawk part of
his head is clean-shaven.  The clerk looks to be about twenty years old.   He
couldn't tell me in which aisle to find a S-hook.

I'm surprised but not offended by the Mohawk.  I wonder, though, how the would-
be clerk dressed for his interview?  Did he come in full war paint, or did he
secure the job looking like Joe HighSchool and then later switch to the foppish
hairstyle?  Or was the regional manager, or whoever pulled the trigger on the
hiring, more tolerant than your run-of-the-mill mid-level corporate executive. 
Hey, maybe green Mohawks don't cut into profits?  I'd guess so, but perhaps I'm
wrong.  Vermont's a tolerant state.

Unlike tattoos, Mohawks can be ephemeral.  In six week, green Mohawk guy could
revert to being plain old Thurston Sleeper.  But a green Mohawk is a curious,
labor-intensive affectation.  it takes work to keep it erect and keep it
green.  To me it says that the clerk is far more interested in making a fashion
statement than in doing his job.  He's in the epater le bourgeois business --
but it's M. Bourgeois who's going to come to the hardware store searching for
just the right kind of wood chisel.

When we first came to this town, back in 1968, Aubuchon was the second-line
hardware store.  Everyone who wasn't just passing through shopped at locally-
owned Gove and Morrill, which carried three or four times the number of items
as Aubuchon, including all the hard-to-find stuff that nowadays you can only
locate on the Internet.  Moreover, Bart Morrill and Lester Wakefield knew how
to fix everything.  Not only would they gladly learn and gladly teach, but they
had a bit of a machine shop in the basement and would whip up the odd part when
necessary.  Now they're both long gone and so is their store and the new guys
at the Aubuchon don't know nothing  -- although they're gussied up in ways that
Bart and Lester could never have dreamed.

The new waitress at The Perfect Pear sports the usual nose ring but she also
displays a hefty piece of bone in her left ear lobe.  It looks, to the
unsophisticated eye, like the tooth of a small shark.

Source: 2008/06/my-facebook-f-1

Title: My Facebook Friends
Date: June 25, 2008

My Internet consultant, who is forty-something years old, signed me up on
Facebook.  He said that I needed to understand how communication takes place
between young folk in the modern era.  He also thought that I should assemble
some Facebook friends.

He himself concedes that in Facebook years he is an oldster.  "You're on
Facebook?" say his astonished junior colleagues and employees, not shy to hint
that he's a bit long in the tooth for an activity so totally 'with it' as social
networking.  Hey, what about ancient me?  A generation and an electronic
revolution older, I allow my pre-Cambrian self to be Facebookized.

It's a new world.  A "Facebook Friend" is not to be confused with a real
friend.  In the traditional universe (mine), relationships were either intense
or diffuse.  You can enjoy a few important relationships or spread yourself
over many -- say, twenty or thirty -- that are superficial.  It's taken me
a lifetime to acquire and sustain a very small number of genuine, intense
friendships.  But young people seem to diffuse their emotional attachments,
as I discovered by browsing the Facebook site.  They form networks of three
or four hundred or eight hundred fellow Facebookers.  No doubt but that these
young folks possess memories far more retentive and perspicuous than mine -- but
what can it mean to have relationships that number in the hundreds?  "Facebook
Friend" can signify nothing more than someone whose path has crossed your own
sometime, somewhere.

Nevertheless, it's intriguing to be in instant communication with a more-or-less
compatible cohort.  I must say, however, that there are practical limits to
the grandparental Facebookish experience.  Real friends of my own years not
only suffer from limited computer literacy but are natively grumpy and therefore
indifferent to social networking.  They're basically Internet hermits.  When I
stumble upon the page of coevals who are Facebookers (perhaps, like me, because
a young friend or grand-daughter took pity on their Facebooklessness), what
generally appears -- along with a generic subsitution for an actual photograph,
which they don't have the skills to post -- is a dispiriting message such
as "Frank has no friends."  As a result, almost all of my "Friends" are a
generation or two younger than I -- which makes me feel pseudo-youthful but also
as though I've crashed the party but I'm not dancing.

I tried an experiment.  I solicited (is that the word?) Friendship with Zoe,
just entering our local university and whose father I've known since 1969. 
She has not "confirmed me."  I also approached, timidly, Sam K., who's in high
school abroad.  I've been good friends with his grandparents for most of a
lifetime.  Sam also declined to confirm me.  ("Confirm" -- the proper Facebook
locution -- seems both too religious and too 'rite of passage' for me.)  I also
tried Rebecca M., a junior in college -- no confirmation.  Is it possible that
these young people don't want one of Gramp's friends to know who's writing what
on whose Wall?

There seems to be some sort of competition among Facebookers to acquire the most
Friends.  I'm as competitive as the next guy, but, handicapped by my years,
I'm stuck at thirty-five Friends, which is absolutely zip zilch in the galaxy
of Facebook amical achievement.  Moreover, I must confess that one of those
thirty- five Friends is a 6" foam donkey named Lefty who is the miniature mascot
of a Democratic consulting firm.  Zooming ahead, Lefty has left me to choke on
his donkey-dust.  The  donkey has one hundred and twenty-four Friends, all of
them, no doubt, intimate.

Source: 2008/06/vivian-de-st-vr

Title: Vivian de St. Vrain is now Vivian Hussein de St. Vrain
Date: June 30, 2008

Hatemongering right-wingers have been using Obama's name to attack him.  It's
only-slightly-disguised bigotry.  Obama sounds like Osama, Hussein is the late,
unlamented  dictator, while Barack is strangely foreign and rhymes with Iraq. 
It's primitive tribalism --a way of calling Barack "foreign" or "un-American"
without actually using the words.  Although Obama generally calls himself
"Barack Obama," foxnewsistas and McCain surrogates like to chant, "Barack
Hussein Obama."  You can hear them waiting for the audience to hiss.

In response, supporters of Obama have adopted Hussein as their own middle
name. There's a good article in The New York Times:  (June 29, 2008: "Obama
Supporters Take his Name as their Own").  "I am sick. of Republicans
pronouncing Barack Obama’s name like it was some sort of cuss word,” one
commentator  wrote in a manifesto titled “We Are All Hussein.”

So today, Vivian de St. Vrain joins the movement and proudly announces that
henceforth the proper designation is "Vivian Hussein de St. Vrain."  It has a
nice lilt, doesn't it?

Go Blue!  Go Dems!  Go Barack!  Yes we can! Yes we can!

Source: 2008/06/my-brother-jona

Title: Wheel-man, I Salute You!
Date: June 30, 2008

My brother Jonathan says, "The wheel.  I could have invented the wheel." 
Meaning, I think, that he understands the advanced scientific principle -- a
wheel turns round and round.  Unlike, say, the refrigerator or the radio,
which he doesn't understand and will concede that he couldn't possibly have
invented.  As for myself, I don't think that  I could possibly have conceived
of something so elegant as the wheel.  The chair.  I could have invented the
chair.  No moving parts.

And yet the wheel, history tells us, was anything but obvious.  Homo sapiens
sapiens had been on the planet for half a million years before some Mesopotamian
genius, or series of geniuses, figured out the fine art of rolling (in fact, the
wheel was apparently used for pottery for centuries before it was adapted for
transport).  In the Americas, both the Mayans and the Incas domesticated plants
and animals, perfected smelting and weaving, carved out roads and aqueducts, but
never hit upon the wheel.

If my brother had been born near the Olduvai rift in East Africa in the minus
four hundred thousands, would he have been smart enough to come up with the
wheel?  Would he even have had the opportunity?  Wouldn't he, like the rest of
us, have spent his time cowering in the cave, occasionally rushing out to grab
a hunk of dead gazelle whenever the lions turned their backs?  And employing
every bit of his brain power learning how better to knap the flint.

And besides, even if you figure out that a tree trunk can be made to rotate, you
still have to invent the axle.  And the spoke.

The lever?  Yes, I think so.  Put a hunk of wood or a piece of bone under a
rock and pry it up.  I could have done that.  But how about the pliers -- a
double lever, now in use for about 4000 years.  I think I could have stared at
a three pieces of metal for a zillion years and not invented the pliers.

I'll make a prediction.  One day, when the aliens come to visit us from their
infinitely more advanced civilization, they will marvel at us the way we marvel
at the Incas.  How astonishing, they're going to say, they got as far as
they did but they never figured out the glugg.  The glugg will be something
as elementary and as obvious and as useful as the wheel or the lever or the
inclined plane.  Some simple machine that we've completely overlooked.

So wheel-man, whoever you are, I celebrate you.

Hey Jon, why don't you go invent the glugg?

Could I in actual fact have invented the chair?  Well, perhaps I would have
been smart enough to think of sitting on a rock or on a tree stump. But a chair
with legs?  Or with legs strengthened with stretchers?  Not very likely that
I would have been smart enough to invent a chair.  If it had been left to me,
we'd still be squatting on tree stumps.

Source: 2008/07/garden-news

Title: Garden News
Date: July 04, 2008

Last fall, I purchased two bottlebrush buckeyes by mail order and set them
temporarily in the kitchen garden.  Yesterday, I finally picked out the right
spot.  I cleared some weeds, carted over a generous supply of the well-dried, 
and transplanted the buckeyes into their permanent location on a slope that's
been difficult to maintain, just at the edge of the sheep pasture.  It's an
experiment;  I've never seen a bottlebrush buckeye this far north.  But hey,
they made it through their first winter with flying colors and the climate is
warming up.

The bottlebrush buckeye is one of those magnificent flowering shrubs that I
first encountered years ago in the Brooklyn Botanical Garden.    It's a plant
that will take three years to flower and a decade to mature, so it's touch-and-
go whether I'll see it in its glory -- assuming that it survives when we have
one of those snowless frigid winters that turn nominal Zone 4 into actual Zone
2.

In addition, I planted a four foot tall bur oak (also new to the norhern
neighborhood). I like to plant an oak tree even though it will be a decade
and a half before it makes an impact on the landscape.  Oaks are for the
grandchildren and the great-grandchildren,  should there be any.  And for the
planet.  Although this part of Vermont is rich in oaks, our particular property
was oakless when we arrived.  We now have many northern reds, a swamp white and
a bur.  I'm on the lookout for other varieties that can tolerate the winters.

Not everything's going up.  Coming down, yesterday, a huge mature balsam fir,
which was in the wrong place and needed to go.  We finally bit the bullet
yesterday.  It took my neighbor Ed's big chainsaw and his Massey-Ferguson
tractor, along with chains and cables to fell it.  It will take a whole day to
cut it up and prepare for the big bonfire.  On the way down, the fir took some
limbs of a beech and made quite a mess of the front lawn.  We've replaced the
divots and re-seeded and mulched the hard-hit areas.  The beech will recover
eventually, but it will take a couple of years. It can now see the light.

Source: 2008/07/my-cardiologist

Title: My cardiologist treats a new patient
Date: July 05, 2008

Nurse, how good is the anaesthetist?

Does Medicare cover this procedure?

Pass me the scalpel.  I mean, the scimitar.

What kind of steriods is this fellow on?

Let's not ignore the 800-pound gorilla in the room.

He says that his name is Dr. Bruce Banner.

Doctor, wait until you see your next patient.

That's the loudest murmur I've ever heard.

Can you move it along, Doc?  The family is in the waiting room and they're
getting impatient.

Source: 2008/07/european-grass

Title: "He Got the Witch Grass out of his Garden"
Date: July 09, 2008

Last summer, planning to extend a flower garden, I covered a weed-choked area
of about 4 feet by 10 feet with a foot high pile of dense lawn clippings.  The
plan was to kill the sod by excluding the light of the sun. It's an effective,
proven method  -- most people use black plastic for the same purpose. What sort
of weed was I combating?  The population endemic to this part of Vermont:  a
mixed stand of goldenrod, milkweed, plantain, dandelion, blackberry, bindweed,
dogbane, Indian paint-brush, buttercup, bracken fern. Yesterday I inspected
the results. The sod is dead, but it's been replaced by a nearly pure stand of
witch grass, which not not only survived but prospered. Every other plant was
door nail dead. I spent the day pulling up and digging out forty square feet of
tenacious witch grass.

Witch grass is the most noxious of the weeds with which I daily contend. It's
invasive, almost indestructible, powerful. If you dig it out and leave behind
the merest shred of root (underground stem, actually), the plant immediately
regenerates. It finds its way through wooden barriers and under metal barriers.
It grows rapidly in almost all soils.

Witch grass has forced me to stop growing bearded iris. It so surrounds and
overwhelms the irises that they can't be weeded without dislodging the shallow
corms. I've occasionally dug up an iris where the witch grass didn't even bother
to go around the corm -- just dug a hole and bored right through it. On the
other hand, Siberian irises compete well with witch grass.  Siberians make
such a dense deep cluster of roots that they squeeze the witch grass to death.
Strangles it. Does my heart good.

There's some pleasure in weeding witch grass, especially when you can get a
good grab and drag out a long root. In good soil, after a rain, I've pulled
out pieces three or four feet long.  But you have to dispose of it properly.
It takes the sun a week to kill the root, and should you accidentally cover it
with other weeds, it will come to life even even though it's not even under the
ground.

I used to say that I wanted my gravestone to read: "He got the witch grass out
of his garden." But now I know that it was mere vanity to think that I could win
the battle of the witch grass.  Here's a prediction: there will come a day when
witch grass will grow over and under and around my marble marker.

Witch grass (agropyron repens) is not even native to the New World. It's come to
us from Europe. Along with the dandelion, the starling and Dutch elm disease.

Source: 2008/07/what-is-the-abs

Title: Vote Here on the Bush Years
Date: July 13, 2008

What is the absolute worst catastrophe of the Bush presidency? Choose one (or
more, I guess, if you can't make up your mind) or append your very own disaster.

1.  The completely botched New Orleans mess (incompetent Bushies in critical offices, carelessness, implicit racism).

2.  The attorney-general scandal (incompetent immature Bushies in critical office, subversion of the constitution, elevation of party loyalty above loyalty to the country).

3.  Compromising of the civil service (appointments based on ideology rather than merit, suppression of informed opinion).

4.  War on the environment (incompetent Bushies in high places, suppression of scientific evidence, politicization of science).

5.  Torture -- or "enhanced interrogation techniques" -- of suspects (subversion of the constitution, illegal legal memos, clandestine government).

6.  Collapse of housing market (under regulation, false optimism, indifference, atavistic economic policies).

7.  Skyrocketing of national debt (tax policy favorable to the very rich, war on the cheap).

8.  Medical policy that rewards insurance companies, penalizes patients and doctors.

9.  Collapse of the dollar.

10  Energy policy (secret, favorable to big oil, indifference to conservation).

11. Iraq war (endless, fraudulent, expensive in treasure and lives, counter-productive).

12.  Failure to capture Bin Laden (stupidity, obsession with Iraq).

13.  Compromising of the judiciary (appointment of loyal Bushies, extreme right-wingers, ideologues).

That's my top thirteen,  but I've drawn it up without much thought, off the top
of my head.  I'm sure that I've left out some big ones.

Source: 2008/07/firlik-bezoars

Title: Firlik, Bezoars
Date: July 16, 2008

I don't like gore. I’m the kind of person who won’t recklessly channel-surf
for fear that the changer gizmo will maliciously lock onto our 24/7 surgery
channel, where some poor soul's innards will be on garish hi-def display.
 And yet, despite my squeamishness, I steeled myself and read right through
to the end of Katrina Firlik's Another Day in the Frontal Lobe, which is a
young neurosurgeon’s bildungs-autobiography. Of course, I allowed myself the
indulgence of zooming through some of the more gruesome parts. How much do I
need to know about maggot infestations in the living brain?

I’m grateful to Firlik for her vivid stories, for the occasional moment of
black humor and also for offering a forthright glimpse into an alternative
world. Nevertheless, I'm sorry to report, Another Day is not a good book. It's
too transparently a package shaped by agent and editor for short-term commercial
appeal. The author is so anxious to be cute and to be loved – she must have
been one of those front-row, admiring-eyes-glued-to-the-professor straight-A
pupils -- that whenever she comes up against a controversial topic, such as the
irrational funding of our medical system or the egomania of surgeons or the
morality of expensive, hopeless surgical interventions, she hints at concern but
then swerves and punts. She doesn't want to offend a single potential buyer.

Not a courageous writer, she is not an admirable being either: what can one say
about a highly-skilled professional who turns down job after job in the American
hinterland and elects to live in New Canaan, Connecticut, because, she admits,
it would be impossible to find a good Japanese restaurant in the sticks,  and
who in one sentence notes that her rich town has more neurosurgeons than all of
sub-Sahara Africa and in another reveals that she works on spines rather than
brains nowadays because spines are more lucrative.

Hey, Katrina, the next time you publish something, sacrifice some of that
royalty money and write directly from your heart (even though it's one cold and
stony organ).

Readers of this blague will not be surprised to learn that Dr. M. was much
intrigued by the book's medical vocabulary. Another Day serves up a feast of
beautiful and exotic words:  venous infarct, dura, spicule, rongeur, neuroma,
glioma, glioblastoma (you don’t want one!), bone dust, debulk, pachygyria. The
ugliest of all: intubated. My personal favorite, and a word that I've now put
in the running for Word of the Year: bezoar.

How could I have lived all these years without knowing the word bezoar?  Could
there be a surer index of my ignorance of medicine?  A bezoar, as everyone but
me seems to know, is a concretion of indigestible stuff stuck somewhere in the
digestive tract – hairballs, medicines, bits of food. Sometimes they can be
dissolved, but on occasions they can only be removed by surgery. A bezoar was
formerly thought to be a magical antidote for poisons –- so score another
couple of strikes against our ignorant superstitious ancestors. The most common
kind of bezoar is the phytobezoar, which is a collection of lignin, cellulose,
or tannin of food fibers. Common sources: celery, grapes, raisins, prunes,
pumpkins, all of which, if you’re like me, you’ve probably unwittingly eaten
without having given a thought to their bezoar-potential and therefore neglected
a splendid opportunity for hypochondria.

A bezoar caused by eating persimmons (an especially dangerous fruit,
bezoarwise), earns its very own word-- diospyrobezoar -- an odd amalgam of
Greek and Persian linguistic roots and a word which, just as soon as a suitable
opening arises, I intend to insinuate into the conversation.

Source: 2008/07/the-wave

Title: The Wave
Date: July 20, 2008

When we arrived in West Bradford forty years ago, there were lots of cows but
very few people. The main road was unpaved and aside from morning-and-evening
milk trucks and the tractors pulling hay wagons, there were very few vehicles.
Now, they've run electricity out Welch's old road and must have built forty new
homes and as a result there are a ton more folks who commute south. (In the
1960s, the nearest exit off the interestate was thirty-five miles away; now, the
interstate is just five miles away.) Very few milking cows are left nowadays --
some horses, some sheep, some heifers raised for beef. Hobby farms, mostly. Inch
by inch we've been surburbanized. Or more properly, exurbanized.

In the 1960s, when two cars passed on the road, the drivers would often stop
to chat, knowing that it wasn't likely that another vehicle would pass by for
a half an hour. If they didn't stop to talk, they'd at least wave. It was bad
manners not to acknowledge an oncoming vehicle. I remember that Ron Jepson, now
long dead, who made a living off twelve acres and a handful of cows, complained
to me once about one of our neighborhood grumps. "He doesn't even wave when he
goes by." Not waving was an intolerable breach of road etiquette.

What's happened to the custom? The wave is in steep decline and only survives as
a vestige of an older way of life. When we take our morning walk on South Road
or on Hackett Hill Road, I make a point of waving at the oncoming drivers. The
response is inconsistent. There's a rare enthusiastic open palm wrist-waggle,
an occasional mock salute, and sometimes a big windshield wiper wave, but more
often merely a perfunctory palm lift off the steering wheel. Sometimes the palm
lift is reduced even further, to a right index finger lift -- a feeble gesture
to antiquity.  Half the drivers don't wave at all; they are recent immigrants
who don't know that the wave has a history. They're in a hurry to get where
they're going, wherever that may be.

Clearly, the great age of waving has passed. But not for all of us. That will
be me out there on the side of the road, elbow raised and wrist oscillating,
clinging to the customs of our forefathers.

Source: 2008/08/its-the-verse-s

Title: "The verse is not/ So long as we can say 'This be the verse'"
Date: August 01, 2008

The most widely-known as well as the most notorious poem of the second half
of the twentieth century is Philip Larkin's "This Be the Verse." For those of
you who don't know the poem by heart, here it is in its brief and startling
entirety.

They fuck you up, your mum and dad.

They may not mean to, but they do.

They fill you with the faults they had

And add some extra, just for you.

But they were fucked up in the turn

By fools in old style hats and coats,

Who half the time were soppy-stern,

And half at one another's throats.

Man adds on misery to man.

It deepens like a coastal shelf.

Get out as early as you can,

And don't have any kids yourself.

Pessimistic? Jaded? Angry?  Yes, I think it's fair to call it so. And let's
also add, unsubtle with a vengeance.

Larkin is hyperbolically illogical. It can't be that every generation is
more deranged than the one that preceded it. When were the good times? A few
generations ago?  In the medieval period?  In antiquity?  In Larkin's view,
it's been all downhill, all the time. No doubt those early primates were already
fucking up their kids when they came down from the trees and started to walk
upright on the savannah. "There's only one piece of roasted rhinoceros left. You
take it. I don't mind being hungry."

Despite its dyspepsia and illogicality, "This Be the Verse" is a curiously
lovable poem. Whenever I've heard it read or recited, audiences react not
with horror but with amusement. The poem's misanthropy is so absolute and its
language so blunt that it can't help but provoke tittering.

The laughter arises because the poem doesn't earn its pessimism. It's too
fluent and too easy. Unlike, say, King Lear, where the sublunary world is rank
with incest, betrayal, and murder.  After three thousand lines and five full
horrific acts, Shakespeare acquires the standing to conclude that life is
miserable and that "humanity must perforce/ Prey on itself, like monsters of the
deep."

The events in Oedipus lend credibility to the difficult apercu that it's best
not to be born at all, next best to die very young.

While Shakespeare and Sophocles are philosophically serious, Larkin is merely
flip. There's a monumental disproportion between his gloom and the light-verse
vessel in which his gloom is contained. And as a consequence, the off-kilter
comedy. It's a whiny poem. "Poor poor pitiful me. I had a difficult mommy."

If "This Be the Verse" is in fact the most popular poem of the last fifty years,
it supersedes Frost's "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." What a remarkable
devolution! While Frost endures, Larkin abhors.

I doubt whether Larkin had "Stopping by Woods" in mind, but he certainly glosses
Robert Louis Stevenson's "Requiem" -- the poem from which he drew his title.
Stevenson's performance is charming, gentle, self-effacing, and modest.

Under the wide and starry sky,

Dig the grave and let me lie.

Glad did I live and gladly die.

And laid me down with a will.

This be the verse you grave for me:

Here he lies where he longed to be.

Home is the sailor, home from the sea,

And the hunter home from the hill.

Stevenson praises the adventurous life lived well and brought to completion.
Death may end it all but it also closes the circle. No completion, no circles
in Larkin, where natural processes are crudely truncated: "don't have any kids
yourself."

"This Be the Verse" is a hilarious and wonderful piece of joking, but it's
victimology is unsettling. It's tempting to claim that it satirizes its own
pessimism, but, sorry, it doesn't. Larkin loves his own gloom.

Here's another Victorian variation on the thema Larkiniana.

Is life a thorn?

Then count it not a whit.

Man is well done with it.

As soon as he's born,

He should all means assay

To put the plague away.

Pessimistic, yes.  But Colonel Fairfax, even-handed, also entertains the
possibility that life might be a boon (which, as we all know, is true for at
least part of the time).

Source: 2008/08/a-semi-mystical

Title: A Non-Mystical Experience
Date: August 03, 2008

It was the evening of a cloudy day and I had my face in among the clumps
of blooming day lilies, which I was trying to protect from the constant
encroachment of witch grass. It's a minor art -- to lie on the ground and reach
arm's length into the forest of leaves, careful not to knock the fragile buds
off the scapes, and identify and remove the underground stems of the witch grass
by feel alone. I had pulled out a heap of noxious weeds and was lost, absolutely
lost, in the project, when suddenly, from behind my back the about-to-set sun
emerged and illuminated the scene   For no more than thirty seconds the day
lily spectrum was on full display: apricot, pink, a range of yellows, each
slightly different from its neighbor, a near white, along with a few fully
saturated, shimmering crimsons, plus some bi-colors with their cute contrasting
throats. For a glorious moment, everything leaped at me. It was truly theatrical
to be surrounded by such brilliant colors and shapes and fragrances -- a rare
and memorable instance of transcendent aesthetic bliss.

The next day, on he telephone, I tried to convey my rapture to The Daughter.
She was concerned. One of her friends had had a similar moment. Her friend
was walking in the Colorado mountains and came upon a magnificent field of
wild flowers. The experience was powerful and life-changing, and she's now,
after years of study, an Episcopal priest. "You're not going to tell me that it
was a religious experience, are you?" I could hear the worry in her voice. My
response: "I would have thought you'd have known me better than that."

Some people conflate beauty with spirituality and religion. I'm not one of those
people. Beauty is transcendent, yes, but it's also material and explicable.

No question but that the profusion of day lily colors is glorious. For a
hundred years now, careful hybridizers have worked on the homely fulvous lily,
a roadside weed sometimes inelegantly called the "outhouse lily", and have
transformed it into the bearer of the rainbow colors in which it now sparkles. 
Thank you, clever day lily breeders, for your generations of imaginative work.
Thanks also to the parcel post driver who every year brings me three or four
more new varieties from Oakes in Tennessee. And while I'm at it, I would also
like to thank the people who designed and built that brown truck and its rubber
tires and constructed the roads and refined the gasoline -- no border of day
lilies without their help. Nor without the designers and manufacturers of my
spade and my favorite dibble and my all-purpose dandelion puller. I could add
other equally essential people -- go right back to the first practitioners of
smelting -- but I think I've made my point.  The day lilies do not declare the
glory of god; they declare the glory of human civilization and human enterprise.

I  grow a single wild fulvous lily on the grounds, just as a reminder.

It's drab.

Source: 2008/08/on-praise

Title: On Praise
Date: August 06, 2008

Praise for what is not praiseworthy is mere flattery. All the more so, if
fair words gain advantage. Praise even of the dead is suspect if it flatters
survivors. Persons in authority must be wary of false praise: be mindful
that for every man who praises you, ninety-nine hold their peace or mutter
imprecations aside.  A friend of long standing said to me, "You are the
hardest person to praise of anyone I've ever known," by which words he meant to
tax me, but which I took as compliment. I offer praise generously when it is
merited, but not for ordinary deeds. Of a churlish man, it was justly said at
his funeral, that he was a good speller; of a sloven, that his fingernails had
never been so clean. Praise need not be effusive and is most sincere if simply
couched. I was once most happy to be praised, when a discreet man, looking over
a landscape of which I am vain, said to a friend who marveled, "He works on
it."  Of all virtues, I am most apt to praise diligence, the want of which I
deplore in myself. Children are most easy to praise as they know not irony.

Source: 2008/08/the-sculpin-sli

Title: The Sculpin.  Slimy or Mottled?
Date: August 14, 2008

Knowing little of the finny tribe, I borrowed the Bradford Public Library's
copy of Langdon's introductory Fishes of Vermont (2006). It's an excellent,
informative, helpful guide. With Langdon's help, I can now declare that it's
undeniably the brown bullhead, a species of catfish, that has been multiplying
in our pond, The bullhead, a villainous omnivore, is one of the causes of the
steep decline of our population of frogs. The butt-ugly, scaleless, bebarbelled
brute gobbles frogs' eggs.

Readers of this blague will not be astonished to learn that Dr. M .has fallen
deeply in love with fish names. Take the brown bullhead, for example. It's
also known by such evocative and lunatic denominations as the horned pout, the
mudcat, and the minister. Minister?  To whom, and under what circumstances,
would a brown bullhead minister?

My favorite Vermont fish, nomenclature-wise, is the slimy sculpin, also
performing under such titles as the blob, the chucklehead, the rock cusk, the
stargazer, and the cockatouch. The slimy sculpin should not be confused with its
near cousin, the mottled sculpin -- which can also be addressed as the slowfish
or gudgeon.

Many of the common Vermont fishes have lost their colorful historic names. The
bowfin was once called the John A. Gindle, the stonecat was the doogler, the
lake trout was the togue or longue, the burbot was variously ling or lawyer
(lawyer? minister?  why not accountant? or dentist?), the quillback was the
buffalo, and the gar was the needlenose. On the other hand, the blandly-named
pond perch of olden days is trending in the reverse direction: it's now called
the pumpkinseed -- a name which seems curiously vegetarian for a denizen of the
deep.

If I had known that there was a fish called the cisco (known on jolly days as
the tollibee and on prosaic days as the sand herring), I would long ago have
promoted Galen Cisco to my all-time-great Baseball-Fish Team, adding him to such
piscine luminaries as Catfish Hunter, Dizzy Trout, Chico Salmon, Sid Bream,
Bobby Sturgeon, Art "Red" Herring, and Shad Roe. And Mudcat Grant.

No Sculpins in MLB that I can recall, but In a more poetic universe, "Slimy"
Sculpin would have been a spitball pitcher, or perhaps even a team owner.

Source: 2008/08/if-someone-had

Title: Crime, Punishment, Oblivion
Date: August 20, 2008

If someone had asked me, a month, ago, whether I'd read Crime and Punishment,
I'd have sworn up, down, sideways, and seven ways from Sunday that I had done
so.  And I would confidently have specified the date: during the early 1950s,
when anyone who read anything at all knew that "existence preceded essence" and
that the grandfather of existentialism was Fyodor Dostoevsky.  Who, in those
days, would have confessed to ignorance about Raskolnikov, his heady jumbled
philosophy, the murder, the remorse?  We were all striving to be Alienated
Youth, and Raskolnikov was the king of alienation -- a hundred times more
alienated than the runner-up, James Dean.

I've just finished reading Crime and Punishment, and I have a confession to
make.  I didn't remember the plot, the characters, or the outcome.  Not the
picture of louche, impoverished, oppressive St. Petersburg.  Nothing except the
mellifluous name:  Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov. Come to think of it, I didn't
remember the Rodion or the Romanovich either.  Just the Raskolnikov part.

Did I read the novel back there in the fifties?  If I did, is my memory now
so flimsy and porous that I've lost everything?   Did I pretend to have read
the novel?  Or was it so much spoken of that I absorbed it without effort. 
Whatever the facts, I certainly managed to fool myself.

Crime and Punishment is an exceedingly vivid piece of writing.  I think
that the trampling of Marmeladov and the suicide of Svidraigalov are such
brilliantly written scenes that they could not possibly slip my mind. How
could I lose track of the pathetic waif Sonya, her dreadful occuption, or her
lunatic stepmother?  The grand generous gestures, the poverty, the overwrought
emotions, the flaunting of propriety.

It's a thrilling, iconoclastic novel -- painful, and not fun for the morally
squeamish.  It's absolutely unforgettable.

Source: 2008/08/duke-duke-duke

Title: Duke, Duke, Duke
Date: August 20, 2008

Ain't it shocking that Gene Chandler's excellent song is now almost half a
century old?  Seems like just yesterday.

This be the verse in its full splendor.

Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke,
Duke, Dukeof Earl

As I walk through this world Nothing can stop the Duke of Earl And you, you are
my girl And no one can hurt you, oh no Yes, I'm gonna love you Come on let me
hold you darlin' 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

And when I hold you You will be my Duchess, Duchess of Earl We'll walk through
my dukedom And the paradise we will share.

Yes, oh, I I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of
Earl.

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

1)  "Duke of Earl" is classic, though late, doo-wop. It's lineally descended
from songs in which a supporting male quartet sang meaningless syllables: doo
wop, wop, wop. In this revisiting of the genre, nonsense doo doo doo de wop
has been superseded by words that carry meaning of a sort: duke duke duke of
earl. Return we now to the pages of history: in their turn, doo wop quartets
were themselves secular offspring of gospel quartets, where a reverent foursome
would sing do lord do lord, do lordy lord (a good example: the unnamed quartet
supporting Georgia Peach in "Do Lord Send Me").

2)  It's a fascinating process: Gene Chandler's replacement of doo doo with
duke duke is in fact a return to the roots, except that the previous and
inherent religious content has undergone secularization. "Lord" has become
"Duke," while the heaven of gospel has become the "dukedom" of doo-wop.

3.  It's easy to deride the naive aristocratic title "Duke of Earl"; but would the song preserve its meaning if it were "Duke of Buckingham?" "Earl" may sound silly, but because it's a generic title rather than a specific one it carries allegorical significance."Duke of Earl" is no one and therefore everyone.

4.  It's entirely likely that the word "earl" was chosen because of it echoes "lord": liquids "r" and 'l" and unemphatic vowel.

5.  The first line of the lyric --"As I walk through this world"-- introduces a secularized religious motif (an inheritance from the song's gospel forbears). Some will recall the opening sentence of the most famous of all religious allegories, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1672): "As I walked through the wilderness of this world."  Gene Chandler, walking through this world, is reborn just as Christian was reborn in the classic allegory. Not religiously, but in a worldly way. He is not saved;  he is duked.

6.  What is the significance of aggressive "nothing can stop me now?" What obstacles stopped the Duke of Earl in the past, before his duking?  The triumphalist language is highly developed but the obstacles remain vague and unarticulated. Audiences find their own meaning in the lacuna, but indignities historically suffered by the black underclass lurk only slightly below the surface of the lyric.

7.  The transformation from a previous but unknown and unarticulated existence to an aristocratic, unstoppable Duke of Earl takes place offstage, nor is any explanation offered for the metamorphosis. It's entirely magical.

8.  Because it's magic, it's pure fantasy. Pastoral fantasy in fact, which, curiously, is simultaneously primitive ("paradise") and sophisticated ("dukedom").

9. But it's a shared paradise: the duke along with his duchess. The retreat to domesticity is almost Victorian: "ah love, let us be true/ To one another...."  This particular Duke does not know that "Two paradises were in one/ To live in paradise alone."

10.  The Duke retreats to domesticity and ayet he seems to stake out ("nothing can stop me now") new territory to conquer, in which regard the spacious lyric seems to embody contradictory or even incoherent vectors of thought. However, the enthusiasm of the singing obliterates the ambiguity of the lyric; in sum, the song is remarkably optimistic -- which is just one reason for its continued popularity.

Source: 2008/08/lebanon-puccini

Title: Lebanon, Puccini
Date: August 23, 2008

I'm just back from Lebanon (that would be Lebanon, New Hampshire) where I
heard a performance of Puccini's Madame Butterfly.  If you pay no mind to the
ridiculous racist orientalist anti-American story, it's a pretty good opera. 
The orchestra, though small, was excellent and the singers top-notch.  The
music is a little on the overwrought side, and the garish emotional display
makes Dostoevsky seem in comparison like drawing-room comedy.  It's a sad,
dated story.  While Emma Bovary found the solution to her problem in arsenic,
Anna Karenina in the locomotive and Edna Pontellier in the water, Cio-cio-san
elects the knife -- more evidence, if more is needed, for women's paucity of
choices in the grand old days.  But great melodies, no question.  The opera
crowd was, as usual, a little on the geriatric side -- and as a consequence I
felt quite youthful bounding up to the balcony.  At breakfast the next day, a
friend admitted to being moved by Cio-cio-san's suffering.  "Did you cry," I
asked.  His reply:  "I'm not saying."

Source: 2008/08/smoking-smokers

Title: Smoking, Smokers
Date: August 25, 2008

My father smoked cigars and later a pipe;  my mother smoked Lucky Strikes --
lots of them.  When I was a boy, the air in our house was a blue-gray haze. I
believe that my mother smoked throughout her four pregnancies. Why shouldn't
she have?  The tobacco industry advertised that smoking was good for you. 
There wasn't "a cough in a carload."  Doctors smoked Camels and were paid to
testify that smoking was harmless all the while corporate leaders knew about
but suppressed evidence of fetal damage, heart disease, and lung cancer. 
Cigarettes were the perfect product:  "make it for a penny, sell it for a
dollar, and it's addictive as hell."

I tried to smoke -- I stole my mother's cigarettes and lit up in the cellar. 
It was horrible, nasty, and disgusting.  I couldn't do it.

Smoking was omnipresent in those days.  Foul odors and brimful ashtrays were
the norm.  In my first year in college, I was assigned a roommate who smoked
constantly.  I hated it, but there was no recourse.  Professors smoked
while lecturing and students, naturally, followed suit, so classrooms were
distractingly polluted.  Smokers had everything their way and dissenters were
a prissy minority.  At dinner parties, guests would bring their cigarettes to
the table.  Is there anything more odious than a tray of smelly ashes at the
festive board?

In the 70s, I got up the courage to place a modest, hesitant sign on our
front door:  "Please no tobacco."  But sometimes guests would smoke anyway,
unwilling to believe  that a hospitable person would try to restrict a commonly
accepted right.  I was regularly outraged by the insensitivity of my friends.

But little by little, customs and laws began to change.  It took lots of hard
work by anti-smoking lobbyists and organizers.  Many lawsuits. Now it's hard to
remember that until recently airplanes had smoking and non-smoking sections --
although in fact, the air stunk no matter where you sat.  As did restaurants,
buses, arenas, theaters, offices.

Nowadays, no one that I know would dream of smoking indoors; certainly not in
someone's home.  Cigarette smoking has become a shameful addiction.  The
change in attitude toward tobacco has been one of the few unequivocal social
betterments of my lifetime  -- but too late for those dear friends and family
members who died far too painfully and far too early.

And what about those knots of poor proud deluded newly-addicted teen-agers? 
The increase in tobacco use world-wide?  And those fat pompous corporate execs,
still lying through their shiny teeth, who deserve to be strung up by their
thumbs?

Source: 2008/08/nanny-state-nan

Title: Nanny State!  Nanny State!
Date: August 29, 2008

According to Charles Dickens, who visited the United States in 1842, American
men were constantly masticating tobacco.  He was thoroughly shocked by the "two
odious practices of chewing and expectorating" -- a habit that he found to be
both "offensive and sickening."

"In all the public places of America," wrote the novelist, "this filthy custom
is recognized.  In the courts of law the judge has his spittoon, the crier his,
the witness his, and the prisoner his."  They all spit "incessantly."  Worse
still, In the hospitals the students of medicine are requested, by notices upon
the wall, to eject there tobacco juice into the boxes provided for that purpose,
and not to discolor the stairs."  A further horror:  "in public buildings
visitors are implored ... to squirt the essence of their plugs... into the
national spittoons, and not about the bases of the marble columns.  This custom
is inseparably mixed up with every meal and morning call, and with all the
transactions of social life.  The stranger will find it in its full bloom and
glory, luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness."

It must have been horrible.  Dickens says that every floor, staircase, carpet
was disfigured with traces of "tinctured saliva."  It's hard to imagine that
our revered ancestors lived in such a foul, smelly, slippery environment or that
your doc would have a spittoon at his feet while he discussed your symptoms.

Eventually, there was a movement to ban public spitting, but it took almost
a century before the odious custom was conquered (except on the baseball
field, where it flourishes today in all its ancient glory).  There were those
who resisted change, of course.  To prohibit spitting was to regulate and
ultimately to deny a human freedom.  If the catchword had been invented, the
right-wingers of the day would have been shouting, the way they do now when it's
not the spitting but the smoking of tobacco that's in question:  "Spitters'
rights!  Spitters' rights!  Nanny state!  Nanny state!"

When Sir Simonds d'Ewes visited Paris two centuries before Dickens toured
America, he was shocked to find the steps of the Louvre littered with "a
thousand ordures."  Defecating in public was the French custom and a human
freedom.  Eventually, however, laws and customs changed.  But I'm absolutely
positive that 1640s libertarians were out there on the barricades, screaming
"Shitters' rights!  Shitters' rights!  Nanny state! Nanny state!"

Source: 2008/09/what-is-a-dra-1

Title: What is a Drag?
Date: September 05, 2008

What, exactly, is a drag?  Here's a sentence from Kate Chopin's edgy (in a
Victorian way) 1899 novel, The Awakening.  "Alcee Arobin and Mrs. Highcamp
called for Mrs. Pontellier one bright afternoon in Arobin's drag."  A drag? 
Could it be "a large four-horse coach with seats inside and on top."  O my
gosh!  It's still another nineteenth-century horse-drawn vehicle!  Along with
a cutter and a kibitka.   Memo to self: add to list.

I didn't know of the existence of The Awakening, a novel which had dropped
completely off the map, until sometime in the 1980s, when it re-established
itself in courses in AmLit.  It was a banned book for a while, not, I would
guess, because of the adultery itself, but because Edna Pontellier acknowledges
and acts on sexual desire.  Alcee Arobin, drag-owner, senses her vulnerability,
but I don't think that in this case the vehicle figures in the seduction.  It's
a fine, liberating book, the prose a little on the hothouse-gardenia side, but
well worth the re-reading.

Source: 2008/09/the-black-cochi

Title: The Black Cochin
Date: September 06, 2008

Cathy: "We have a Cochin.  She's beautiful.  Her feathers are an iridescent
black.  With Cochins, the feathers cover the entire leg.  She's a pet, part
of the family.  She's four years old and must weigh seven pounds.  But just
lately she developed some sort of neurological disease.  She would quiver,
shake, sometimes her wings, sometimes all over.  Faint.  We took her to the
vet.  We thought she had eaten something bad.  It's such a wet year, there
are mushrooms all over the place.  Perhaps she ate mushrooms or some poisonous
berries.  The vet took an x-ray.  It cost $400."

Dr. M. (flabbergasted):  "You spent $400 on a ten-dollar chicken?!

Cathy:  "Actually, she was given to us.  Free."

Dr. M.:  "What did the x-ray show?"

Cathy:  "An egg.  You could see it clearly."

Dr. M.:  "I mean about the disease."

Cathy:  "Nothing in particular.  The shaking stopped after a while,  But a
few days later she developed bumblefoot because she couldn't perch correctly.

Dr. M.:  "Bumblefoot?"

Cathy:   "Bumblefoot is an infection.  It distorts the shape of the foot. 
So we've been giving her antibiotics.  One of us holds her in a towel, then the
other pries open her beak.  You insert a mixture of applesauce and antibiotic
into her beak. She doesn't like it."

Dr. M.:  "Is it working?"

Cathy:  "It's not clear.  She may have to have surgery. The doctor recommends
it."

Dr. M. (in a state of shock):  "Surgery?  On a chicken?  How much is that
going to cost."

Cathy:  "The vet says $700.  He's an avian specialist.

Dr. M (astounded):  "Are you going to do it?"

Cathy:  "We don't know.  We're thinking about it."

Dr. M.:  "Have you considered physical therapy?  Massage.  Perhaps
acupuncture?

Cathy: "First we're going to try echinacea or goldenseal."

Source: 2008/09/palin-observati

Title: Citizen Dentist
Date: September 09, 2008

Sarah Palin is like Jesse Ventura; she's a "novelty" governor.  Every once
in a while, Americans like to stick it to the pols by electing an amateur. 
It shakes things up for a while.  Sarah Palin is a joke, but now McCain has
endangered our beloved nation by taking her seriously. Here's a scenario: 
McCain is elected, he dies or is taken out by a conspiratorial maniac, and
there's a dangerous small-minded, uneducated, right-wing fringe religious-bigot
demagogue in charge of the nuclear stockpile.

Governing is the most difficult of all arts, and yet Americans seem to think
it's a snap.  When you take your car in to be fixed, you want an experienced,
knowledgeable mechanic, not, not an actor or an athlete.  I'm yet to meet a
person who wants his impacted wisdom tooth treated by a citizen dentist.  But
to run the government -- let's just hire anyone at all.

I'm reading Milan Kundera's excellent novel, The Joke.  It's set in 1950s
Czechoslovakia, and like all novels of the communist era, portrays a world in
which the government is in the hands of mediocre people chosen and promoted not
for brains, wisdom, or talent but for ideological orthodoxy.  t's a system
that's doomed to failure, but it's exactly the system that has now been imposed
on this country by the Bush administration, which regularly hired graduates
of Patrick Henry and Liberty --ideologically pure right-wing colleges -- over
applicants of genuine distinction.

Republicans oppose affirmative action when it works to the advantage of the
underrepresented, but they are its greatest proponents when it comes to
political correctness.  Major examples (there are zillion minor ones) are such
disasters as Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, Justice Clarence Thomas, and now
likely Vice President Sarah Palin.

Source: 2008/09/expertise-by-pr

Title: Expertise by Proximity
Date: September 15, 2008

Regular correspondent Otis Jefferson Brown inquires whether, in lieu of the
precedent by which Sarah Palin claims expertise in foreign affairs because
she can almost see Russian from Alaska, he is now a rocket scientist because,
through his bedroom window, he can, on starry nights, see the moon.

Otis, I'm sorry to say,  does not grasp the precedent.  Of course he's not
a rocket scientist, because he's not educated or practiced in that difficult
field.  However, he is certainly qualified, by the principle of expertise
by proximity, to become the head of NASA, for which position I urge him to
immediately apply, especially if he attended high school with Sarah.

Is each and every Alaskan equally qualified to be Vice President?  Of
course they are, but with a caveat.  Those who live in the western part
of the state are obviously more knowledgeable and are to be preferred to
dwellers in the Alaskan interior.  Eastern Alaskans have not achieved more
significant expertise by proximity than what would prepare them to serve as
trade representative to the Yukon, or perhaps, ambassador to Canada.

Source: 2008/09/what-i-learned

Title: What I Learned in Frackville
Date: September 19, 2008

TV-free for more than three months, we stayed last night at a motel in
Frackville, Pennsylvania and couldn't resist taking a gander at the tube.  I
was shocked to see how artificial and contrived it all seemed.  The actors were
not real people, nor were they actors pretending to be real people.  They were
actors trying but failing to act like real people.  They were, at least to me
last night, no more convincingl than those archaic Egyptian sculptures.

Try this experiment.  Switch on the TV and then surf from channel to channel. 
I guarantee that you'll be able to tell within ten seconds whether the
person you see on the screen is acting in a "daytime drama," a TV series, a
documentary, or a movie.  The style of performance in each of these genres is
so heavily conventionalized that the cues become immediately obvious to the
TV-literate.  (By the word "convention." I mean "an agreed-upon departure from
reality").  Good actors have assimilated these conventions.  When they appear
on screen, they gesture and smile and speak in agreed-upon but unnatural ways.

My new perspective was an artifact of the three-month hiatus.  Temporarily
unfamiliar with the style, all I could see were the conventions at work.  Of
course actors are always faking, but I had stopped seeing it.  In Frackville,
it all became transparent, offensively transparent.  And because it was so
transparent, it wasn't worth my time, especially when a little clicking brought
me to baseball.

I wonder how long my resistance will continue.  Not very many days, I
Iimagine.  'll forget.

Source: 2008/09/road-to-hanniba

Title: Road to Hannibal
Date: September 23, 2008

Stepping westward, we left St. Louis behind and detoured northward to enjoy
scenic Route 79 to Hannibal. Well worth it --lovely, well-cultivated bottom land
and wonderful vistas from the bluffs overlooking the Mississippi.  We toured
Louisiana, an old river town where a handful of century-old mercantile buildings
are hanging on precariously, waiting to be redeployed for modern uses.  I
recommend if, especially for those who are not fazed by a seventy-five mile add-
on to a twenty-four hundred mile jaunt.

While I'm dispensing advice, let me also commend Route 50 between and Bridgeport
and Parkersburg in West Virginia -- another less-well-traveled and very
beautiful highway.

Louisiana, Missouri (unknown to me until today) now enters that small but
distinguished category of cities that are named according to an unusual
template.  Others include Washington, Vermont (and many other states),
Delaware, Ohio  and Delaware, Wyoming and Indiana, Pennsylvania. Related but
Impure:  Kansas City, Missouri; Michigan City, Indiana.

Source: 2008/09/a-scary-flashba

Title: A Scary Flashback
Date: September 26, 2008

I watched a part of the Couric-Palin interview (all I could stand).  For me, it
was a deja vu experience.  Took me back to the days when I examined students
who had missed most of the classes and hadn't done much of the reading but had
the effrontery to see if they could bullshit their way through.  It was all
there:  the repetition of a handful of memorized phrases, the circumlocutions,
the volley of words when an occasional thought entered  the otherwise vacant
brain, the telltale fumbling, the sheer unadulterated bluff.  But as for
Palin's level of analysis -- it wouldn't have earned a C in any class that I
ever taught.  At best, it's at the level required to run for vice president of
the student body in a mediocre high school.

Source: 2008/09/left-right-conf

Title: Left-right Confusion
Date: September 29, 2008

As far as I know, there have been exactly zero scientific studies of directional
dyslexia.  As a consequence, all of our knowledge is anecdotal.  No one can
say for certain whether the condition is inherited or acquired, or whether it's
more (or less) common among women, southpaws, redheads, eastern Europeans,
bad spellers, or chocoholics.  "Common sense" suggests that it might be
associated with right-left confusion, and indeed, a number of the individuals
who've commented on ""People who Lose their Way" indicate that they have
severe problems telling the one hand from the other.  For example:  one
commentator reports that a lifelong problem is that "I've been completely
unable to instinctively tell left from right."  The emphasis on the word
"instinctively" is meaningful.  Without conscious effort, most unaffected
people intuitively and easily understand the difference between right and
left;  for another class, some of them DDers, it's something that must be
learned by effort, as in the case of the reader who thinks her DD is related
to the fact that she "had lots of trouble as a child learning right and left,"
or of another who, learning to dance, can't consistently raise "right hand and
left leg -- or vice versa."  Another non-instinctive person "still doesn't know
my left from my right (I have to put my hands out and see which one makes an
'L).'"  A high school student plaintively confesses that her mom "threatened to
write the words left and right on the back of my hands before I had to take the
test for my driver's license."  It's a frequent complaint:  "I was almost 20
years old before I stopped having to think 'I write with my left hand...  if I
were to pick up a pencil which hand would I hold it in.'"

Is there, then, an association between right-left confusion and directional
dyslexia?

I don't think that the evidence allows us to conclude so.

Most of the people who commented do not mention any such condition.

Perhaps they take it for granted that everyone in the DD community shares the
trait -- but we don't.  Even though I'm among the world's most frequently lost
souls, I have not the slightest bit of trouble with left and right.  In fact,
I'd say that I'm hyperconscious of my handedness as well as the handedness of
others.  I always observe and remember which of my acquaintances are right or
left-handed.  And if someone says, "turn left," I turn left.  Unerringly and
instinctively.

Pending further investigation, the evidence suggests that left-right confusion
is independent of directional dyslexia.  It's a separate problem (and one which
may further disorient those of us who are chronically lost).

Coming soon:  east/west/north/south.

Source: 2008/10/lessons-from-r

Title: Lessons from R. B. Hayes
Date: October 04, 2008

Rutherford B. Hayes, whose biography (by Hans J. Trefousse) I have just read,
was a an intelligent, well-meaning, but not very imaginative president.  It's
a blemish on his record that he compromised his principles and allowed ex-
Confederate leaders in the southern states to install Jim Crow policies that
would take a hundred years to undo.  He should have fought much harder.

Hayes' most famous sentence dates from his 1877 inaugural address: "He serves
his party best who serves his country best."  It's an admirable principle --
and one that that has been thoroughly violated by Mr. Bush and the pack of
clowns and schmegeggies that he has installed to ruin our government.

After Hayes left office, he wandered to the political left.  Although as
president he had intervened to crush the railroad strikes, he later came to
believe (according to Trefousse) that "the taxation system was unfair, taking
a much smaller share of the estates of millionaires than of ordinary people."
"The real difficulty," Hayes wrote, "is that vast wealth and power reside in
the hands of the few and unscrupulous.  Hundreds of laws are in the interest
of these men and against the interest of the workingmen.  Lincoln was for
government of the people.  The new tendency is for government 'of the rich, by
the rich, and for the rich.'"

These are words of remarkable pertinence.  It woult appear that we haven't
moved very far from the mark -- the more shame to us.  If Hayes had said these
same words today, he would not doubt have been accused of fomenting "class
warfare."  (Class warfare: redistributing money from rich to poor.  Normal
state of affair (not class warfare):  taking money from the poor to give to the
rich.)

Source: 2008/10/in-bruges-dont

Title: In Bruges/ Don't Look Now
Date: October 08, 2008

We enjoyed In Bruges for its black humor, its witty profanity, and the
unpredictability of its plot (that is, until the mandatory chase scene).  And
especially for the lovely views of medieval Bruges, an old Hanseatic town.

In Bruges contains a film-within-a-film which is described by Chloe, the
handsome drug dealer and thief, as an imitation or a homage or a 'nod of the
head' toward Don't Look Now, Nicholas Roeg's scary-as-hell Julie Christie-Donald
Sutherland masterpiece.  I've been racking my poor brains, trying to decide
whether there's a meaningful connection between the two films -- or whether the
writer-director Martin McDonagh is just planting red herrings.

Bruges and Venice (where the earlier film is set) are old, architecturally rich,
becanalled towns and both directors make much of their warm civic atmosphere. 
The plots of both films are initiated by the deaths of young children.  In each
film, an important character is a dwarf who is, one case, the perpetrator of
violence and in the other its victim.  That's all that I can come up with at
the moment, so I'm leaning to the red-herring theory. But I'd be interested in
other people's views.

Source: 2008/10/a-while-back-we

Title: Non-Existent Republican Friends
Date: October 10, 2008

Although I'm not a particularly sociable individual, I have friends all over
the U.S and a few in other parts of the planet.  I have friends of various
interests and complexions and ethnicities and ages and of both (or all) the
genders.  Although religion is said to be great divider, and I'm not in any
sense a believer, I have maintained rewarding and intimate relationships with
people who are regular churchgoers -- even with some who are devout beyond
ordinary devotion.  But there's one class of people with whom I share no
friendships -- I have not a single friend who is a Republican.

I don't that think it's merely a question of opportunity or proximity.  I
think that there are such fundamental differences between the way Republicans
and Democrats see the world that it's nearly impossible to create a basis for
friendship between the two groups.  A while back, we traveled to Bulgaria. 
There were some thirty people in the group, who, within a day or two, had
sorted themselves into two distinct clans. In the bus: Repubs together, Dems
together.  In the restaurants, same thing.  Walking, talking, visiting the
museums and archaeological sites -- the same.  It was a clear case of mutual
affinity and mutual repulsion.

There were no overt political discussions, no debates on the issues. What, then,
were the cues to which we (and everyone else) responded?

At heart, I think, It's the difference between those who see the world as
necessarily competitive and those who think that it can be cooperative.  The
crucial sign is the way that people think of money and taxes.  As soon as
someone started to talk about his money, I became wary.  When the same person
complained about his taxes, I knew that he was never going to be my friend.

A Republican responds positively to a candidate who announces that he's going to
let people "keep more of their own money in their own pockets."   The phrase
"your own money" gives me the willies.  I don't think that anyone makes money
on his own -- he makes it because there's an enormous public investment over
many hundreds of years that has created  the opportunity to "make money." 
Our taxes have supported this titanic effort.  I think that the  standard
of living of many Americans -- certainly of those who can afford to travel
to Bulgaria -- is high enough that they can think about improving the living
standard of others,  and stop thinking first of their own pockets.  People who
have enough and yet continue to prioritize their pockets are simply selfish.

It's the difference between a Hobbesian universe -- a war of all against
all -- and a universe in which competition is no more real than altruism. 
 Republican electioneering is designed to appeal to the worser side of human
nature, not the better, the more community-minded side.

Hobbes believed that men were so depraved and competitive that they required
authoritarian government to keep them in check.  Is that why Republicans are
so tolerant of government intrusion into their personal lives?  And why they
profess liberty but continue to fall in love with simplistic heavy-handed
nationalists?

Source: 2008/10/the-libertarian

Title: The Libertarian Universe
Date: October 12, 2008

Out here in the west, social services are administered by the county
commissioners.  At a candidate forum last night, libertarians running for
commissioner opposed a .05% (i.e. a penny on a $20 purchase) extension of
a sales tax that would go to support battered women, the alcohol recovery
facility, mental health, walk-in clinics for the poor, etc.   The libertarian
argument: "charity" should be voluntary.  When the government collects taxes,
it will be elected officials not "the people" who decide which "charity" to
support.

It's a truly grotesque argument.  Of course elected officials (democratically-
elected officials) decide.  Its their job;  we've delegated it to them.  We
elect officials to to decide how to spend all public revenue.  What exactly is
the problem?

Moreover, I know of not a single instance in which a complex society such as
ours has been able to support the less able and less fortunate with strictly
private charity.  It hasn't happened and it's certainly not going to happen
soon.

Is private giving morally superior to public intervention, as the libertarians
assert?  I don't know that it is.  Most of us express our commitment to the
general welfare by paying our share of the burden.

I can only conclude that the libertarians, at least the ones that I heard last
night, live in an alternative and wholly theoretical universe.  They're in
thrall to a foolish and impractical ideology -- one that renders their actions
unintentionally hard-hearted and cruel.

And what makes them so damn angry, intolerant and insulting?

Source: 2008/10/reading-trollop

Title: Reading Trollope
Date: October 19, 2008

I would have thought that there wasn't a novel by Anthony Trollope that I hadn't
read, but browsing the library shelves, I found one that was unfamiliar to
me.  It's a short, late novel called An Eye for an Eye. It dates from 1878
(Trollope, born in 1815, died in 1882.

Trollope wrote forty-seven fluent novels and thoroughly mastered his craft. An
Eye for an Eye reprises familiar motifs, most notably Trollope's favorite
situation of the weak hero torn between private and public callings. Shall it
be love, this time, or shall it be duty? In this particular case, the hero is
young, uncommonly simple Fred Neville, who promises himself to the Irish beauty
Kate O'Hara but also agrees that he will never dishonor the Scroope name (he's
the heir to the Earl of Scroope) by marrying beneath his station. It's a typical
Trollope situation but daring for its time, because Fred impregnates Kate
(when?  between chapters?Although I thought I was reading attentively, I missed
the moment).

Trollope creates an awkward situation, but I'm sorry to say, gets himself and
Fred off the hook by throwing one of the major characters under the metaphorical
bus, so to speak. I don't like it when novelists sidestep the dilemmas that
they create. Trollope clearly admires the aristocratic Scroopes, but either
volitionally or unconsciously (it's hard to say which) manages to persuade his
readers that they're better off giving the upper classes a wide berth.

Trollope was not a learned or innovative thinker, like his greater contemporary
George Eliot, but in his later novels he pushed, a little, against Victorian
prudery.  His last novel, Dr. Wortle's School, which I've recently re-read,
deals with the potentially shocking question of bigamy.

I often wonder why I'm such a Trollope fan. There's so much about him to
dislike: his crude anti-feminism, his condescension to people of other colors
and to non-English nations, his obsessions with class and cash, his disgust
with Jews, his ridiculous worship of horses and hunting, etc. And yet, he tells
a great story, he loves his characters, and his dialogue is always bright and
witty.

Although he is not an author who transcends time and place, Trollope is still
the best writer to investigate of you want to learn about both the strengths and
the weaknesses of nineteenth-century England.

Source: 2008/10/undergraduate-s

Title: Undergraduate Squalor
Date: October 21, 2008

An "orphan precinct" is one that lacks a regular committee and chair. We have
one nearby, and I've been recruited to walk the neighborhood and deliver GOTV
flyers to registered Dems. I'm natively shy and I hate knocking on doors, but
there are votes to be had and lordy-mercy don't we need every single one. The
neighborhood in question is near to the university, high-density, undergraduates
mostly -- 98% of the people on my lists are under 25 years old. But the squalor!
Here are these beautiful old 1910s and 1920s arts and crafts bungalows, or the
remnants of them, and they've been allowed to go to seed, or way past seed --
bricks unpointed, wood unpainted, porches sagging, screen doors ripped and
hanging off.  And then the beer cans, the cigarette butts, the newspapers that
have been decaying in their plastic sleeves for half a year. Garbage strewn
everywhere, foul odors. It's disgusting, an affront to the decent citizenry. Who
are these children?  How can they live in such cisterns of filth?

I was working myself up into quite a fit until I started to think about the
conditions in which I lived when I was in college, back there in the just-
barely-post-diluvian 1950s. I didn't drink alcohol, even then, or smoke
cigarettes, but I lived amongst as much dirt and disorder as any modern
undergraduate could manage. When I concentrate my mind, I remember the floor
of my room littered with every garment I possessed. Every sock and every shirt
grey with dirt, sweat, food droppings. I remember an ancient tattered rug that
was not swept or vacuumed a single time in two consecutive semesters. I remember
a bathtub that was so foul that it was shunned by the roaches. And am I right
(my apartment mate Otis J. Brown might be able to confirm this) that we found
two hundred empty Coke bottles strewn around Terry Cannon's room after he had
cleaned up and moved out. And also that our back stairs were littered with a
thousand dog droppings, around which we maneuvered in and out, not thinking that
such pollution was a circumstance that we might think to remedy.

Is it possible that these degenerate kids are no filthier than their venerable
grandfathers? Gives one pause. Well, who cares, really, just so long as they get
their pathetic drunken butts in gear and vote for Obama.

Incidentally, for anyone who cares: I'm now compulsively neat and cleanly.

Source: 2008/11/an-obsession

Title: An Obsession
Date: November 01, 2008

These last few weeks, I've been reading political news obsessively.  Not
just the NYTimes and the WaPo, but the left-wing blogs as well:  Politico
and Daily Kos and HuffPo and TPM.  I follow the local political gossip on
ColoraoPols.  I check the latest polls on Pollster and 538, searching for
trends and differentials.  Worse still, I'm up in the middle of the night
almost every night:  what's the latest news from North Dakota, Montana,
Florida?  I keep up to date on senatorial and house races all over the country
especially where the red candidate is a horror or is running a particularly
loathsome campaign:  Dole, McConnell, Bachmann, Sununu, etc.  My days (and my
nights) are no longer my own.

I'm not the only one.  Many of my friends are doing the same thing.

Not without reason.  I believe that the republic is at stake.  If McCain/Palin
is elected, I fear for the century and for the country and for the planet.

On days when I do something for the Dems (knock on doors, deliver those flyers
that they presume to call "literature," fold-and-stuff) I sleep better.  But I
won't be at peace until Virginia is in the Democratic column.  Only then will I
breathe easy.  Who knows, maybe I'll be able to get through the night without
logging on to the internet to learn exactly how many points Obama is ahead in PA
according to Gallup and Rasmussen and Harstad and CBS.

I ran into my friend Mike S. a few days ago.  He had just been to the doctor
about his high blood pressure.  While he was all wired up he started chatting
with the nurse about Sarah Palin.  His blood pressure shot up 40 points.

I wonder what's going on with mine.

Source: 2008/11/takacs-geezers

Title: Takacs Geezers
Date: November 04, 2008

At Grusin Music Hall last night to hear the Takacs play Beethoven and Schumann,
always a delight, and also a quartet by Bartok, which is, I'm sorry to say, even
after many exposures is still screechingly hard on my tender ears (except for
the very amusing pizzicato 4th movement).  Perhaps some day I'll "get" Bartok,
but it's been forty years of hard listening and frankly, I'm not there yet. 
I'm still hopelessly stranded in melody, harmony, and rhythm.

Meanwhile the chamber music crowd get older and older.  Anyone with the least
amount of pigment in his/her hair is young;  in fact, anyone without a wheel-
chair, a walker, an oxygen bottle, or a "minder" is young.  Grusin is the place
I take my septuagenarian self in order to feel youthful and vigorous.  I admit
that it's a strategy that doesn't have much of a future, but I'm not thinking
long term.

I think Ed and the Takacses should accommodate to their elderly audience.  For
example, when it comes time for the violin to play solo parts in the highest
register, the notes are barely audible.  It can't just be me having this
problem because half of the geezers in the auditorium have sprouted hearing
aids.  I think that Ed should make an effort to play the high notes a lot
louder.  Or possibly, plug in that near-Strad that he wields so well.  I'm
sure that there's a electronic program designed to amplify the top of the
register.

On the other hand, If the Takacs wants to attract a younger audience, there
are some changes they might make.  For one thing, it's time to give up on the
all- black tuxes.  Why must they all dress like Johnny Cash?  Sequins would
be good, or anything glittery.  And those shiny black shoes in an age when
footwear has become plastic and colorful?  What's with that?  And how about a
little chest hair (or in the case of Gerri the violist, a little bosom)? Bring
that Broncos/Buffs/Coors crowd to Grusin!! A new generation of Brahmsophiles. 
And why must they just sit there like lumps when they could move around the
stage a bit.  An occasional dance step.  Slap that cello, swing those violins
from side to side.

Lots of room for exciting innovations in the world of the classical string
quartet.

Source: 2008/11/my-day

Title: My Day
Date: November 05, 2008

My election day was much like that of many Americans, I betcha. In the morning,
out walking the neighboring precincts, to knock on doors and rouse up the
occasional procrastinator. I was greeted for the most part by enthusiastic
thumbs-up Obama voters but also by apologetic laggards whom I forced to swear
holy oaths that they would hustle down to the polling place "right now." I
encountered one sour young woman who told me that she was so tired of being
urged to vote that she was sorry that she had voted. I was on good behavior and
did not respond that there was a lot more at stake than her convenience. Later
in the day, after the mandatory septuagenarian nap, I talked with a candidate
for county commissioner and together we made a last check of the polls. Then
to a downtown restaurant where partisans had gathered to await the results. I
was nervous as a cat when at first Virginia showed up in the red column and
I couldn't relax until Ohio came in blue. Then, moderately joyful, off to a
friend's house to watch the long parade of blue states. Lots of shouting and
applause. At last the polls closed on the California coast and the US was once
gain in the care of a person with brains, education, and values that I could
recognize. Then home to watch McCain gracefully concede and Obama accept. Broken
sleep, but this morning up early to search the archives for the flag and the
flagpole. Right now Old Glory, looking might relieved and cheerful, is flying
above all the Obama/Biden and Dem yard signs. A great lift to the world's
spirits, and to mine.

Source: 2008/11/latter-day-conf

Title: Latter-Day Confederacy
Date: November 06, 2008

The Republicans have voluntarily transformed themselves into a regional and
agrarian party. If the Democrats play it as it lays, they have the opportunity
to create a permanent Democratic majority -- permanent into the foreseeable
future, that is.

McCain was the candidate of a geographical region, not of the nation. How
many votes did the Arizona Jekyll/Hyde senator win that were outside of the
old Confederacy (reminder: the Confederate States of America were, in order
of their secession, South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee. The "border
states" of Missouri and Kentucky did not legally secede but were allied with
the Confederacy)? These states constitute the heart of McCain's support. Of his
162 electoral votes, 113 came from the southern pocket.  he rest came from the
otherworldly Mormon states of Utah and Idaho (9 votes) and from impoverished
agrarian states, many of them suffering from declining populations, such as the
Dakotas, Nebraska, Kansas, and Montana. In the entire country, the only areas
where McCain in 2008 ran ahead of Bush in 2004 were some of the all-white rural
counties in the old confederacy and Oklahoma and an occasional retrograde county
in undeveloped western Pennsylvania and West Virginia. If anyone in America
found Palinity appealing, it was people in the poorest, least educated parts of
the continent  -- and also in the atypical Alaskan kleptocracy.

The Democrats made inroads into the new old south because northern Virginia's
Washington suburbs and the research triangle area of North Carolina have joined
the new century, and because Florida is a haven for northeastern migrants.

The Democrats are the party of the future: multicultural, educated,
international, young, high-tech, entrepreneurial, secular. The Republicans are
the part of the past:  geriatric, racist, melanin-deprived, Bible-thumping,
rural, poor, less well educated. Their day is over and gone.

The "pundints" (as McCain calls them) want Obama to govern from the middle. I
agree, except that I think that he should govern from the middle of New York,
New England, the upper middle west, and the far west -- not a middle somewhere
between Virginia and Mississippi. Obama should make an effort to educate the
denizens of the American backwater, but if it's necessary to drag them kicking
and screaming into the 21st century, then so  be it. But the United States
of America can no longer allow itself to be shackled to a mean, recalcitrant,
atavistic, pre-Darwinian southland.

It's not longer red state versus blue state. It's all blue except where it's all
white.

Source: 2008/11/obama-and-numbe

Title: Number 44 and Number 42
Date: November 10, 2008

I'm jubilant that, come January 20, we'll once again have a president whose
brain waves are dancing, who can bring an English sentence to completion, and
who understands that America consists of much more than the Bushian roster of
Fortune 500 executives, evangelicals, know-nothings, high school dropouts,
gay- bashers, neocon imperialists, dittoheads, gun nuts, military contractors,
upward redistributionists, fetus-worshipers and health insurance profiteers.
The new president will abandon the present system of government (trust the
market -- capitalism is always right!) and return us to the world of evidence
and reason. Quite the revolution, isn't it?  And speaking of revolutions,
the new president, if you haven't heard, is black (or to be more accurate,
black-and-white, which is this country still means, in defiance of all logic,
black). How splendid to bury a long-standing racial taboo. Nothing makes me
prouder than that we've elected an African-American, Kenyan-Kansan president.
With a brain.

The election of Barack Obama brought me back to hometown Brooklyn of sixty-one
years ago. I was eight years old on April 15, 1947, when Jackie Robinson "broke
the color barrier." It was Jackie on first or Jackie running the bases that
alerted me to the idea that I lived in a conflict-riven society. We (family,
friends, neighbors, writers for the Brooklyn Eagle) were enthusiastic about
Jackie, but there were those reactionaries and bigots in other cities who were
convinced that their world had just come to an end. No question but that the
advent of Jackie Robinson was the major formative political experience of my
early childhood -- even though it was decades before I could fully appreciate
its cosmic significance.

In my mind, and I think in the minds of others of my generation, there's a
direct line from Jack Roosevelt Robinson to Barack Hussein Obama. Two smart,
skilled performers; two ferocious but very cool competitors. Two very courageous
gentlemen.Two barriers busted all to smithereens.Two milestones in American
history. Never the latter if hadn't hadn't been for the former.

Jackie's fabulously athletic body fell apart early and he died young of
diabetes. He was born in 1918, and if he had been blessed with longevity, he
would have been ninety years old today.

Wouldn't that have been a pretty picture -- Jackie Robinson, frail, gray,
stooped, leaning on his cane, but still in possession of that marvelous knowing
glint in his coal black eyes, sitting right there on the platform in front of
the United States Capitol, a tear on his cheek while Barack Obama holds up his
hand and swears to protect and defend the constitution of the United States of
America. I see it oh so clearly in my mind's eye. It gladdens my fond old heart.

Source: 2008/11/up-in-the-sky-e

Title: Up in the Sky, Ever So High
Date: November 16, 2008

Today's essaylet is being composed thirty thousand miles above ground, somewhere
over, it appears from up here, Utah. I'm flying on Southwest Airlines, the
Trailways of the sky -- no frills, no food, no nothing. No passengers to speak
of, either. Big ol' three-quarter-empty jet plane. "Nobody's flying nowadays," a
stewardess told me. Chalk up another one for W.

Air travel was in its florid adolescence when I was a boy. Propeller-driven
planes flew over Flatbush every two minutes on their way to Idlewild (latterly
JFK). But not with me or anyone I knew on board. I can't imagine who traveled
by plane in those days -- probably only the Filthy Rich, certainly no one
from the old neighborhood. In the late 1950s, I remember hearing rumors that
there were Cornell undergraduates so wealthy that they regularly made the
journey from NYC to Ithaca in the air (while I crawled upstate on a smelly
Greyhound that left the Port Authority at midnight and made "rest stops" at East
Stroudsburg, Scranton and somewhere in the southern tier before arriving on
Aurora Street at 8 in the morning). My very first airline flight (it was on an
expense account) took place in 1960 on a 12-passenger Mohawk from Ithaca to NYC.
I was one wide- eyed gawker, let me tell you. There were very few flights for
me during the 60s but by the 70s, I was more prosperous and air travel became
semi-routine. Airlines had once been an upper-class preserve, and there was
still some leftover graciousness, especially on the long haul to Europe. Menus
and decent food and complimentary wine. But little by little, flights became
more expensive and less elegant. Is it my imagination or have they magically
shrunk the size of the seat? I recall a particularly bad run of luck when I was
routinely placed in a middle seat, surrounded on both sides by plump widestance
armrest-hogging smokers.

The extinction of the cigarette is a plus, but it's hard to think of another
improvement. Nothing to look forward to air-travel-wise but "consolidation,"
fewer flights, smaller seats, negative frills, and grubbier planes. The great
age of the airplane has gone the way of the steamship and the railroad. No more
dress up, no more glamor. Just as well, I think, or would be if the decline of
service were reflected in a decline of prices.

There's no first class on Southwest  -- although what would it matter to me?
I never once sat in a first-class seat -- not a single time. In fact, in all
honesty I must admit that I indulge a bit of class resentment that there should
be any distinction of classes. Although I wouldn't mind if someone offered
me something more gracious than one of those nasty mini-bags of over-salted
pretzels -- the kind  you have to be an experienced safe cracker to break into.

Source: 2008/11/my-henry-james

Title: My Henry James Problem
Date: November 20, 2008

I'm reading, or re-reading (what does it matter when it's been fifty years
since the last go-around) Henry James' The Wings of the Dove. Once again, I'm
variously stimulated, frustrated and infuriated. Has there ever been a writer
who cries out to be parodied more than does Hank the J? Try to resist the
impulse to make fun house mirrors of this representative, convoluted sentence.

"Her welcome, her frankness, sweetness, sadness, brightness, her disconcerting
poetry, as he made shift at moments to call it, helped as it was by the beauty
of her whole setting and by the perception at the same time, on the observer's
part, that this element gained from her, in a manner, for effect and harmony,
as much as it gave -- her whole attitude had, to his imagination, meanings that
hung about it, waiting upon her, hovering dropping and quavering forth again,
like vague faint snatches, mere ghosts of sound, of old-fashioned melancholy
music."

Let me guess that most of Dr. M.'s loyal readers did not finish reading the
quoted bit. They made a good faith attempt at the first few words, then
whistled, threw up their metaphorical hands, and surrendered. Or if they did
get all the way to the end of the sentence, they were certainly puzzled as to
whether they had fully deciphered the Jamesian code. It's not that the sentence
has no meaning, but is it worth a reader's time to parse and disentangle its
many syntactic knots? Now, dear friends, just Imagine 539 small-print pages
of prose, every paragraph on every page loaded with similar abstractions,
assertions, modifications, withdrawals, subordinations, and equivocations. It's
taxing. James takes it out of you, wears you down.

And therefore let me confess that a big chunk of my Henry James problem is that
it's so damn hard to keep the ol' eye on the ball when every sentence is so
laborious to construe. In most novels, readers are pulled along by the plot.
You might have trouble "getting into it," but once you do, your attention is
galvanized and you start to sail. In the case of HJ, there's very little plot,
very little in the way of story. It's all hyper-subtle character analysis and
teasing conversation. I can't speak for every reader, but I must admit that,
while reading Wings, my mind frequently took flight. I regularly had to forcibly
snap myself back to attention. It's anything but effortless to stay with the
Jamester.

But let me return to the exemplary sentence that I quoted above. The two key
words are "poetry' (line 1) and "meanings" (line 5).  To paraphrase: she (i.e.
James's character Millie Theale) has "poetry" and the situation has "meanings."
Underneath all the wobbly circumlocutions, that's kind of it.

But neither of these two crucial nouns gives much away. What sort of poetry
does Millie 'have,' you might ask?' What particular 'meanings' inhere in the
situation? I myself want --crave, in fact -- further definition and explication.
That's the novelist's job. If he wants to keep me happy and focused, he has to
provide considerably more specificity that HJames deigns to supply. Words such
as "poetry" and "meanings" don't constrain a reader;  rather, they are empty
vessels into which I, or any other reader, can pour a variety of significations.
The reader, i.e. me, is simply asked to do far too much of the work. I resent
it, some of the time.

Which takes me back to where I came in, in the 50s and 60s, when James was the
king of the American canon -- or at least he was very much the boss in the Large
Eastern University where I was a graduate student in literature. I don't know
how my ever-so-civilized teachers managed it, but to appreciate and understand
Henry James was framed not as a test of the author's creative skill, but as
a test of the reader's sensitivity. James, it was confidently and regularly
asserted, was subtle, delicate, loaded to the gills with the most exquisite
sensibility. Did I, a kid from Coney Island Avenue, possess the sophistication,
the tact, the sensitivity to grasp James superfine insights and his characters'
inclinations and velleities?

You know what? I didn't.I failed the test.

James portrays a world to which I could not easily relate. No one in Wings of
a Dove works for living.The characters all live off their incomes, derived who
knows how? When HJ has to bring two characters together, he has two choices and
two choices only -- a dinner party or a chance encounter at a museum. Action? 
Yes, the characters travel from one resort city to another. I'm exaggerating
just the tiniest bit. There is one character in Wings who has an occupation.
Although we never see him at work, Merton Densher is a journalist. Which is
precisely his problem. How can he be a suitable mate for Kate Croy if he has a
job? How shockingly vulgar!

It was a chore to take James seriously, especially in 1960 and especially
for someone of my background. But then, not to take James seriously, not to
understand him, was presumed to disqualify a guy from the serious study of
literature. Which turned out not to be the case.

But I'm glad to say that I persevered with Wings. If I hadn't, I never would
have re-read the infinitely splendid, magnificently tawdry piece of dialogue
between Densher and Croy that brings Book 8 to a conclusion -- a conversation
that's as well done as anything in English since WS lay down his quill in 1613.

Coming soon to these pages: my Marcel Proust problem. Hint: way worse than my
James problem.

Source: 2008/11/overheard-conve

Title: Overheard Conversation
Date: November 30, 2008

A long weekend in Santa Fe, New Mexico -- a handsome small city. I don't know
of another place in the nation in which the principal economic engine is the
making and selling of arts and crafts.  I myself am in the familiar situation:
anything I can afford, I don't want, and anything I want, I can't afford.
Besides, we're in de-accessioning mode -- a condition which doesn't prevent
us from appreciating the astonishingly high level of artistic achievement on
display here. Fortunately, there's no cost to hiking in the nearby mountains
-- we went to Bandelier National Monument to gasp at the spectacular rock
formations and marvel at the Anasazi cliff dwellings. A most enjoyable and
worthwhile expedition. The guidebook says that Santa Fe is the product of the
melding of three cultures: Native American, Hispanic, and Anglo. I guess, by
default, I must be an "Anglo." It's odd to be an Anglo, but not as disorienting
as my experience in Salt Lake City, where, as a non-Mormon, I was considered to
be a "gentile."

At breakfast in the hotel, a man at the table next to me told the following
story to his friends (I was alone at the moment, pretending to inspect the
complimentary USA Today).  "A Hindu, a Jew, and a Republican are driving in a
storm. The car breaks down, they walk to an isolated farmhouse and ask the owner
if they can stay the night. 'Sure,' he says, 'but I have only two beds. One of
you will have to sleep in the barn.' "'No problem,' says the Hindu, 'I don't
mind sleeping in the barn.'  But after a half hour, there's knock on the door,
and the Hindu says, 'There's a cow in the barn. Cows are sacred. I can't sleep
with a cow.' So the Jew says, "Don't worry. I'll sleep in the barn." But after a
half hour, there's a knock on the door, and the Jew says, 'There's a pig in the
barn. I can't sleep with a pig.' So the Republican says, 'Don't worry, I'll go
sleep in the barn.' But after a half hour, there's a knock on the door. It's the
cow and the pig."

Actual dialog, captured in the wild.

Source: 2008/12/basketball-an-4

Title: BASKETBALL ANNOUNCER EXHIBITS PROFOUND IGNORANCE OF BIBLE
Date: December 04, 2008

I watched the Nuggets beat the living whatchamacallit out of the Toronto
Raptors. Actually, I didn't watch the entire game -- it was a gruesome mismatch.
I can endure only so much garbage time at a single sitting. The high point,
for me, was a comment by one of our home team announcers (I'll not reveal his
name). Toronto has a reserve point guard named Willie Solomon, who acquired the
nickname "King Solomon" when he played for Maccabi Tel Aviv in 2005. "Must be a
reference to the movie," suggested our announcer.

I'm guessing that he means King Solomon's Mines.

Well, no one ever suggested that we consult TV announcers for knowledge of
scripture.

Source: 2008/12/its-been-a-long

Title: It's Been a Long Time Coming
Date: December 08, 2008

I'm enchanted that our new president chose to cite -- or "sample" as they say
in the world of pop music -- one of my favorite, and one of the most important
of the songs of the 1960s. Here's the borrowed sentiment, delivered in Chicago
on November 4, just after Obama cleared the electoral hurdle: "It's been a long
time coming, but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in this election,
at this defining moment, change has come to America." The big O's citation is to
the refrain of Sam Cooke's great anthem, "A Change is Gonna Come": "It's been a
long time coming/ But I know a change gonna come, oh yes it will."

Those who know their Sam Cooke will appreciate Obama's sentence. To the Cooke-
innocent, the "change" is a new administration and new policies. To the Cooke-
knowledgeable, the "change" to which Obama refers is a tectonic shift in
American racial politics.

So I'm reproducing Sam Cooke's lyric right here.  If you're one of my coevals,
you probably know the song by heart. If you don't know it, you should. If you're
curious, you can see and hear Sam and Otis Redding and a host of others sing the
song on You Tube. Here's the lyric.  It's one great, inspiring song.

"I was born by the river in a little tent

And just like the river I've been running ever since.

It's been a long time coming.

But I know a change is gonna come.

It's been too hard living, and I'm afraid to die.

I don't know what's up there, beyond the sky.

(refrain)

I go to the movie and I go downtown

Somebody keep telling me, don't hang around.

(refrain)

I go to my brother, I say help me please,

But he winds up knocking me down on my bended knees.

(refrain)

There's been times that I thought I couldn't last long,

But now I think I'm able to carry on.

It's been a long time coming,

But I know a change is gonna come, o yes it will."

Talk about the ability to say a lot in a little.  O yeah!

Source: 2008/12/more-on-sam-coo

Title: More on Sam Cooke
Date: December 08, 2008

Sam Cooke's "A Change is Gonna Come" condenses centuries of tangled racial
strife into a brief lyric. The song begins in rural, impoverished, perhaps
southern, America: "I was born by the river, in a little tent."  Then, with
a glance at the old man river who just keeps rolling, it alludes to African-
Americans as on-the-lam outsiders: "Just like the river, I've been running
ever since."  The third stanza, now shifted to an urban location, refers
specifically to the insult of segregation (shortly before writing the song,
Cooke had been barred from a Shreveport hotel): "I go to the movies and I go
downtown;/ Somebody keep telling me, don't hang around." The second stanza
is surprisingly confessional for a man who had started his career in gospel
and had sung lead for the Soul Stirrers;  it's about loss of faith. "I don't
know what's up there, beyond the sky." Nevertheless, despite all the reasons
for losing heart, including the lack of support from brothers of different
political factions, Sam retains an uncompromisIng optimism: he will "carry on,
yes I will." The song is a miniature allegory of a triumph over separation and
persecution. It celebrates endurance, perseverance, fortitude in the face of
long odds.No wonder that Barack Obama adapted Cooke's affirmative "Yes I will"
into "Yes we can."

Sam Cooke himself didn't get to the promised land; he was shot, under
"mysterious circumstances" in December of 1964. "A Change is Gonna Come" was
released posthumously.

Source: 2008/12/i-dream-of-geor

Title: "I Dream of Georgie with a Whole Lot of Shoes."
Date: December 15, 2008

Just before pulling the blankets over me, I watched (via You Tube) the Iraqi
journalist wing not one but both his shoes at the Duck Most Lame. Not much of an
arm, I thought, but a symbolic act of courage nevertheless. A few hours later,
waking from troubled sleep, I realized that my dreamatorium had been working
overtime. I had imagined a White House press conference where at a signal all
the correspondents, led by Helen Thomas herself, unzip, untie, unvelcro and hurl
whatever was on their feet at the Great Incompetent. He weaves and bobs, takes
one on the shoulder.  Everyone is on board but Fox, whose "correspondents" lace
up even tighter. Next  thing you know, regular citizens start packaging pairs
of old shoes and mailing them to "W, The White House, 1600 Pennsylvania." Huge
mounds of shoes fill a nearby warehouse; the secret service refuses to estimate
the total but reporters guess fifty cubic yards. Someone creates a Facebook
application "One Million Strong to Hurl Shoes at George W."  Everyone visiting
El Lamo is now asked to remove shoes before meeting with him; but then, what
do you know, people start throwing their smelly socks. I dreamed of political
buttons: "I'm Shoeless for George." And songs: "I Threw A Shoe at You Know
Who."  A website springs into existence: send ten dollars from anywhere in the
world and we'll leave a pair of old shoes at the front gate of the White House.
It's a democratic movement: all shoes are equal. Sneakers, loafers, Blahniks,
boots, moccasins, babouches, buskins, pattens, galoshes, scarpines, clogs, air
georges. A protest movement with real soul.

Source: 2008/12/carrots-etc

Title: Carrots, etc.
Date: December 18, 2008

I've experimented a bit in with flowers but in my choice of vegetables I've been
quite conservative. My garden has always relied upon the standards: black-seeded
Simpson lettuce, Detroit red beets, Danvers carrots, Waltham 29 broccoli.
But now I've decided to take a walk on the wild side  In today's mail came
my brand- new heirloom and rare seed catalog. (Is there anything that more
brightens a cold December morn than the colorful garden catalog that arrives
in the mailbox at winter solstice?)  Consider the lowly carrot, for example.
Here are some of the possible choices for next year's adventure garden: the
12" long red-orange St. Valery, dating from the 19th century; Lunar Whites --
"white carrots were grown during the Middle Ages but now rare";  Cosmic Purple
-- a dark variety, loaded with lycopene; Parisienne -- "small round carrots
popular in France"; Chantenay Red Core -- "a large stump-rooted carrot with a
deep red-orange center" dating from 1929; the "mild and sweet" Shin Kuroda,
a Japanese variety. And twenty other equally entrancing varieties. How to
choose?  I have room for twenty feet of carrots. Just enough for one variety,
or possibly, if I push it, two.

What about tomatoes, the king of all summer vegetables, but an uncontrollable
plant that turns itself into a jungle come August. Nine pages of varieties --
greens, yellows, pinks, reds, purples in various sizes from cherry to plum to
2-pounders; some of them mottled, others striped, round, cylindrical, and every
one of  them claiming to offer old-fashioned sweet/acid tomato taste. How many
can I possibly plant?  However few, I know I'll be imploring my friends take
some, please, with you when you leave. Old Vermont saying:  "always keep your
car locked in August, otherwise someone will open your door and throw in a bunch
of zucchinis." Or tomatoes.Which brings me to the nine pages of exciting squash,
including the Hopi Cushaw and the Pink Banana and the... well, you can see my
dilemma.

Source: 2008/12/mynewcareeriii

Title: My New Career - III
Date: December 21, 2008

This blague's enthusiastic readers are well aware that each year for the
last two, Dr. M. has made himself available for the NBA draft, but that not
a single team has selected him, even the lowly, strife-ridden Knicks. It's
incomprehensible, but true. Why are these GMs so unadventurous?

As a consequence of being overlooked, I'm developing an entirely new marketing
strategy this year. I'm no longer going to sit at home waiting for the telephone
to ring. Heck, no!  I'm going to advertise my skills by competing in the
dunking contest.

I've developed three imaginative new dunks, any one of which could carry the
day and get me the attention I require.

The first is a variation of "making change." I drive to the basket, leap into
the air with a basketball in my left hand. With the right hand,  I leave
a quarter on the top of the backboard and take down the dime that's been
previously placed there.With the left hand, I gracefully drop the ball through
the net.

My second dunk. I have a ball in each hand and put another one under my shirt.
I spring, dunk both basketballs authoritatively and successively, then grab the
third one and throw it high into the air. I land right under the backboard, and
then, without pause, immediately spring into the air again and power that third
one through just as it comes down into the cylinder.

I've perfected these two moves, which, I can say without bragging, are far more
interesting than anything I saw in the contest last year. To be absolutely
honest, so far I've only done them with six-foot rim and with those mini-
basketballs that they sometime distribute free during the second half timeouts.
Not to worry -- I'm working on it every day and in a couple of weeks I'll be
ready for the standard rim and full-sized basketball. There's still plenty of
time before All-Star Weekend.

My third dunk is even more extraordinary. I start at the far basket and do a
series of back handsprings and back flips across the floor. Then, as I approach
the target basket, I pick up a basketball between my ankles, and with one final
back flip -- in which my feet are actually above the level of the rim -- I slam
that sucker home. It's going to be something spectacular to watch, I guarantee,
just a soon as I work out a few kinks in the execution.

Source: 2008/12/nightmare-made-worse-by-critique

Title: Nightmare Made Worse by Critique
Date: December 27, 2008

Last night -- another horrible dream. I was riding in the passenger car of an
old-fashioned railroad and there was this big puffy guy, a smaller version of
Oliver Hardy, who was brandishing a pistol. He was about to take hostages and
shoot us folks. I grabbed his gun arm and wrestled him to the floor, but he was
mighty strong. I called out to the other passengers, "Help me!"  Eventually, a
couple of people came to my aid and started to twist his arm. Then I yelled out,
"Hit him!" and a couple of people started to bang his head with books. Heavy
books. Then I shouted "Kick him!" and a crowd gathered and started in with their
feet. After a while, I realized that the gangster/terrorist/kidnapper was dead,
but I continued to punch to and kick him. I woke up with my heart beating 180 or
so.

It took a while to regain my equanimity, but it wasn't long before I returned to
sleep. I dreamed that I was reporting the dream to my daughter and son-in-law
and that they were totally uninterested and bored by my story. Which I took to
be a critique of my ability with narrative.

So if I tell any more dreams, I'll abbreviate (as I did above, where I left out
all sorts of interesting details) for fear of alienating my audience.

Source: 2008/12/can-you-believe-it

Title: Can You Believe It?
Date: December 29, 2008

And now a brief quiz for Metablogian readers who are familiar
with nineteenth- century fiction. I will describe the situation and quote a
short excerpt, and you will be required to identify the novelist. Ready? 
Let's go. Here's the story: a clergyman considers whether to commit a
murder.  Although he takes no concrete action, he's overcome with guilt about
what might have been. Here's a sample of his extensive, tortured musings.

He struggled to drive from his mind and from his eyes the phantom of the
terrible deed but that he did not succeed was made evident to himself by the hot
clammy drops of sweat which came out upon his brow, by his wakefulness through
the livelong night, by the care with which his ears watched for the sound of
the young man's coming as though it were necessary that he should be assured
that the murder had in truth not been done.  Before that hour had come he found
himself to be shaking even in his bed; to be drawing the clothes around him to
dispel the icy cold, though the sweat did still stand upon his brow;  to be
hiding his eyes under the bedclothes in order that he might not see something
which seemed to be visible to him through the utmost darkness of the chamber.
Why then, could he not sleep?  Why should he be hot and shiver with cold by
turns? Why should horrid phantoms perplex him in the dark?

And the correct answer is?  Obviously, it's Russian anguish, the novelist is
Fyodor Doestoevsky and the passage is from Crime and Punishment.

Except that it's not. Surprise. It's Anthony Trollope, master of manners,
anthropologist of English civilization. The character who is described is not
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, but Thomas Greenwood, D. D.; the novel is Marion
Fay and the year is 1882. (Crime and Punishment appeared in Russian in 1866,
in English in 1914).

In Dostoevsky's novel, Raskolnikov does the deed right at the outset. There's
no murder at all in Marion Fay. As is common in Trollope's last novels, there's
a flirtation with boundary-breaking (bigamy in Dr. Wortle's School, premarital
sex in An Eye for an Eye, interclass marriage in this particular novel), but
there's also a withdrawal or hesitation.

Marion Fay would have been quite something if Trollope hadn't lost his nerve
and had let Greenwood pull the trigger.

It would have been an even stronger piece of fiction if Lord Hampstead had
actually married the low-born tubercular Quaker lass and if Hampstead's sister
Frances had married the Post Office clerk George Roden before, not after, it was
discovered that he was an Italian Duke by birth. But Trollope drew back from
the dilemmas he created, alas and alack, and as a result there is no  English
parallel to Dostoevsky's radicalism. More's the pity.