

================================================================================Source: 2022/01/paule-marshall

Title: Novels about Brooklyn: Brown Girl, Brownstones (1959)
Date: January 01, 2022

Well, one might ask, how goes the reading-Brooklyn-novels project?

I've been taken by surprise. Solely by the luck of the draw, just because the
books were available at the public library, and without planning or intention on
my part, my first three novels all had the same focus: coming-of-age-as-a-girl-
in-Brooklyn. First, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (TGB) about a Irish-German girl in
the period around WWI, then Another Brooklyn (AB) about a Black or African-
American girl in 1970s Bushwick, and yesterday, Brown Girl, Brownstones (BG,B)
by Paule Marshall, written in 1959 but neglected and then rediscovered during
the 1970s. BG,B focuses on young Selina Boyce, daughter of immigrants from
Barbados, who was raised in a West Indian neighborhood somewhere between Fulton
Avenue and Crown Heights.

The three novels, and their three heroines, share common concerns. In all three,
an intelligent young girl, a reader, tries to achieve selfhood in a challenging
environment. The young girls come from families that are led by strong mothers
and are compromised by weak, failing fathers. Religions (Catholicism in TGB,
Nation of Islam in AB, and a dictatorial new religion led by "Father Peace,"
whom I take to be Father Divine, in BG,B) are unhelpful and damaging.

Today's novel, Brown Girl, Brownstones is the most detailed, informative, and
moving of the trio. It's a substantial, rich, highly-detailed, and I would say
old-fashioned novel about self-discovery. It used to be said that "every modern
writer's first novel should be titled "my horrible adolescence.'" But BG,B is
more complicated than the stereotype. It's an "immigration novel" about the
conflicts between the foreign-born parents and the Brooklyn-born daughter. It's
also a story of regional interest, very strong in depicting the peculiarities of
Brooklyn culture.

Barbadian-Americans are depicted as an entrepreneurial class, upwardly mobile,
anxious to get ahead. The first step is to acquire a brownstone and become a
landlord rather than a tenant. And yet young Selina rejects her aspiring mother,
whom she sees as hopelessly materialistic. She fears the success of a move to
the boring suburbs -- a familiar 1950s theme.

BG,B is a novel about race, and, in my opinion, hits its stride in the last few
chapters when Paule Marshall analyzes bigotry. There are a few pages that either
anticipate or follow the powerful critiques of James Baldwin and Frantz Fanon.
And Richard Wright. I suspect that it's such pages that helped bring deserved
attention to Brown Girl, Brownstones.

Source: 2022/01/paula-fox

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  Desperate Characters (1970)
Date: January 06, 2022

Paula Fox's Desperate Characters feels to me less like a novel than a short
story, or perhaps a set of short stories sutured together. It's comprised of a
series of incidents that concern a married couple and like many fictions in the
short story genre, resists closure or resolution. Though it's a miniature of a
novel, it's still a gem.

The principal characters, Otto and Sophie, come to the end of the story just
about where they started -- not miserable but not happy either. They are
immigrants to an incompletely gentrified, downtown Brooklyn neighborhood.
Their house -- all pocket doors, cedar floors, highly polished Victorian
furniture even a Meissen cat dish -- as well as the houses of their neighbors
are vulnerable to violation. Otto and Sophie, and their friends, are attacked
by the sort of intrusions that are familiar from horror films -- the bite of a
stray cat, a threatening phone call, a stone thrown through a window, unwanted
visitors, vicious inexplicable vandalism, mysterious goings-on in the house next
door. These attacks on the home are intermittent but unending; in fact, the last
image in the book is of a self-inflicted wound -- an interior wall splotched and
stained by the black ink of a thrown inkwell. Stasis, not progress.

Should I have been surprised that the Brooklyn novels that I have now read are
so concerned with the acquisition, improvement, integrity, and preservation of
the homestead?

To tell truth, I have been a bit startled -- but I should not have been.
Brooklyn has always been the most mutable and fluid of cities. Outsiders --
Irish, Italians and Jews in my part of Flatbush, as well as southern Blacks
searching for the warmth of other suns, West Indians, Russians, Hispanics from
central and south Americas, Asians of all varieties, and nowadays midWesterners
-- arrive and alter the neighborhood. For the worse, according to the prior
inhabitants, and for the better, according to the new arrivals. It's a repeated
and perpetual dance -- and certainly one that was a feature of my own family
history.

My immigrant grandparents never had the resources even to imagine the purchase
of a home. They were renters of a cold-water sixth-floor walkup in Williamsburg.
Nor had they owned property in the old country, where they were even poorer.
I imagine that when my parents purchased the house in which I was raised (in
1936, for $4500) they were the first in my ancestry dating back to the spear and
atalatl eons ever to own a piece of real estate.

Re-reading these Brooklyn books has reminded me how important that home on
East 9 Street in heart of  Flatbush was to my parents. And why my father, in
his last years, solitary, crippled by arthritis, but intransigent refused to
leave it though it would have been much more sensible and convenient to live
elsewhere. He was determined to die in his own precious home, and he did so.

Here's a picture of 539 East 9 Street, a big old undistinguished Victorian,
taken sometime around the 1939, the year of my birth. The second and third
stories were rented; we lived on the ground floor. The house, long since
demolished, lives on in my memory.

Especially in my nightmares, where at least once a month, I defend myself
against the savage bows and arrows, the cavalry rifles, and wild dogs that
attack the property.  And wake up in a sweaty terror.

Source: 2022/01/elephant-paintings

Title: Art, Elephants
Date: January 09, 2022

Here's a photograph of a "work of art" that has adorned the lobby of the
condominium in which I've lived since 2009. It is unsigned -- the creator hasn't
been courageous enough to inscribe his/her name. I think it's a ridiculously
ugly smear, and In the privacy of my aggrieved mind, I attribute it to a
painter-of-my-imagination whom I call Fango Nero (Italian for "black mud"). I
conceive Fango Nero to be an innovator in the sense that he employs not brush
or palette knife but rather a standard Home Depot 6" paint roller. I don't
find fault with Signore Nero for leaving his painting unnamed and unsigned.
It's a wise choice on his part. After all, the set of smudges is a patently
disgraceful, reprehensible piece of trash that has no business masquerading
as art or being affixed to anyone's walls, let alone mine. I don't know what
prompted the architects or the contractors of this building to purchase this
thing and hang it in my lobby. Perhaps it was bequeathed to them, or possibly
they were supporting a needy uncle.

So many accomplished artists in this world and I must be afflicted with these
splotches! What a waste of space!

That's what used to think, these last twelve years --  until I had a sudden
epiphany.

This painting is not the work of my imaginary painter Fango Nero, or any human
being. No, not at all. It's got to be the production of a talented elephant.

Some of my readers will have seen videos of elephants painting. If the professor
of art or the mahout offers an artistically-inclined elephant paint and brush,
by golly, he or she will grasp the brush handle with the ever-useful trunk and
create you something in the abstract impressionist line.

Here is a genuine pachydermal production.  (I'm not aware of the name of the
particular artisit.)

It's quite a bit more interesting than my black and white paint roller job, is
it not? I like the cheerful interplay of the two well-chosen colors and the way
that the long pink lines, almost imprisoned by the green, suggest both freedom
and delight. A superior production! It would be a greater pleasure by far to
encounter this canvas several times a day than the muddy black one that ambushes
me every time I pass through the lobby.

The bottom line: Fango bad, Dumbo good.

Source: 2022/01/daniel-fuchs-1

Title: More Brooklyn Novels: Summer in Williamsburg (1934)
Date: January 13, 2022

Daniel Fuchs was known to me only as the writer of the screenplay of Criss-
Cross, a noir that epitomizes "gritty."  Or perhaps grimy. I was not aware
that Fuchs  began his writing career with three Brooklyn novels, the first of
which is Summer in Williamsburg. It's a novel that hits home, because Fuchs was
born in 1909 and grew up in exactly the same part of Brooklyn, and in the same
circumstances, as did my father, who was born there in 1904.

The novel comprises a single summer of tenement life and it's not optimistic
or cheerful: "people in tenements lived in a circle without significance, one
day the duplicate of the next until the end, which occurred without meaning but
accidentally." Fuchs' Williamsburg is filled to the brim with anomie, petty
criminals, violent teen gangs, multiple suicides, harridan wives and unfaithful
husbands, ungratified sexual longings, business failures and consequent poverty.
Even a fatal fire. In some Brooklyn novels, it is through books and reading
that a character stumbles upon a clue to another and better world; not in this
one. Fuchs' tenement world is claustrophobic and imprisoning. And yet, Fuchs
occasionally offers a touch of poetic language -- sometimes even breaking the
novel's "fourth wall" and intruding a bit of inventive authorial charm into the
narrative. Redeeming moments, for the most part, but few and far between.

Other elements that might offer hope to a hopeless world: athletics, either
participatory or spectator; religion, not a shred, even though almost all of the
characters are Jewish; music; any sort of aesthetic concern. No beauty in Fuchs'
Williamsburg.

I wonder how my father managed to survive his many Williamsburg summers without
bitterness and with such a cheerful, optimistic demeanor.  Why was he not
soured and jaded by his grim environment?  Or perhaps Williamsburg had its
particular glories while Fuchs had an eye only for nastiness.

Yesterday, while reading this book, my browser took me, by chance, to a travel
site that advertised a stay at a 4-star hotel in Williamsburg, "New York's
coolest neighborhood." Fuchs (and my father) would have been flabbergasted. 
"Coolest neighborhood."

And so, it appears, the whirligig of time continues its whimsical way.

Source: 2022/01/hubert-selby-jr

Title: Another Brooklyn Novel:  Last Exit to Brooklyn (1964)
Date: January 14, 2022

I read the first fifty pages of Hubert Selby's Last Exit to Brooklyn and then
decided, No More. It's an ugly, brutal book, not one that's going to offer me
either instruction or pleasure. I read two chapters -- the first about the
murderous gang wars and the second the transsexual who dies of an overdose of
benzedrine. Then I looked up the wiki article and realized that I was about
to come face to face with "the novel's most notorious scene, in which a young
prostitute is brutally gang-raped after a night of heavy drinking and is left
for dead in a vacant lot." Sorry, not for me.

Not much about Brooklyn either in this grim novel; no local color, though the
story is reputed to be set in Sunset Park or Red Hook.

Selby crosses William Burroughs (whom I also can't read) with Jack Kerouac. Plus
innovative grammar, confusing punctuation, and inventive orthography.

Not my cup of tea. Sorry, life is too short,

Source: 2022/01/jonathan-lethem

Title: Still Another Brooklyn Novel:  Motherless Brooklyn (1999)
Date: January 17, 2022

Jonathan Lethem nominally sets Motherless Brooklyn in downtown Brooklyn, but
it's more accurate to say that it takes place in the world of Dashiell Hammett
and Raymond Chandler and Elmore Leonard. Or, to be even more precise, in the
Land of Noir. It's a textbook example of superior detective fiction, with all
the trappings: a clever gumshoe (who, of course, gets himself bopped on the
head), a bad girl, two (count 'em two) car chases; a mysterious international
crime cartel (on loan from Ian Fleming), a scary assassin, seedy all-night
joints, endless stakeouts, even a police detective who's always just a step
behind our guy. It's so self-consciously, unapologetically derivative -- less
plagiary than homage. One character even quotes Sam Spade: "When a man's partner
is killed, he's supposed to do something about it." The novel is suspenseful,
clever, and occasionally witty.  It kept me engaged and guessing, so I have no
complaints. Of course I couldn't follow the intricacies of the betrayals and
counter-betrayals, but then, I never can.

It's a Brooklyn novel in the sense that it recognizes the astonishing
provinciality of the borough. Lionel Essrog, our detective, thinks of New Jersey
and Connecticut as exotic territories. Most of the action is specifically
located in downtown Brooklyn, which happens to be a neighborhood that I know
rather well. The investigators have their office on Court Street, where I often
visited my father's law offices, first at 125 Court and later on the 13th floor
of a tall building at 66 Court (the floor was listed, believe it or not, as 12A,
so as not to alarm the triskaidekaphobic). Also mentioned is Joralemon Street,
where Dr Irving Pollack, my smooth-faced orthodontist, painfully tightened
the metal braces on my teeth every other week for the entire duration of my
childhood and youth.

Motherless Brooklyn seems to be designed for the big screen. In 2017 a version
appeared that was written and directed by the rather brilliant actor Edward
Norton, who also plays Lionel Essrog. On a whim, we rented and watched the film
last night. It's an engaging film, very handsomely rendered. I watched it, I'm
afraid, with a chip on my shoulder, because I came to it with the novel fresh
in my mind and resented the liberties the film takes with the novel. In fact,
after just a few introductory scenes, Norton left the novel behind. Instead,
he crossed it with the Towne-Polanski Chinatown. It's a mistake, but not a
bad one, because if your intention is to imitate a film, you might as well
imitate an excellent one. Into the film, Norton imports a series of elements
that are utterly foreign to the novel. There's a dictatorial character who is
modeled on Noah Cross, a child of mysterious origin similar to the daughter of
Evelyn Mulwray ("she's my sister and my daughter") and a contrived plot device
that brings us deep into impenetrable Harlem. I'm sorry to say that Motherless
Brooklyn, the film, doesn't escape the gravitational pull of Chinatown.

Source: 2022/01/another-brooklyn-novel-by-daniel-fuchs-homage-to-blenholt-1936

Title: A Second Brooklyn Novel by Daniel Fuchs:  Homage to Blenholt (1936)
Date: January 20, 2022

Of the ten or so novels that I've read since I began this project, Homage to
Blenholt is certainly the most regional and the most "Jewish." It is positively
marinated in local color. Even in the first few paragraphs, we encounter the
"dirty cobbled streets" of Williamsburg, a milkman's plodding horse, the
subway and the trolley, "gutters," "seltzer," and a "stoop."  Kids play
Johnnie-on-the- pony, punchball, and ringolevio. There's a pickle man and a hot
corn man and a peddler selling imitation pearls. Even when characters are not
kvetching outright, they speak in a thick dialect that ladles English words onto
Yiddish structures and inflections.

The thin but adequate plot concerns young Max Balkan, who yearns for a more
glamorous, more powerful life. -- but every reader soon realizes that despite
his ambitions he's doomed to a life of slicing pastrami behind the counter of
someone else's delicatessen. Max admires Blenholt, a corrupt politician whose
graft has earned him a shiny suit and an extravagant funeral, -- but in his more
romantic moments he dreams of being an Alexander, a Caesar, or, his favorite
role model, Christopher Marlowe's Tamburlaine the Great, the Scythian shepherd
who rose from poverty to become the scourge of God and conqueror of Persia.

In the novel's finest phrase, poor Max's unromantic mother dismisses her son's
fantasies: "Tamburlaine, Schmamburlaine."

The bell of nostalgia rang most powerfully with the appearance of a word, well
known to me but no doubt unfamiliar to most readers. The word is "Forverts." It
was my task, on Sunday mornings, to buy and deliver a copy of the Jewish Daily
Forward to my Yiddish-speaking grandparents, who lived around the corner on
Coney Island Avenue. So with 50 cents in hand, I purchased the Times and the
Eagle for my parents and for my grandparents, the "Forverts." Until Homage to
Blenholt, I had not seen or heard that strange foreign word in 65 or 70 years.
My thanks to Daniel Fuchs.

I should add that, like Balkan, youthful me was dazzled by Tamburlaine. Marlowe
-- a young man's poet -- was my first serious literary love. He offered me
romantic escapism of a high order. But I was far too unimaginative to see myself
as the conqueror of the known world. For me, it was quite enough to appreciate
Marlowe's exotic landscape and still unsurpassed poetry.

Source: 2022/01/lj-davis-meaningful-lfe

Title: Another Brooklyn Novel:  A Meaningful Life (1971)
Date: January 25, 2022

I had never heard of L. J. Davis until I searched out his black-comic novel, A
Meaningful Life.  It's about a young man named Lowell Lake from Boise, Idaho
who moves to Brooklyn (as did the author himself) and buys a decrepit mansion
in a newly gentrifying section of Bedford-Stuyvesant that was eventually
to be dignified and upgraded into Boerum Hill. In his endeavor to repair
the building, everything that could go wrong, goes wrong -- and does so in
inventive, unpredictable ways.

If it's a satire, as it's sometimes called, A Meaningful Life is not gentle,
Menippean or Horatian, but, rather, far beyond the outer limits of Juvenelian.
It's nasty, and sometimes falls into just plain ugly.  It reads less like a
novel than as an extended turn by a stand-up monologist or comedian. Plot and
character are regularly sacrificed to jokes. It has the saddest ending of any
novel I can recall reading

Lowell Lake is afraid of "Negroes" and doesn't much like Puerto Ricans or Jews
or gays (whom he calls "fruits," and "fags") or old people, and he, and the
author, indulge themselves in brutal stereotyping.

It's one of the bleakest books I've ever read, and, if you hold your nose, one
of the funniest.

Source: 2022/01/ajrich-amyhempel-jillciment

Title: Not Another Brooklyn Novel:  The Hand that Feeds You (2015)
Date: January 28, 2022

I was steered to A J Rich's The Hand that Feeds You by a pair of websites that
listed books set in Brooklyn, but I'm sad to say that there's almost nothing of
Brooklyn in the novel -- a considerable disappointment to expectant me. It's a
murder mystery in which various places in and around Brooklyn are mentioned, but
in fact the novel takes place in a cliched fictional city in which murders are
committed, red herrings are liberally strewn, police are not very bright, and
the actual perp is lo and behold revealed in the last chapter.

I'm not a great reader of crime fiction, but I found this one "suspenseful" and
"gripping." Against my better judgment, I swallowed it in one gulp.

I would have liked it even more if I had any affection or even interest in
dogs, because in The Hand that Feeds You, the mystery is whether it was
Morgan Prager's or Billie Badgirl-Richbitch's dogs who ripped out scamming
boyfriend Bennett's throat. The novel might also have been more up my alley if
protagonist-narrator Prager had been able to form warmer bonds with humans than
with canines. The novel concludes with Prager receiving a chaste peck from her
human crush and a sensual roll in the grass with her devoted doggy. Borderline
perverse, in my opinion. But what can be expected of a novel in which dangerous
"pitbulls" are re-branded as "pitties."

It's odd and something of a curiosity that scenes in the novel are located
in Rangeley and Oquossoc, the only towns in rural Maine with which I'm even
remotely familiar.

Source: 2022/01/fear-of-clowns-coulrophobia

Title: Coulrophobia
Date: January 29, 2022

My bedmate informed that last night, in the wee hours, I uttered the strange
words, "fear of clowns."

Thanks to her I then remembered doing so (I had forgotten). But why those words?
I had no context. Was I in the throes of some sort of clownish nightmare       ?

Or was it merely a vocabulary exercise?  Perhaps, in my dream, I searched for
the English word for "fear of clowns." I know there is such a word, and in the
morning, I tried to recall it, but without success. I then tried to re-invent a
word, but the best I could do was "bozophobia," which is clearly an undignified
and inadequate invention. The existing and correct word, I soon discovered, is
coulrophobia, a curious modern coinage, dating only to the 1990s. Coulrophobia
is, for some mysterious reason, derived from the Greek word for "stilt-walker."
(There's a modern Greek word for clown, κλόουν, transliterated as klóoun,
which I suspect to be a recent borrowing from American English.)

Coulrophobia can be a serious affliction. According to the Cleveland Clinic,
coulrophobia can lead to hyperhidrosis. I myself am neither coulrophobic nor
hyperhidrosic.

The nighttime mystery remains. Why in the world would a semi-normal guy blurt
out the words "fear of clowns" at 2 am in the morning. In the long history of
human sleeping and dreaming, has such a thing ever happened before? Or will it
again?

Truly, I am a fascinating individual. Especially during the night. During the
waking hours, not so much.

Source: 2022/02/fortress-of-solitude-

Title: One More Brooklyn Novel:  Fortress of Solitude (2003)
Date: February 02, 2022

I grow all weak-in-the-knees sentimental when novelists write about such icons
of my childhood as spaldeens and stoopball.

Such delights abound in the first half of Jonathan Lethem's novel Fortress
of Solitude. The novel's Boerem Hill (newly upscaled from Gowanus) in the
1970s was as rich in such street games as my Flatbush in the 1940s and 50s.
Nevertheless, it' can't be said that these elements of nostalgia redeem Lethem's
huge undisciplined sprawling novel. Fortress of Solitude is crazily inventive,
profuse, uncontrolled. I have rarely read a novel by a respectable author so
in need of a dictatorial editor. Surely, there's enough material here for four
or five fine novels, each of which would deliver more bounce and impact than
this door-stopper. If Fortress of Solitude were a building, it would be called
overdecorated; if it were a piece of music or a film, it would be overproduced.

Some of my Flatbush cohort like to think that 1950s Brooklyn was a paradise for
children. I am not of that opinion. To me, Brooklyn was frequently menacing
when it wasn't just plain boring. The so-called "melting pot" was a cauldron
a racial animosities. But it wasn't all bad -- there were the Dodgers and the
camaraderie of the schoolyard. The public schools were crowded and disorderly,
but there were great teachers and enthusiastic students. Not so in dystopian
Fortress, a lord-of-the-flies world of vicious adolescents, incompetent adults,
and dysfunctional government. Far worse than I remember; and worse, I think,
than the reality.

The author of Motherless Brooklyn, a much finer novel, presents us this time
with two motherless youngsters, one white and one black, who through thick and
thin maintain a deep abiding friendship. But alas the novel veers into territory
that some might call magic realism, but to me was neither realistic nor magical
nor even remotely credible no matter how much disbelief I tried to suspend. To
read the last embarrassing third of the novel was a sad chore.

I don't think that I have ever read a substantial and ambitious novel that paid
so little attention to female characters. Where are the ladies of Boerum Hill? 
Not only are the mothers missing, but the occasional inadvertent woman who
wanders unto the page remains an unrealized cipher, a nothing.

Source: 2022/02/offill-speculation

Title: Brooklyn Novel??
Date: February 06, 2022

Re: Jenny Offill, Department of Speculation (2014). "Shimmering."
"Breathtaking."  "Radiant, sparkling with sunlight and sorrow." "Powerful."
"Glitters with different emotional colors."  "Each line a dazzling perfectly
chiseled arrowhead aimed at your heart."

That's what they say. How about "undisciplined," "faux-poetic," "self-
indulgent", "unreadable." Which is what I say.

Whatever happened to my gritty Brooklyn?  When did it become so absurdly
soft?  During gentrification, when the corner candy store turned into chi-chi
fern bar?

It appears that Offill is from North Carolina and lived in Brooklyn for "a
while." Not long enough to make an impact.

The "chiseled arrowheads" may have been aimed for my heart, but they missed
their target by at least a sewer and a half.

Source: 2022/02/predictions-2022

Title: Predictions for 2022
Date: February 07, 2022

It's been six years since Dr. Metablog (aka Vivian de St. Vrain, aka The Modern
Nostradamus) issued a set of predictions. His last collection, from 2016, earned
a score of 100% correct, when every single one of his dazzling glimpses into
futurity proved to be exactly accurate. An astonishing performance!!  Which is
why The Modern Nostradamus once again won the Lifetime Platinum Award from the
International Prophecy Society. Now, after a brief but pregnant retirement, Dr M
returns to the prophecy lists and offers the following. Read and be dazzled, fit
audience though few. Here's what's going to happen!

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)   there will be a forest fire in one or more western American states;

3)   a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce; moreover, another (or
possibly the same) star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the same)
actress will gain or lose a great deal of weight;

4)   a politician will be accused of dishonesty;

5)   there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

6)   there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

7)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East;

8)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both;

9)  Mitch McConnell will continue to be a colossal asshole.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of the year. 
Let's see whether a senior but world-class professional augur still has enough
on the oracle ball to foretell the future one more time.

Source: 2022/02/kazin-walker-in-the-city

Title: Love
Date: February 08, 2022

Some years ago, I wrote about meetings of the E & L Chafetz Family Circle, a
biennial gathering of my immigrant grandmother's family and also of her many
cousins, spouses and descendants. I recalled that Youthful Me objected to being
dragooned into attending these sessions. I also confessed that I hadn't a
glimmer of understanding of what those meetings meant. Here's what I wrote:

What I didn't know, and is so obvious to me now, was that I was much more
important to them than they were to me. That I was "doing well in school" were
words that they dearly wanted to hear. It was for my generation and for me that
they had braved the Cossacks, sold the farm, deserted from the Russian army,
left backward White Russia  or the Ukraine behind, endured the miseries of
steerage, slept four to a bed for years and half-acclimated themselves to a new
and utterly foreign world. For me. They had sacrificed themselves to invest in
me. So that I could "do well in school," get an education, live a better life. I
was their emissary to America, to the future.

It is still painful to admit how little I had appreciated these diminutive and
ancient but very brave people.

As it happens, I was not the only person to come to the same conclusion.

In A Walker in the City (the city is the Brownsville section of Brooklyn), the
distinguished man of letters Alfred Kazin had long ago (1951)made the identical
point:

My [immigrant] father and mother worked in a rage to put us above their level;
they had married to make us possible. We were the only conceivable end to all
their striving; we were their America.

Kazin proceeded to analyze his parents' marriage (he's a generation older than
I so his words are relevant not to my parents, but to my grandparents and those
of their Chafetz generation). "Love" became his subject. As I type his words, I
think of Joseph and Sonia, Isaiah and Etta:

Our parents, whatever affection might offhandedly be expressed between them,
always had the look of being committed to something deeper than mere love. Their
marriages were neither happy nor unhappy.; they were arrangements.

Powerful words, I think. Their marriages were "arrangements" -- certainly not
the touches of sweet harmony.

Not "love." Love was not for such as his parents (or, to continue the argument,
my grandparents).

I am perfectly sure that in my parents' mind, love was something exotic and
not wholly legitimate, reserved for "educated" people like their children, who
were the sole end of their existence. So far as I knew, love was not an element
admissible in my parents' experience. Any open talk of it between themselves
would have seemed ridiculous. It would have suggested a wicked self-indulgence,
a preposterous attention to one's own feelings.... They looked on themselves
only as instruments toward the ideal "American" future that would be lived by
their children.

I have the same sense about my forebears. I never heard any of them use the word
"love" and I don't think it would have been a comprehensible value for them.
To fall in love, to be in love, was not their expectation. Their aim was more
elemental: simply, to survive.

Moreover, not only did they not recognize romantic love, they also, as far as I
can remember, attached little importance to "happiness."

What an oddity!  They had left the dark backward of eastern Europe, lands of
dearth and pogroms and cholera, and traveled to a country in which the "pursuit
of happiness" was inscribed in its founding documents. But their aim, I am
absolutely sure, was not to achieve ephemeral happiness; their aim was to put a
roof over their heads and put food on the family table.

Life and liberty, yes; the pursuit of happiness -- an utterly alien concept.

Source: 2022/02/emily-gould-friendship

Title: A Contemporary Brooklyn Novel by Emily Gould:  Friendship (2014)
Date: February 14, 2022

Friendship is definitely an urban novel, but there's little in it that
is particular to Brooklyn. Certainly not to my Brooklyn. It's a modern,
contemporary coming-of-age novel, but, unlike prior-century works, adolescence
is delayed or postponed, because the two thirtyish women about whom it revolves
would have solved their problems when they were a decade younger if they
weren't so rich and spoiled. It's healthy that they try to maintain a profound
friendship in a world of meaningless temp jobs, bad boyfriends, inchoate
ambitions, voluntary poverty, and impulsive and irresponsible sex.

It's an amusing novel, well-plotted but written without much in the way of flair
or style. Not weighty. Perhaps I was a little put off by the indulgences of
first world difficulties.

For one of the characters, Williamsburg was a "hotbed of youth and culture." For
another, it was a "hotbed of European tourists and restaurants with thirty-five
dollar entrees." Wow, Williamsburg is two distinct hotbeds. It's hard to imagine
how Daniel Fuchs would have reacted. Is there another part of the U. S. so
fundamentally altered in a couple of generations?

Source: 2022/02/amnesia-on-film-the-right-of-way-1931

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Right of Way (1931)
Date: February 17, 2022

Amnesia is perfunctory in this "pre-Code" melodrama. Comes and goes without much
stress.

Rich snotbucket monocle-wearing attorney Charlie "Beauty" Steele is beaten,
thrown into a river and presumed dead. He is rescued and wakes up without a
glimmer of memory but is otherwise entirely functional. In his new, raccoon-
skin-hat personality he falls in love with shopkeeper Rosalie Eventural (played
by 18-year-old Loretta Young). Eventually it comes to light that he has left a
wife behind. His memory returns in flash and in a flashback, and things go from
bad to worse. Bigamy and all that.

The Right of Way has not aged well. It's a silent film with words. Conrad Nagel,
acting in a superseded tradition, is all exaggerated gestures, eye rolls, and
heavy lipstick. Loretta Young is so young that she hasn't even started to look
like Loretta Young.

Astonishing to think that the film is now pushing a hundred years old and that
amnesia was there right from the start. Before the start, actually, because
there were two silent Right of Ways (or Rights of Way) before this all-talkie
version.

Source: 2022/02/astonishing-dream-idea-for-a-new-technology

Title: Astonishing Dream; Idea for a New Technology
Date: February 19, 2022

Another long troubled night, another astonishing dream. This time, I found
myself lurking in a primitive cabin inhabited, it seemed, by a big happy family.
There were a bunch of kids and a cheerful be-aproned matriarch cooking on an old
wood stove what looked to me like a cauldron of soup. Immediately, the scene
shifted to a hall or a church basement. There were eight or ten long tables at
which a couple of dozen unfamiliar but clearly delineated folks were seated,
waiting for their dinner. But first, some singing. An unidentifiable patriotic
song, and then, a hymn. I recognized it as a hymn because it included the line,
"He died in vain." Still in the midst of the dream, I said to myself, I have to
remember this verse, so I took out pen and paper, and wrote down these words:
"he died in vain." As I did so, a large, bearded, slightly threatening man
accused me of "making fun" of the proceedings. He demanded to inspect what I
had written. I showed him my writing and explained to him that I thought "he
died in vain" was theologically wrong, because according to the usual Christian
interpretation, Jesus did not die "in vain."

End of dream.

In the morning, awake, I did some research to see if "he died in vain" appears
in any familiar or remote hymn. Just as I anticipate, no soap. However, I
discovered that the most frequently cited use of the phrase comes not from a
hymn or from the Bible but from the Gettysburg Address: that "we here highly
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain." Why should my dreamatorium
think to quote Abraham Lincoln? But why not, especially since there's been a
lot of Lincoln talk in our household this last while what with Lynn reading a
biography and also Team of Rivals. Then I wondered, could the cabin in the first
part of the dream be a reference to Kentucky log cabin in which Lincoln was
reputedly born. A long shot, but not impossible. Anyway, it's my dream; I can
interpret it as I want.

These mysterious dreams inspire in me an idea for a stunning new technology.
I think it would be very helpful if someone would devise a recording device
for dreams -- so that they could be saved and then played back on the TV
screen. It would be fascinating, I think, to see not only the fragments that
one remembers but the whole multi-hour experience laid out there in full
color and stereophonic sound. What a boon to mankind! What a convenience for
psychoanalysts!

I imagine something like an applewatch with an app for recording a month or so
of all-nighters. I know I'd buy one.

Impossible, you say?  Well, did they not laugh at the Wright brothers?

I think I need to present this idea to Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos. Bill Gates.
Someone with imagination and a history of achievement. Someone who would know
how to monetize so brilliant a conception. I myself am willing to invest my
entire income tax refund, however large it turns out to be.

Source: 2022/02/poor

Title: "Give Me Your Tired, Your People Who are Experiencing Poverty"
Date: February 21, 2022

At lunch yesterday, a friend of long standing mentioned that the conglomerate
that now publishes his American politics textbook has hired a new employee, a
vice-president for diversity and inclusion. It's a well-intended decision, I
am sure, but it carries a potential downside. The new v-p has instructed my
friend to make some changes to his prose. For example, he will no longer be
allowed to report that Lyndon Johnson got his way by "arm-twisting" recalcitrant
legislators. The metaphor, though commonly used back in the LBJ era, and still
picturesque, is disrespectful to people who suffer from broken or withered arms
and is especially discourteous to those who are missing one or both upper limbs.
No more arm-twisting, therefore. My friend was also told that it is no longer
permissible to say that in the U. S., "the poor tend to vote at lower levels of
participation than the general population." The new v-p insists that the phrase,
"the poor" denigrates various people by reducing them to a mere category. "The
poor" should therefore be updated and altered to "'people experiencing poverty."

In our peaceful and prosperous midWestern town, we've had a continuing and
difficult debate about homelessness. Some while ago, our extremely correct local
newspaper ceased to denominate those without regular domiciliary appointments as
"the homeless" and began to call them "people experiencing homelessness."

Such a circumlocution, I believe, though well-intended, misses the mark. The
word "homeless" has a poignancy and immediacy that the bloodless bureaucratic
euphemism "people experiencing homelessness" lacks. Rather than making
homelessness more palatable; it makes it more painful.

Let us thank all the gods in the pantheon that Emma Lazarus did not write,
"Give me your people experiencing lassitude, give me your people experiencing
poverty."

I wonder what the v-p for inclusion would say about Jesus, who famously advised
that "when thou makest a dinner or a supper, invite not thy friends, nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; lest they also bid thee
again, and a recompence be made thee. But when thou makest a feast, invite the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind." Such a forceful series of evocative
nouns! But would "the maimed," "the lame," "the blind," overleap the diversity
and inclusion barrier and enter a 21st century textbook? I think not.

Although Jesus may have had some good ideas, he was definitely not "woke."

Source: 2022/02/amnesia-on-film-whirlpool-1950

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Whirlpool (1950)
Date: February 22, 2022

Just when I was beginning to think that the Hollywood memory-loss well had run
dry, along comes Whirlpool and another variant of the world's most flexible
mental affliction. This time: loss of memory by hypnosis.

It could have been a good film: Ben Hecht, Otto Preminger, Gene Tierney, Jose
Ferrer. But it's gimmicky and the psychology is vulgar pseudo-Freudianism.

Malignant David Korvo (Ferrer) hypnotizes poor Ann Sutton (Tierney) into
imagining that she's committed a murder. Will she recover her memory in time
for the true murderer (Korvo himself) to be discovered? Yes, she will. The
film turns into something like a police procedural but might better be called
a psychoanalytical procedural. Richard Conte plays the Tierney's husband, and
he's the psychoanalyst, but frankly he's so surprisingly dense that he's an
embarrassment to his entire profession. The audience is led through a series of
melodramatic twists and turns, many requiring wholesale suspension of disbelief,
before all turns out well, or pretty well, because poor Ann Sutton (Tierney) is
reunited to her doltish husband.

Here's a picture of Iago-like hypnotist Jose Ferrer staring into the deer-in-
the-headlights eyes of luminous Gene Tierney.

Source: 2022/02/ex-wife-divorcee-ursula-lindesay-parrott

Title: Ex-Wife (1928); Divorcee (1930)
Date: February 22, 2022

Through the continuing miracle of TCM, we watched Divorcee, a 1930 "pre-Code"
drama of marriage and adultery. It's a film that was shocking in its own time
and still carries a bit of an edge. Jerry Martin (Norma Shearer) and Ted Martin
(Chester Morris) attempt to create a marriage of perfect equals, but Ted strays.
There's a great understated scene in which Jerry, the betrayed wife, cold-
bloodedly tells her unfaithful husband, that "I've balanced our accounts."
Ted, though he has proclaimed a commitment to equality, does not, let us say,
handle the revelation of his wife's adultery with grace. The marriage comes to
a disastrous end. But alas after an hour or so of travail and weeping, Jerry
loses her nerve, succumbs to propriety, pursues her erring husband to Paris, and
promises to be true. The assertion of equity has turned out to be just so much
blather. The double standard has been tested but has held firm. The film flirts
with radicalism but reverts to a Hollywood ending in which love conquers all and
an adventurous woman accepts her subordinate place.

I was sufficiently intrigued by the film to investigate its background. The
source is a novel called Ex-Wife (1928) by Ursula Parrott, which sold 100,000
copies and was a sensation in its day. I confess that although I'm supposed to
know something about literature, I had never heard of this scandalous piece of
fiction. Ex-Wife sunk like a stone and has been out of print for many years, but
our interlibrary loan department managed to locate a 80s reprint in Fort Lewis,
Colorado. (Thanks, Interlibrary Loan!).

Ex-Wife is an inartistic piece of writing -- hectic, repetitive, padded, but
one that obviously struck a nerve. In this novel, a young divorced woman does
not just pine for her wandering husband. Instead, she enjoys her independence,
and "sleeps with more men than [I] can count." She then she falls deeply in love
with the wrong man, and finally opportunistically marries a third fellow whom
she doesn't love but to whom she promises to be faithful (we are skeptical).
The novel is marinated in speakeasy bootleg liquor and easy morality. Much
wilder than the rather tame film version, it is also more challenging and
revolutionary.

In the course of the novel, our heroine has a baby (who conveniently dies) and
also an abortion. The babies are important to the larger backstory. In 1922, the
then Katherine Ursula Towle, a recent Radcliffe graduate, married Lindesay Marc
Parrott, a young reporter for The New York Times.

They had a son named Lindesay Marc Parrott Jr. two years later. However, his
existence was kept a secret from Ursula's husband, as he never wanted to have
a son. So, Ursula left the child in the custody of her father and sister and
returned to Lindesay, still not speaking a word about the son. It was not until
1926 that Lindesay found out that he was a father. As a result, he immediately
divorced Ursula, rejected the existence of his son, and never once went to see
him.

It's an astonishing revelation that certainly does not speak well for Lindesay
Parrott, but adds some autobiographical interest to the plot of Ursula Parrott's
Ex-Wife. Suddenly, the deceased child and the abortion make a certain kind of
sense.

I should add that Lindesay Parrott was a name well known to me in the days of my
youth. I was then a diligent reader of The New York Times and Lindesay Parrott
covered the Korean War, so I encountered his name every single day from 1949 to
1955. And then in the 70s, I learned that Lindesay Parrott had retired from the
Times and had purchased a small farm on Kidder Road in Bradford, Vermont, a bit
more than a mile, as the crow flies, from where we lived on Hackett Hill Road. I
gave thought to knocking on his door, but I heard through the local gossip chain
that Parrott was a recluse and a terrible alcoholic. Whether true or not I don't
know. Of course I had no idea that Lindesay Parrott had once been married to a
notorious novelist.

As for Ursula, after her divorce from Lindesay Parrott, she married three
more times, and was also rumored to have had affairs with F. Scott Fitzgerald
and Sinclair Lewis. She died in 1957 "in the charity ward of a New York City
hospital."

Here's Ursula Parrott's Radcliffe graduation picture:

Source: 2022/02/adelle-waldman-love-affairs-of-nathaniel-p

Title: A Contemporary Brooklyn Novel:  Adelle Waldman, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P. (2013)
Date: February 24, 2022

This curiously named novel, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P. (no relation, thank
goodness), concerns a 30-year-old Baltimorean become Brooklynite who drifts from
bed to bed but is incapable of achieving lasting love.

Adelle Waldman takes a scalpel to Nathaniel P[iven] and also to his various
lady friends. Her analyses are sharp, incisive and sometimes painfully close
to the bone. She is not above devoting paragraphs, even pages, to dissecting a
minor event or brief conversation. Sometimes the intricacy of her observations
resembles those of Henry James, though I can't remember The Master ever
discussing either the scrotum or the anus of any of his characters. Waldman
put me in mind of a sentence with which Horatio admonishes Hamlet: '"'twere to
consider too curiously to consider so."

Reading this novel, I was relieved that I am not a 30-year-old on the hunt --
and that I never was. There's lots of sex, some of it precipitous, but not much
discussion or examples of genuine intimacy. Waldman's landscape is unfamiliar to
me -- a foreign culture or, rather, an alien civilization.

Set in Brooklyn, almost all the action takes place in Williamsburg or environs,
certainly within sight of the Manhattan skyline -- although I remember that once
or twice characters may have ventured into the Brooklyn hinterland for a pizza.

The author is amusingly aware of the way the new Brooklyn has superseded the
old:

the two groups (i.e. older residents and newcomers) might have existed on
different layers of the earth's atmosphere that only from a distance appear to
be on the same plane. A store called National Wines & Liquors, Inc, where both
liquor and cashier were enclosed behind bulletproof glass, was not actually a
competitor to the much newer Tangled Vine, which specialized in organic and
local wines and exhibited the work of area artists at its Thursday-evening
tastings.

Which reminds me that I started to read but failed to comprehend a novel called
Class (2014) by Francesco Pacifico in which Williamsburg was regularly referred
to as "Willy." Again, I ask, what would Daniel Fuchs think?

The more of these novels I read, the more Brooklyn seems like a multiply layered
palimpsest -- one culture imposed upon another, generation after generation. 
My own Flatbush neighborhood, now upgraded to "Kensington," was farmland right
through to the end of the 19th century, then a suburb for prosperous old
Protestant families, next a haven for Irish, Italian and Jewish immigrants and
now an ethnic stew of Hasids, Turks, Arabs, Russians, and South and Central
Americans of all kinds but also with an strong admixture of Tangled Vine dinks,
yuppies and midWestern computer geeks. It's a complex piece of urban Americana
-- one facet of which is well-illustrated by the story of unhappy Nathaniel P.

Source: 2022/03/toibin-brooklyn-auster-follies

Title: Two Very Fine Brooklyn Novels
Date: March 01, 2022

I liked Paul Auster's The Brooklyn Follies (2006) so much that I read it
twice. It was even better the second time. Even though it begins scary ("I
was looking for a quiet place to die. Someone recommended Brooklyn..."), it's
a cheerful and warm-hearted novel. Auster's gift is to make barely credible
events seem commonplace and normal. So Follies packs in a mute nine-year-old
girl who journeys many miles to find her uncle, and then a forger of paintings,
a noir-y blackmail scheme, a wacky pseudo-Christian religious cult, a Jamaican
transvestite who mouths "Can't Help Loving that Man" at a sad funeral, and so
on.

The Brooklyn Follies is a comedy not because it labors at one-liners but because
everyone who should get married or at least find a mate, manages to do so by the
last page. Plus it's rich in Park Slope locations and lore.

I also enjoyed Colm Toibin's Brooklyn (2009), which is another version of
the immigration novel. It's set back in the 1950s but the 50s might as well
be the '20s as far as oppressive social customs are concerned. Although the
central figure, Eilis, travels to Brooklyn, she never quite frees herself from
provincial Ireland or the interventions of transatlantic priest Father Flood.
Young, inexperienced, she falls hard for a boy of Italian extraction -- and her
doing so turns out to be more of a problem that it needs to be. Eilis must make
some important, life-determining decisions, but whether she makes the right
choices is left to the reader to decide (I myself think she loses her bearings).
It's a lovely, understated, carefully wrought and admirable novel.

Source: 2022/03/boulder-mall-dogs-music

Title: On the Mall
Date: March 04, 2022

On our prosperous Boulder Mall, where all the men are handsome, all the women
are good-looking, and all the mendicants take Venmo, there are 44 separate and
distinct signs that declare, No Pets. Such clear instructions do not inhibit our
infatuated dog owners, who can't bring themselves to believe that the injunction
applies to their particular o-so-lovable canine. They cannot fathom that not
every recreational mall-walker is in love with Bowser. As a result, the No Pets
law is widely and defiantly flouted.

There's a second mall rule: no amplified music. Acoustic guitars, string
quartets, bluegrass bands, accordionists, and singers are all allowed and
encouraged. But every once in a while, some itinerant assembles an appallingly
large apparatus on our otherwise peaceful Mall and produces sounds that can be
heard for half a mile. Rude, ear-shattering noises.

Canines and amplifiers are everyday commonplace violations. But yesterday,
walking on the mall, we observed a remarkable and unprecedented novelty. Along
comes a nondescript scruffy guy walking an oversized nondescript dog, and lo and
behold, onto the beast is strapped a boombox. Honest to Pete, I'm not making
this up! The attached mechanism is a powerful one and it generates an extremely
loud noise. Unidentifiable sounds, possibly though not certainly some sort of
music.

A woofer with a woofer, so to speak.

The man and his faithful friend proceed shamelessly along the mall, bass notes
vibrating the shop windows and oscillating my pancreas.

I was floored, frankly. One dog, one amplifier; two concurrent violations.

And then I watched in amazement as the big ol' dog dropped a big ol' deuce. A
double deuce, actually. Two long brown glistening, smoking turds. Lurking right
there on the bricks, preparing to ambush the pretty white shoes of the next
three-year-old princess-in-a-pink-tutu to come tripping by.

In our town, it's the inviolable custom that every dog owner carries a plastic
bag and politely disposes of his pet's droppings. Not this guy. He just kept
on walking, pretending that he didn't know what was going on at the end of his
leash -- which was, as a I have said, 1) a pooch, 2) an attached amplifier, and
3) pooch poop. A jackpot -- a perfect trifecta.

Do I have a theory to account for such contemptible misbehavior?  Well, I've
been thinking and mulling and contemplating, and I'm aware of the talk of the
breakdown of civil society, but all I can come up with is this: some people are
royal jerks.

Source: 2022/03/girl-in-translation-2010

Title: Yet Another Brooklyn Novel: Jean Kwok, Girl in Translation (2010)
Date: March 08, 2022

Girl in Translation is the story of a young, impoverished immigrant from Hong
Kong. I may be wrong, but it reads as if it were less a novel than a barely
fictionalized autobiography (Jean Kwok, the author, made her way from an
unheated tenement to Harvard; Kimberley Chang, the central figure, escaped
to Yale.) Mutatis mutandis, and all that. It's a familiar kind of work:
a bildungsroman, of course, but also an immigrant novel, a coming-of-age
adventure, and thanks to an inartistic tacked-on ending, an H. Alger rags-to-
riches saga. Sometimes I felt that I was reading a century-later re-imagining of
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, things Irish replaced with things Chinese -- except
that there is not a single tree in this novel's bleak landscape, not even a
symbolic one. Plus ca change, plus de meme chose.

While it's not original or innovative, nor written with any particular flair,
Girl in Translation is nevertheless valuable for the world it opens up to us.
Plus it's on the whole uplifting, even if there are some unfortunate moments in
which "triumphant" shades over into "triumphalist."

There's not much to admire about the Brooklyn of this novel; it's an unpleasant
place. Manhattan's Chinatown, where much of the action takes place, is no
better.

Source: 2022/03/luckman-cortelyou-flatbush

Title: Sid Luckman's Cortelyou Road Childhood Home
Date: March 11, 2022

Of course everyone knew that Sid Luckman was from Brooklyn and that he had
attended Erasmus Hall High School and Columbia University before becoming one
of the first superstars of the National Football League. To football fans, he
was as renowned a home-town boy as Sandy Koufax was to followers of baseball.
But until I read R.D. Rosen's new biography of Sid, called Tough Luck, I didn't
know that football's first T-formation quarterback was a neighborhood guy, and
that his modest childhood home was just four blocks off the route that Stephen
Lewin and I took every morning for four years to EHHS. And that his house was
just around the corner from the Sears department store where I spent the summer
of 1957 pulling down $1.25 large an hour.

The above is a modern picture, drawn from googlemaps. I suspect that the house
is not much changed from the way it appeared in the 1930s but that the bars on
the windows and front door are later additions. According to Zillow, the House
of Sid is 1664 sq. ft. and is now priced at c. $750,000. I'd bet $2500 was the
number in the 1930s, when the Luckman family was in residence.

Shouldn't there be a bronze plaque on the property?

It's a measure of the chanciness of the old neighborhood that Sid's father was
convicted and imprisoned for a gangland murder and that he died in Sing Sing.

Source: 2022/03/eleanor-roosevelt-brooklyn-539east9

Title: When Eleanor Roosevelt Visited 539 East 9 Street
Date: March 14, 2022

It should be remembered and recorded that in October of 1960, Eleanor Roosevelt
herself visited the home of my parents --my childhood home (539 East 9 Street in
the Flatbush section of Brooklyn).

I myself missed the occasion, alas. I was then living in Massachusetts,
undergoing the first disorienting days of graduate school. But I know the story.

During the 1960 presidential campaign (John F. Kennedy versus "Tricky Dick"
Nixon), JFK's Catholicism emerged as a divisive issue. It's hard to believe what
a fuss was made about his religion, especially nowadays, when no one bothers
themselves that Joseph Biden is not only a Roman Catholic, but a serious one at
that (JFK's personal commitment to his religion was, let's say, nominal).

Among Jewish voters, some of whom had grown up in Brownsville or Williamsburg or
the Lower East side where Jewish-Irish conflict was a fact of life, there was
a great deal of resistance to voting for JFK. And other Jewish voters, harking
back to the old country, remembered Catholics as their antagonists and were hard
put to vote for a candidate of that persuasion.

It fell to the task of Mrs. Roosevelt to persuade these reluctant voters that
they could and should cast a ballot for Kennedy. At the time, there was no one
in America who had more credibility with Jewish populations than she. It was
well known that Mrs. Roosevelt had lobbied her hesitant husband for more lenient
policies toward "displaced" Jews

I don't know how it came about that our living room was chosen as a site for
Mrs. Roosevelt to meet with voters. I suspect that it was through my mother's
extensive contacts with members of the League of Women Voters, an organization
of which she was a stalwart volunteer. I know that my mother assembled 50 or so
voters, almost all Jewish women, and seated or stood them in our very crowded
second floor living room. Mrs. Roosevelt arrived, and as my father said to me
later, she "dragged her ass" up two flights of stairs, spoke for 20 minutes,
presumably in that upper-class nasal twang for which she was famous, answered a
couple of respectful questions, and then limped back down to her car. And went
on to the next venue. And the next. (She was 76 at the time, and not in great
health.) Apparently she followed this same arduous routine for months.

That's how elections are won.

Eleanor Roosevelt died two years later, in 1962.

Source: 2022/03/erasmus-basketball-1951

Title: A Heart-of-Flatbush Novel: Big Man (1966), by Jay Neugeboren
Date: March 30, 2022

Of the many Brooklyn novels that I've read this last while, Big Man, by Jay
Neugeboren, comes closest to home. Neugeboren was newborn in 1938, just a
year before me, and he attended fabled Erasmus Hall High School, most likely
graduating with the class of 1955 (I was '56). It's a mark of my ignorance of
modern American letters that I had no idea that my near-classmate was the author
of 24 books, most of them novels. Big Man was Neugeboren's first novel.

Close to home? Here are couple of sentences that will shiver the nostalgia
timbers of wistful ex-Erasmians.

I walk down Church Avenue, past the Kenmore Theater. Across the street the
old church, used to cut classes and sit in the graveyard....  In front of
Garfields's Cafeteria all the guys hanging out with their broads and their
puffed hair.... Guys with Erasmus jackets on. I keep walking. Past the firehouse
and the Holy Cross schoolyard.

Wow, it's a guided tour of the old neighborhood as it was in the 1950s. Who from
Erasmus hasn't sprawled on the steps of the Dutch Reformed Church?

The novel revolves around the 1951 basketball scandals, which were world-shaking
news at the time. A number of New York City college players (CCNY, St. Johns,
Fordham, LIU) fell into the clutches of shady gamblers and were paid to shave
points.  A few were indicted and convicted. I wrote a few melancholy and
disillusioned paragraphs about the scandals some years ago -- here.

In Big Man, Neugeboren tells the story through the eyes and mouth of a
character named Mack Davis, who had been an upcoming star but is now, because
he missed a couple of baskets, stuck in a dead-end job at an automated carwash.
It's an ambitious conceit and a promising plot. Big Man, I regret to say, is
not a very artistic piece of work, but what the heck! Neugeboren was only 25 or
26 when he wrote it and had had only a few years to recover from uninspiring
Erasmus Hall English classes.

I confess that I was uncomfortable that Neugeboren wrote the novel in a black
voice. I don't object in theory, because there's no earthly reason why a
white novelist can't impersonate a black person, any more than male novelist
can't speak as a female (or vice versa), or a young writer speak in the voice
of an old. So wny was I troubled? I think it was because the voice that the
novelist invented didn't seem genuine. It seemed "literary" -- as though the
Davis character had been heisted out of a  blaxploitation film. Occasional
inadvertent lapses in the dialect were particularly painful to my ever-sensitive
ears.

Big Man reminds me how central basketball was to my adolescent life. I think
if I had spent as much time and effort on my schoolwork as I did practicing my
foul shots I might have been somebody. But I think I learned as much about life
from basketball and its scandals as I did from any other 1950s phenomenon (such
as the antics of "Tailgunner Joe" McCarthy). I'm grateful to Jay Neugeboren for
preserving an important piece of my history and especially for bringing the old
neighborhood right to the forefront.

Source: 2022/04/mature-romance

Title: Senior Romance
Date: April 02, 2022

Young 'uns, I don't know that you entirely grasp the glamor and mystery of
maturity (which in some jaded circles is called "old age.")  Let me tell you,
the golden years are just chockablock full of sensual romance of a kind that you
might not now appreciate.

Just the other day, for example, we were both instructed to make another visit
to the phlebotomist (it seems hardly a month goes by that some specialist or
other doesn't need to inspect a sample of our personal sanguineous fluids).

Being economical people, we scheduled our appointments for the same time, same
place.

Her blood draw was in anticipation of a knee replacement; mine for routine
monitoring of my half-a-dozen annoying senior conditions.

So there we were, side by side, in adjacent cubicles, stripping our sleeves for
the venipuncture.

I ask you, is there anything on earth more romantic than a senior couple
experiencing simultaneous blood draws. Rapture, rapture! Joy and jollity!

In a merrier world, the instant of venipuncture would have been accompanied
with an orchestra of swelling music, perhaps Brahms. And there would have been
candles; next time this happens, we'll surround ourselves with a whole Liberace
of candelabras. Dozens of long stem red roses. Beakers of Veuve Cliquot '42. 
An applauding audience of family and friends.

It would have been even more thrilling if my technician hadn't taken three tries
to hit the mark. "Your vein rolled," she said accusingly, compromising ever so
slightly the transcendent moment.

Source: 2022/04/what-i-wore-to-the-oscars-2022

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars, 2022
Date: April 02, 2022

Friends and relations have been clamoring to know what I wore to the Oscar
ceremony this year.  So here goes:

Source: 2022/04/henry-james-portrait-of-a-lady-1963-2022

Title: Henry James, Portrait of a Lady (1963-2022)
Date: April 20, 2022

I read James' Portrait of a Lady in 1963 but never again until last week,
so there has been a hiatus of almost three score years. During the interim,
glaciers have melted, continents have subducted and conventional notions about
what constitutes a "lady" have shifted quite marvelously.

After such an interval, it's not disgraceful for me to confess that I remembered
very little of the novel and that even major plot points came as a shock and
surprise. Moreover, I re-read the novel with a bit of prejudice, because I had
recently learned that Theodore Roosevelt once met James and dismissed him as "a
miserable little snob." Even if I hadn't been alerted by Roosevelt's back-of-
the-hand slap, I would have recognized that Portrait of a Lady generates enough
snobbery to power a nineteenth-century locomotive from Rome to Florence even
while hauling the book's entire cast of frequent travelers. It's a class-ridden
novel in which lesser sophisticates are out-snobbed by superior sophisticates.
Despite this unfortunate failing, Portrait of a Lady is a rather wonderful piece
of writing.

Let me further confess that I brought a second and more deeply-rooted prejudice
to my re-reading. In the early 1960s, when I was a graduate student of "English
and American Language and Literature" at a New England university, Henry James
was at the apex of his critical reputation. He was "the Master." In fact, an
appreciation (or devotion) to James became a sort of ticket of admission to
the coterie of the literary elite. A touchstone. If you (that is, me) were
able to appreciate and adore James's extraordinarily subtle judgements and
discriminations and his sustained and intricate analyses of the velleities
of social interactions, why then, you were one of the elect. But if you were
baffled by his niceties and sometimes could not divine what the heck he was
going on and on about, why then you weren't what James calls in Portrait "a
person of sensibility." And if you weren't a person of sensibility, why in
tarnation were you studying literary history at a university that had been home
to establishment sophisticates since 1636?

Not a James devotee, I managed to slip through the system without the
disgraceful lacunae in my preparation coming to anyone's attention. And until
this past week, I managed to keep my distance from Mr. Henry James.

But I may have made a mistake to have done so. I'd still say that Portrait of a
Lady isn't up there in the stratosphere with Bleak House and Middlemarch, but
it's still a darn good novel. It's not conventionally exciting; in fact, it's
talky and static in the extreme. Nothing much happens. Isabel Archer talks with
Henrietta and HJ analyses the conversation. Then someone goes to Gardencourt and
has a long conversation with Lord Warburton. Then Lord W meets Countess C in
Rome and they talk. Then Madame Merle, who, we are told, was born in Brooklyn
and therefore ought to have known better, has a long conversation with Isabel
Archer. Then someone meets someone else in a museum or a train station or a
restaurant and they have a long conversation -- once again dissected by HJ. Then
they ride the rails to Florence and talk. Meanwhile Ralph Touchett is slowly
dying and will continue die (and talk) for another five hundred pages. These
various conversations are often oblique, with the most important points omitted
or merely implied (to be grasped only by persons of subtlety and sensibility).
It's all so slow that I sometimes felt myself yearning for a good solid knife
fight or at least a lengthy car chase. When Isabel finally tells enigmatic
villainess Madame Merle that she doesn't want to see her ever again, I longed
for her to spit it out with a a good round "fuck off" -- but no such luck.

And yet as mysteries are revealed in the last third of the novel, Portrait
becomes undeniably exciting. Much is familiar; it seems as though James
recapitulates the marriage of Dorothea Brooke and Eddie Casaubon in the
misalliance of Isabel Archer and the "sterile dilettante" Gilbert Osmond. And
also borrows the Pansy plot from the story of Honoria Dedlock. But I came to
these insights, if they are insights, only in retrospect; while reading the
novel, I was surprised and intrigued.

I strongly object to the ending of the novel, which seemed to violate the
trajectory of the plot. Surely Isabel has earned her freedom. To me, her
continued bondage to propriety seems cruel to both the character and also to
hopeful (but deceived) readers. Wicked, in fact, to the point of sadism. No
doubt the conclusion tests a reader's sophistication, and no doubt if I read the
voluminous commentary that the novel has engendered, the apparent cruelty of the
conclusion would be be explained and justified. But I won't read the commentary.
I'm obviously not a "person of sensibility" and I prefer to remain unimproved,
unenlightened, and pissed.

Source: 2022/04/neugeboren-imagining-robert-lefferts

Title: A Brooklyn Memoir
Date: April 23, 2022

I read Imagining Robert, My Brother, Madness, and Survival by Jay Neugeboren for
neighborhood and neighborly reasons. Its author is a 1955 graduate of fabled
Erasmus Hall High School (I was class of 1956). Much of the story takes place
in the area of Brooklyn now called Lefferts Gardens. Walkable, or at least
bicyclable, from East 9 Street.

It's a sad tale. Younger brother Robert went seriously off the psychological
rails in his late teen years. Older brother Jay relentlessly chronicles his
brother's lifetime of struggles. It becomes clear that modern medicine does not
offer any remedy or hope to people with Robert's illnesses. The system relies
on  ineffective drugs and ineffective therapies and what amounts to involuntary
imprisonment. It's a painful, discouraging history.

And it's also a good and moving book. Very sincere and very emotional. I confess
to dropping an occasional tear.

And yet I don't know whether it's right to expose a loved one to such public
scrutiny. I myself wouldn't have made that choice. But I empathize with
Neugeboren's tale, inasmuch as I know from personal experience that therapies
for some forms of mental decay are no better now than they were during the
Darkest Ages.

Source: 2022/05/ukraine-shtetl

Title: Starokonstantinov
Date: May 05, 2022

Ukraine has been invaded and whole cities have been obliterated by the Putin
dictatorship. It's tragic. Once again, I'm overwhelmingly grateful that my
grandparents chose to pack up and leave the blighted Ukraine. It's a decision
that has looked better and better with each passing year.

My father's family came from a Ukrainian "shtetl" called Starokonstantinov,
or Alt Konstantin ("old Constantine"). As a youth, I overheard but did not
understand conversations in Yiddish about a place that my grandparents called
(phonetically) Xusantine-gebernia, where the X stands for a non-English deep
guttural fricative. Seventy years ago I paid little attention to my eastern
European ancestry. Now I'm fascinated.

Where is Starokonstantinov?  What is a "shtetl?"

I've just read Yohanan Petrovsky-Shtern's new (2014) and highly pertinent
history, The Golden Age Shtetl (an oxymoronic title if there ever was one). Y
P-S defines a shtetl as "an East European market town in private possession of
a Polish magnate, inhabited mostly but not exclusively by Jews, and subject
to Russian bureaucracy." Starokonstantinov, he claims, was a "quintessential
shtetl." "My" ancestral shtetl lies in the western part of Ukraine, about 50
miles south of a line drawn between Lviv and Kyiv. Nowadays, it has a population
of about 30,000 souls.

I know that my grandfather's people lived in Starokonstantinov from the middle
of the nineteenth century, but I have no idea when they first arrived -- it
might have been years or centuries before. The town itself is not an ancient
foundation. It enters history only in the late 16th century when a Polish noble
named Konstanty Ostrogski built himself a castle (which still survives) and took
ownership of the surrounding area. Starokonstantinov was a "private town" --
meaning that it was owned by the Ostrogski family for several hundred years. In
its first years, Starokonstantinov was included in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
In 1569 it became part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In 1793, and for
many years, even after my ancestors had struck out for the new world, it was
a possession of the Russian Empire. Now it's in the independent Ukraine, and
hoping to remain so.

The history of Starokonstantinov is marked by a series of tragedies prior to
the one now in progress. An early disaster was the Battle of Starokonstantinov
in 1648, which was a key event in the Chmielnicki Massacres of 1648-49. Eastern
rite Cossacks broke into the fortified town and killed all of its 130 Jewish
families and as many Polish Roman Catholics as they could find. During the early
part of the 18th century, the Haidamack massacre of Uman by Cossacks spilled
over into other Ukrainian shtetls, including "mine." And then beginning in 1881
came the series of pogroms -- anti-Jewish peasant riots provoked and tacitly
supported by the Russian officialdom. In Starokonstantinov, there were 6611 Jews
in 1847 and 9212 (61% of the total population) in 1897. (There would have been
two more if my grandparents hadn't seen the light in 1895). During the Nazi
occupation in 1942, virtually all the remaining Jewish population (6731 in 1939)
was murdered. It's a troubled, tragic history.

I'm not sure what it means to say that a town was wholly owned by Polish
nobility. Did the Ostrogskis own all the land, or the land and some of the
buildings? Did they administer the public works? The churches? Did they possess
the surrounding farms?  Did they own, until they were freed in 1861, the
serfs?  Most likely, each shtetl had its own particular form of ownership (the
late medieval world was anything but standardized). Y P-S does not explain;
perhaps he assumes it's common knowledge.

Starokonstantinov occasionally makes an appearance in The Golden Age Shtetl.

I had not realized how active my ancestors might have been in the vodka trade.
"In Starokonstantinov, the possession of Countess Rzewuska, about fifty [Jewish-
owned] inns and taverns yielded 67 percent of the town revenues." (Query:
how and when did the shtetl pass from the Ostrogskis to the Rzewuskis, who
were a very prominent and wealthy Polish family)? As far as I can tell, the
"town revenues" went directly into the hands of the Polish overlords. In 1827,
"Starokonstantinov Jews realized the that their efforts to prevent the draft of
men for twenty to twenty five year terms in the Russian army [had failed], and
the Jewish populace turned against their own kahal elders and attacked their
houses." "Local police had to summon an additional army unit to suppress the
outburst." (The "kahal" was a committee of prominent Jewish citizens who were
the nominal governors [under Polish supervision] of the Jewish population.)
In the first half of the nineteenth century, the divorce rate among Jewish
couples in Starokonstantinov, was 16 percent. In larger cities, it was even
higher (in Letichev it was 47 percent). Y P-S attributes the surprisingly
high rate of failed marriages to the relative freedom of Jewish women and
to the breakdown of traditional constraints as the Jewish population became
increasingly urbanized. A major fire in Starokonstantinov in 1835 hastened the
shtetl's decline. Russian travelers found Starokonstantinov and especially its
roads deplorable. "A Russian army officer observed that Starokonstantinov is
dirty beyond any measure: but 'if we bother ourselves to learn the reasons for
this situation, we would perhaps find out that even the Jews, whom are usually
blamed, have nothing to do with it.... To drive through the streets of the
town is a real challenge, as there is no pavement. Stones once paving the road
have long sunk into the soils. When it is raining, they do nothing but prevent
movement.'" Mud season in Starokonstantinov must have been an annual challenge.
Nevertheless, Starokonstantinovites were readers: a merchant estimated that in
the shtetl there were "about 20,000 books, mostly prayer books, bible and bible
commentaries, tractates on the Talmud and the Kabbalah." Y P-S thinks that this
number must be a great exaggeration. But it's on the record that a merchant
named Pinhas Yosef Bromberg from Starokonstantinov brought twenty Hebrew books
with him while traveling on business to St Petersburg.

My great-grandfather was a participant in the commerce of Starokonstantinov.
According to my father, he was a "factor."  A "faktor" (Yiddish from German)
was essentially a middleman. My ancestor had a horse and a wagon (perhaps, I
allow myself to fantasize in a moment of self-aggrandizement, two horses and two
wagons). According to tradition, he mostly dealt in grain, but factors such as
he bought and sold whatever was available: wood, coal, ribbons, calico, mirrors,
bolts and screws, vodka and wine. They did much of their business at fairs and
Starokonstantinov was famous for its very prominent fair.

Source: 2022/05/errol-flynn-olivia-de-havilland

Title: Dodge City Nincompoops
Date: May 06, 2022

The rip-roaring conclusion to Dodge City (1939), is marvelously dumb. The bad
guys, led by really nasty villain Jeff Surrett (Bruce Cabot) have jumped out
of the burning railroad car and onto their horses. They are going to make a
getaway, we assume. But for some reason, the six schmegeggees don't ride away
from the railroad tracks. Instead, they continue exactly parallel to the tracks,
allowing Wade Hatton (Errol Flynn) to get out his rifle and pick them off, one
after another.

All that the black hats needed to do was to hang a right and ride off into the
brush, or just rein up, and let the train go by. The train is on a railroad
track.  But no. Not these guys. They keep on riding alongside the train until
they're all shot. End of movie, but not the end to my astonishment. I'm baffled
that the director, Michael Curtiz of all people, allowed such a brainless
ending.

Also: Errol Flynn, with his anachronistic 1930s mustache and condescending
smile, was so goody-goody and upstanding that I felt a strong urge to piss on
his leg.

Source: 2022/05/emma-straub-modern-lovers-cortelyou-road

Title: A "Ditmas Park" Novel
Date: May 09, 2022

From my birth in 1939 until I fled to Ithaca in 1956, I lived on East 9th
Street, in a section of Brooklyn that had no other name than "Flatbush." But
all is flux, as Heraclitus said in a very different context, and now the
undistinguished neighborhood of my youth has been upgraded to pretentious
"Kensington."  Moreover, the adjacent section of Flatbush through which I early
morning shambled to fabled Erasmus Hall H. S., consisting of a large stock of
handsome old Victorian homes, has also been re-christened. It's now "Ditmas
Park."

Ditmas Park is where Emma Straub's novel, Modern Lovers (2016) situates itself.
It is, she claims, "the only neighborhood in New York City that felt like the
suburbs."  A sentence of praise or an instance of wicked irony, one might ask?

Suburb or not, Modern Lovers does not take place in the Flatbush of my youth.
Yes, streets retain their familiar names (Rugby, Argyle, Stratford, Newkirk,
Ocean Avenue). In fact, one of the modern lovers, a fiftyish wife and mother,
works out of a real estate office at the corner of Cortelyou Road and East
16th Street, exactly where old Mr. Hart used to repair the fragile gears of
my three- speed. But all is yuppified. None of the children in this novel go
to PS 217 or PS 139 or Erasmus (in fact, these anchors of my old neighborhood
go unmentioned). Instead, the young 'uns attend expensive "Whitman," an elite
private academy. The young lady who is at the center of the story has both a
'mum" and a "mom" -- a circumstance that no doubt occurred 70 years ago, but no
one would have talked about it, at least openly. It's Flatbush, all right, but
where are the Italians and Irish and the Jews?  A decade ago I toured PS 217
and couldn't help being struck by the "diversity" of the student body -- Turks,
Syrians, Russians, central and south Americans, Asians both east and south, and
of course Afro-Americans. These folks don't appear in Modern Lovers. Nor do
the ubiquitous Hasids. No wonder Emma Straub likes the slice of Brooklyn that
she describes as suburban.  Here's a Brooklyn novel that's more Updyke-y than
Fuchs-y.

Modern Lovers tells a warm, approachable, sound, humorous-to-slightly-satirical
story. It's modern, in the sense that the lovers aren't young and aren't
searching for mates; instead, they're middle-aged and trying to repair troubled
marriages. I don't doubt that Modern Lovers hits some readers' bull's eyes -- 
even if it misses my tired old target. For me, it was a story of considerable
sociological interest -- an instance of how the decades have transmogrified my
Flatbush into hip Ditmas Park.

At the end of the novel, the entrepreurial ladies start a new restaurant, Hot
and Sweet, which bakes perfect apple turnovers and supersedes that old frayed 
Cortelyou Jewish deli.

Source: 2022/06/wood-products-ennos

Title: Wood Words
Date: June 02, 2022

I suspect that I know more about wood than most laymen, partly as a consequence
of Uncle Al owning and operating the sawmill for all those years. And then
there's my own independent enthusiasm for trees: planting and transplanting,
gathering and saving seeds. Nevertheless, The Age of Wood by Roland Ennos
presented amateur me with a truckload of brand new information. It's a book that
re-tells the history of civilization through the use of wood and wood products.
A very good book, well worth the perusal.

Moreover, Ennos introduced me to a number of savory new words -- words that no
doubt I should have known and which are probably known to true woodophiles but
that are novel to me.

For example: the newfangled word anisotropy, which is defined as the property of
a material that displays different traits along different axes, as for example
lumber, which is much easier to split along its grain than across it. Because
wood is anisotropic and so tough sideways, it has many uses that it wouldn't
have had if merely isotropic.

Anisotropy, as a collection of sounds, does not appeal to me as much as some
of Ennos's gritty, oldfangled words. I am happy to make the acquaintance of
the word bodger, which is a wood carver or turner, but specifically a person
who makes chairs out of beechwood. What a wonderful word, though, I confess,
difficult to work into the conversation. Also hard to insinuate into the daily
exchange is futtock, which is a curved piece of timber forming the lower part
of the frame of a wooden ship. Futtock should not be confused with its near-
neighbor puttock, which is a kind of kite, and a word which Shakespeare uses as
an insult. Both futtock and puttock sound vaguely naughty, perhaps because of
their proximity to buttock. I also like strake, which is a continuous band of
hull planking, and which sometimes sports a rove, which is "a groove along the
lower inside edge of each strake." I admit that I had never heard of nacelles,
which are the outer casing of an early wooden aircraft engine. I imagine that
nacelles are as obsolete as wooden airplanes, as is monocque, a type of
construction in which the outer skin carries a major part of the stresses. Who
knew?  I was familiar with the word sheave but I didn't know that it also is
the rotating wheel inside a pulley. A duogong is part of the network of wooden
supports in traditional Chinese wood-frame buildings.

A trullo is a traditional Apulian drystone hut with a conical roof.

Source: 2022/09/contradictory-assertions

Title: Contradictory Assertions
Date: September 05, 2022

We stayed at an inn in Lyme, New Hampshire called "Breakfast on the
Connecticut." Good location, decent accommodations -- but they don't serve
breakfast. Which reminded me of the famous sign in front of the Fairlee Diner on
Route 5 in Fairlee, Vermont: "Open Seven Days a Week. Closed Tuesday."

Source: 2022/09/baboon-spirituality

Title: Are Baboons "Spirtual'?
Date: September 11, 2022

A friend is intimately acquainted with a primatologist. She (the primatologist)
has spent many a year, almost a lifetime, studying baboons. She has lived with
them and claims to have been accepted as one of the troop. She travels with them
when she can. I'm impressed by her dedication. I wouldn't want to travel for
more than a couple of days with a group of human tourists, let alone energetic
lower primates. My one encounter with baboons, in a  rest area in South Africa,
was unpleasant. The baboons were noisy and aggressive. Sub-Yahoos.

The primatologist told my friend the following  story. She was accompanying
a troop of baboons on a trek from one feeding place to another. They came to
a river that they wanted to cross. They all stopped, sat down on the ground,
waited silently for about thirty minutes. Then they all arose as one and
proceeded to wade across the river.

My friend said, and I quote verbatim, "it was a spiritual moment."

To which I immediately responded, "I don't know exactly what you mean, but I
can tell you that never in a thousand years would I interpret such an event as
'spiritual'."

All of us around the table were polite, so the conversation moved on to more
fruitful topics and did not become contentious.

But later, I thought, what did he (and the primatologist) mean by the word
"spiritual."  And the best that I can come up with, is that they both deduced
that the baboons engaged in some sort of prayer--that they paused to solicit
divine intervention before setting out on a hazardous adventure.

I'm not even slightly sympathetic to that reading. In actual fact, just between
us, I think it's kind of dumb.

I can think of many a reason why a congregation of baboons might assemble
themselves and take a moment. Perhaps they were assessing the flow of the river.
Maybe they were waiting for the current to become less strong. Or perhaps they
were looking at the other bank to see if there were predators hiding in the
underbrush. Or, most likely, they were simply tired and were gathering their
strength.

I think that my friend wanted to believe that baboons are spiritual, because
it follows that if baboons can pray to a higher power, then there's something
natural and universal about belief in a deity, even if it's the Great Baboon in
the Sky. Conversely, I am just as convinced that baboons are smart enough to
look around carefully before taking the plunge. No supererogatory hypothesis
required.

To me, the natural and material explanation is completely obvious -- although I
must admit that the primatologist who offered the spiritual explanation and the
friend who repeated it are both scientists of considerable repute.

Source: 2022/09/wehmeier-complete-games-robin-roberts

Title: Herman Wehmeier; Pitching 1950-2022
Date: September 22, 2022

For three days last month we stayed in a BNB just across the Connecticut River
in New Hampshire. The place is owned (or perhaps only managed) by a family
bearing the surname Wehmeier. It's a rare name, but one not entirely unfamiliar
to me. Like any member of my baseball-obsessed generation, I was immediately
put in mind of the only other Wehmeier who's ever crossed my path. I refer of
course to Herman Wehmeier, of famous memory, the right-handed pitcher who played
fourteen seasons of major league ball, mostly for Cincinnati and the Phillies.
His career, from 1945 to 1958, coincided with the period of my greatest interest
and enthusiasm for baseball -- the years in which I studied Dodger box scores
with an assiduity that I never granted to algebra or Latin.

Herman Wehmeier was a solid pro, but not a Hall of Fame quality pitcher. His
lifetime W-L was 92-108 and his cumulative ERA was 4.80. He made it into the
record books because he led the league in Walks Allowed three times, in Wild
Pitches twice, and in Hit Batsmen and Earned Runs Allowed once apiece.

When looking over his stats, one particular number stands out. Herm started 240
games in his career and pitched an astonishing 79 complete games. He finished
one out of every three games that he started! A remarkable achievement from
the perspective of 2022, is it not?  A new world of "closers," "set-up men,"
"openers" and precipitous yankings.

Among active pitchers, Max Scherzer, who might be my nominee for pitcher of
the decade, has, in 14 seasons so far, pitched just 12 complete games. In his
best year, 2015, he had just 4. Jacob deGrom, who is as talented a pitcher
as baseball can boast, has started 207 games in his career so far, just 4 of
which he has completed. The present leaders in complete games are veterans Adam
Wainwright with 28 and Justin Verlander with 27.

Robin Roberts, one of the best pitchers of Wehmeier's era, once pitched 28
complete games in a row, one of them lasting 17 innings. Lifetime, Roberts
started 609 games and completed 310.

Source: 2022/09/ocellated-turkey

Title: The Ocellated Turkey
Date: September 25, 2022

Turkeys, I was recently surprised to learn, come in two distinct species. The
familiar one is the "wild turkey", Meleagris gallopavo, the big bird that in
broods of twenty or so, wanders around my house and garden, eating seeds,
insects, acorns and apples and occasionally leaving behind a fancy feather or
two.

They're new to the neighborhood. Until about twenty years ago, I had not seen a
single turkey; now, they're everywhere. And bold. Or perhaps just indifferent to
me.

And then there's the second kind of North American turkey. It's rare -- found,
nowadays, only in the Yucatan peninsula. It's the "ocellated turkey,"  and it's
one heck of a fancy bird.

Source: 2022/09/rah-rah-cornell-football

Title: Rah-Rah
Date: September 28, 2022

Promenading last Friday on the semi-famous Boulder Mall, we stumbled upon a
Certifiably Big Event.

Ours is a college town where the three major religions are marijuana, massage,
and football. On the evening that precedes a Saturday home game, the Mall is
turned over to a football rally--a gigantic and noisy one. Have any of my
regular readers or stray internet pilgrims ever been to such an event?  It's
quite an echt American experience: the uniformed marching band -- all epaulets
and brass and drums, the perky cheerleaders, a float featuring sports heroes
of yore, the hundred gladiators themselves (all much taller and thicker than
ordinary human beings) along with chants and rousing speeches. Tons of school
spirit and not a shred of irony.

The next day, despite the ginned-up enthusiasm, our team was blown out by UCLA,
45-17.

Rallies are not my kind of event. I'm constitutionally allergic to rah-rah and
for the last couple of decades I've been boycotting football.

Why no more football for me? In truth, football was never my passion. I hardly
ever played the game -- only a little "two-hand touch" in the schoolyard, so
I'm not surrendering much by proscribing a sport that is a danger to everyone's
physical well-being. There are too many dreadful injuries, especially head
injuries. Too many retired players afflicted with dementia. A few days ago,
surfing the channels, I accidentally glanced at a few minutes of a NFL contest.
Even in that brief stretch, a cornerback was badly battered and carried by
stretcher into an on-field ambulance. To me, it looked like it could be a broken
neck. I'm sorry that I paused to watch; it will be along time before I do so
again.

And I've always been resistant to Rah-Rah. Rubs me wrong; always has, right from
the start.

The local mall rally caused me to remember my first days at Cornell, 66 years
ago. I was a most naive freshman (now "freshperson" or "first-year") and had not
a glimmer of an idea about college life -- none of my family or friends ever
having enjoyed such an experience. Completely at sea. My peers in the freshman
dorm insisted, you have to go to the rally. I had no idea what a rally was but
if going to college meant going to rallies, then why not? I knew no better and
tagged along with my new acquaintances. So there it was, just like last night on
the mall. The band, the cheerleaders, the athletes, the rah-rah exhortations.
One after another the speakers (were they coaches?), told us how hard we were
going to cheer tomorrow for dear old Cornell and victory. We sang Cornell songs,
the lyrics to which were handed to us on a mimeographed sheets of paper. It was
far too enthusiastic for me -- too patriotic I guess one might say. I was not
true to my school. How could I love Cornell or think fondly of my alma mater.
I had just arrived, for goodness sake, and hadn't even finished unpacking. The
insisted-upon emotion seemed contrived and artificial and I resented the pseudo-
nostalgia. I don't like being subsumed into a crowd. I respond negatively when
I'm exhorted to cheer or wave or sing. It all seems dangerously close to the
unthinking obedience of nationalist politics.

And then, next day, came the game itself. Dutifully I trudged to Schoellkopf to
watch our guys encounter Princeton. I remember nothing about the contest, not
even who won or lost. But I can still feel the cold September drizzle -- and I
know that I caught a stiff cold. In my four years in Ithaca, it was my first and
only football game.

I soon learned that Cornell had much to offer beyond the rah-rah. It took a year
or so, but eventually I found my people.

Source: 2022/10/tyrannosaurus-ted-williams-mongols-anemoia-

Title: Anemoia
Date: October 10, 2022

The premise of Riley Black's The Last Days of the Dinosaurs (New York, 2022)
is a most splendid one. Imagine, she proposes, that it is 66 million years ago
and dinosaurs are the monarchs of the earth. What was it like, in that era, to
be alive in, say, the steamy forests where Wyoming now lies -- a world in which
club-tailed ankylosaurs were tracked by tyrannosaurs while primitive mammals
scuttled in the ferny underbrush. Rich and strange, certainly. And then, how
was it all transformed on "the worst day in the history of the planet" when the
Chicxulub asteroid plowed into the Yucatan? One fine day, the dinosaurs were
triumphant; and then in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the six-mile-wide
asteroid crash lands and everything goes all kablooey -- the sure and firm-set
earth shakes, the atmosphere turns furnace hot, and acid rain and smoke and fire
and tsunamis snuff out 80 per cent of our planet's animal species.

It's a fabulous idea for a masterpiece of science writing, and consequently
I'm grieved to report that The Last Days of the Dinosaurs is a disappointing
book. It is loose and melodramatic and outrageously padded -- a thirty page
essay turned into a swollen three hundred page opus. It's much too pop; it's
insufficiently serious and therefore leaves poor frustrated me craving data
and detail rather than reiteration. Who could believe that the high drama of
Chicxulub could become quite so tedious? I put the blame on Ms. Black's literary
agent, who, I have no shadow of doubt, advised her to "turn your idea into a
book, and keep it easy -- not too technical -- you'll sell a lot more copies."

What a shame, because Black is well-informed and writes with intermittent flair.
She loves her reptiles, and in particular displays genuine warmth, almost
reverence, for every young person's favorite dinosaur, the tyrannosaurus rex. An
infatuation that lingers from her childhood, I suspect. I myself, not similarly
transfixed, might have supposed that T. Rex had been expelled from the Terrible
Lizard Hall of Fame sometime in the 1990s, when it came to be gospel that
the 60-foot tall monster was not a top-of-the-food-chain predator but merely
a snuffling scavenger. Was it not revealed to us that the creature's meager
brain was dwarfed by its olfactory bulbs, so that it could effortlessly detect
decaying flesh over the unbounded western landscapes? And was it not also agreed
that its puny forelegs were useless for pursuit or attack? Black will have
nothing of such paleontological revisionism. Her T. Rex is a hunter, lurking in
ambush to pounce and to crunch with one powerful bite the enormous protuberant
osteoderms that protected the stegosaurus spine. To me, the idea that a beast
as gigantic as a tyrannosaurus could conceal itself behind bush or boulder and
sneakily lunge at its prey seems totally ludicrous.

Black, bless her kindly heart, firmly embraces the unrevised T. Rex. Her loyalty
is transcendent. In a burst of psychological overkill, she describes her crush
on the dinosaur as an example of anemoia. And what, readers rightly ask, is
anemoia?  It's an unfamiliar word that describes a baffling concept. Upon
investigation,"anemoia" turns out to be a recent coinage, a "fire-new" word
(as WS, in LLL, calls such innovations). It's "a nostalgia for a time one has
never known," such as Black seems to feel about the years and days that preceded
Chicxulub. And here I must once again reveal my want of imagination. Anemoia,
however hard I labor to grasp the idea, is too subtle for my downright brain.
Isn't it the case that "nostalgia" is by definition a cherishing of something
in one's own personal history, as such a one as I might remember with warmth a
concert or a wedding or that long ago glorious day in which I, batting leadoff,
started the game with a triple to right field.

I can't quite fathom a nostalgia for something I've not known in my own person.
The emotion that Black describes I would call simple curiosity. I'm as intrigued
as the next guy about the past and I can certainly summon a yearning to have
been present at some great historical event, but I wouldn't call it anemoia.
For example, I might wish that I had been at Fenway on September 30, 1960, the
day that Ted Williams blasted a home run on his very last time at bat -- but I
wasn't there and it would be a falsehood to claim otherwise. [Full disclosure: I
was in attendance, just behind third base, the previous day, September 29, and
therefore missed the moment by a scant twenty-four hours.] Unlike Black, I'm
not anemoiac about the dinosaur-dominated world of the K-P boundary, but I have
other anemoiac -- as I've now redefined the word -- yearnings.

My most pressing and immediate wish would be to have joined the crowd at a
performance at the Globe Theatre in London, perhaps of Hamlet in 1599 or
Macbeth in 1606. Why? Because even though Shakespeare's works have been studied
microscopically for more than 400 years, no one really knows how those plays
originally looked or sounded. My suspicion is that they were far more foreign,
more strange, less realistic and more primitive than scholars recognize.
After all, the most brilliant play ever written, King Lear, was performed in
daylight and the actors had to project their voices to a crowd of 2000 people,
many of them shuffling about, gossiping, and cracking hazelnuts. No sets, no
curtains, no lighting, and no scenery to speak of. I'd guess that the cast
employed a style of dramaturgy closer to its medieval inheritance of allegorical
representation than we like to admit. Furthermore, I am convinced that if I were
present there at the actual Globe, I would discover an endless series of unknown
unknowns. Unimaginable unknowns, that would knock our anemoiac socks off. The
past is another country; they do things a heck of a lot differently there.

But wait! My dormant anemoia, now aroused, yearns to experience in my own person
other events in the past. Where else to indulge my wants? Certainly in Athens,
at a performance of a play by Sophocles -- which I can guarantee to be a hundred
times stranger than anything London could possibly offer.

But why only the arts?  Now that I think of it, I would love to take a gander
at forested Manhattan Island when Henry Hudson's Half Moon made its first
landfall. I could have talked to the Lenapes; tried to warn them about the
dangers that were coming down the pike. And there's much more. Just prior to
struggling through The Last Days of the Dinosaurs, I read Marie Favereau's
The Horde (2021), a most fascinating history of the Mongol civilization that
conquered and controlled the area from Hungary in the west to Korea in the east
during the 13th century and the first half of the 14th. Favereau's depiction of
the Mongols was novel and disorienting, essentially because I'm accustomed to
think about great empires as centered on a dominant imperial city -- Athens,
Rome, London. I believe that I understand a little of what life might have
been like in Rome; after all, I've read some of the ancient historians and I
know a bit about cities. I've even toured Pompeii, for goodness sake! But the
Mongols did not live in cities; they were not particularly literate, they were
unabashedly polygamous, animist, and almost entirely nomadic. It's a challenge
to imagine a "city" of a hundred thousand people in constant migratory motion.
When Mongol men went to war, which they seemed to do often and always, they
brought along the women and children, the cattle-drawn carts and wagons and
the felt tents along with their horses, goats and sheep. To spend time with a
wandering horde, an entirely unfamiliar form of civilization, and to try to
understand their mental world, would certainly challenge and enlarge my (and
your) conception of what it means to be a human being.

Favereau doesn't dwell on such speculations (she is more concerned with military
history than social or psychological matters) but nevertheless the ways in which
the migrants related to each other and to their environment had to be entirely
foreign to us mostly urban, post Age of Reason moderns. What was it like to be a
Mongol? Perhaps I feel this question personally because a recent examination of
my DNA tells me that I'm 1% Asian by genetic inheritance. I assume, naturally,
that like approximately 16,000,000 other people, I'm directly descended from
Mongol leader Chinggis (formerly Genghiz) Khan through one of his seven wives
or his innumerable concubines. Is it anemoia, a recognition of my kinship to
Grandpa Genghiz, that has produced in me, this morning, such a wildness in the
blood? Or is it the caffeine?

In actual fact, although I'm most curious about Mongol life, I don't think
that I would have made a good nomad. In the first place, I suffer from serious
directional disabilities and would no doubt promptly misplace myself on the vast
and featureless Eurasian steppe; and secondly, I lack enthusiasm for subsisting
on kumis, the fermented mare's milk which was the staple of the Mongol diet.

Let me now admit that while I indulge some pseudo-anemoia for my distant Mongol
forebears, I feel much closer to my more recent Ukrainian shtetl ancestors. If
I could be plopped down in the western Ukraine, I might be able to absorb the
texture of life in Staroconstantinov in 1895, just before brave Isaiah and Eta
set out for America.  As things stand, I know almost nothing of any importance
about the lives of my eastern European ancestors. How did these resilient folks
survive centuries, millennia,  of dearth, disease and pogroms? What did they
eat? Where did they sleep? What, indeed, did they do for "fun," if they had
any conception of fun? What did they read? How did the sexes relate to each
other? How did they find privacy? And most significantly: how seriously did they
embrace that narrow, all-encompassing and demanding religion?

A nineteenth-century shtetl seems impossibly foreign and faraway, but in the
longer time frame, it's actually very recent. The most distant past that we can
readily imagine is when the archeological record begins to appear -- perhaps
five thousand year ago. But my and your fully human ancestors migrated from the
Olduvai Gorge some 60,000 years ago, which leaves approximately 55,000 years
without any data at all -- or at least nothing beyond the merest occasional
trace. For these many millennia our forbears lived in world where there were no
cities, no writing, no pottery, no weaving, no domesticated plants or animals,
no metals, no wheels and therefore no vehicles -- only stone hand axes and
later spears and much later still bows and arrows. Two thousand five hundred
precarious generations of foraging! I would like to see for myself how our
common ancestors managed to survive when the gigantic short-faced bear competed
for the cave and the terrifying European lion lurked in the shadows. I suspect
also that the most dangerous predator our g g g... grandfathers faced was the
tribe next door -- otherwise why would we have inherited such hostility to
people who look or act just slightly differently than ourselves. Wouldn't it be
profoundly anemoiac to join a family of our mutual forebears for a week or two
and participate with them as they went about their lives?

What a treasure-trove of unknown unknowns would we confront!

Source: 2022/10/insightful-comment

Title: Insightful Comment
Date: October 21, 2022

Before I forget, I would like to put on the record the most memorable student
sentence that I received during my entire 50+ years of teaching literature: 
"After Gregor Samsa was transformed into a large insect, his lifestyle changed."

Source: 2022/10/nostalgia-flatbush-shallow

Title: Nostalgia
Date: October 24, 2022

The word "nostalgia" has a curious history. It was coined in the late 17th
century by attaching Greek άλγος (algos - pain) to νόστος (nostos
-homecoming). Originally, nostalgia carried a strongly negative signification:
"intense homesickness" -- "the depressing symptoms...  that arise in persons
when they are seized with a longing to return to their home and friends." Then,
for reasons that are not on the record, sometime during the first part of the
last century, the meaning of nostalgia shifted and became much more positive.
It's now a good word: "a wistful yearning for the past." A useful word.

Nostalgia is a familiar phenomena that all can recognize: the savoring of a
pleasant memory from earlier in our lives. It seems that nostalgia contains
within it a bias toward or even a falsification of the past. It's implicit in
nostalgia that things were better "back then." For example: I am a member of
a Facebook group called My Flatbush House from Years Ago. Its contributors
routinely idealize their childhoods. Reading their posts, you'd think that
the Flatbush of our youth was if not the the classical Golden Age at least
the Garden of Eden. "I loved my Brooklyn childhood." "I wouldn’t trade my
childhood for anything." "I grew up in the 40s and 50s! We were so lucky to have
known those days." "Much simpler times, more real and human-sized." "There was
no fear, everybody felt safe; we played out in the streets, unsupervised, until
it was suppertime." "We walked to and from school in every weather." "Going out
meant playing games in the street." "I feel so blessed to have lived such a
wonderful free life." "The fragrance of roses was everywhere in July (why don't
roses have perfume anymore?)"

"Ou sont les neiges d'antan?"  "Those were the days, my friend,/ We thought
they'd never end." "Rocky Top you'll always be/ Home sweet home to me."

Of course I also remember the good times, but I can't embrace such unalloyed,
uncritical celebrations. Yes, I can savor some pleasant moments in my seventy-
years-ago life. But I also recall that the 1950s was the era of "juvenile
delinquents" and gang wars, back alley abortions, ethnic strife, "broken homes,"
heroin, segregation, overcrowded chaotic schools, imminent nuclear holocaust
and "take cover" drills, McCarthyism, polio, the Korean War, Stalin, and Walter
O'Malley.

It's fascinating that the English language does not have a word for an antonym
of nostalgia. One of my sources suggests "cynicism." But I'm not a cynic;  I'm
an intermittent and realistic anti-nostalgist.

And why, when I lie insomniac (as is my too-frequent custom), do I not savor the
odor of those ever-perfumed Coney Island Avenue hybrid tea roses but instead am
tormented by nightmares of fear, humiliation, awkwardness, embarrassment and
loneliness. My childhood was pretty good one, thanks to my attentive parents. So
why do I obsess about the bad times? Have I gone full curmudgeon? Or am I simply
more honest than my cohort of Flatbush contemporaries?

In The Second Part of Henry the Fourth, Shakespeare explores nostalgia and its
opposite. Two old guys, Shallow and Silence, reminisce.

SHALLOW: I was once of Clement's Inn, where I think they will talk of mad hallow
Syet.

SILENCE: You were called 'lusty Shallow" then, cousin...

SHALLOW: On that very same day did I fight with on Samson Stockfish, a
fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, jesu, the mad days that I have spent. And to
see how many of my old acquaintance are now dead.

SILENCE:  We shall all follow, cousin...

SHALLOW:  Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living yet?

SILENCE: Dead, sir.

SHALLOW: Jesu, jesu, dead. He drew a good bow; and dead. He shot a fine
shot...  And is Jane Nightwork alive?...  Nay, she must be old; she cannot
choose but be old; certain she's old, and had Robin Nightwork by old Nightwork
before I came to Clement's Inn.

SILENCE:  That's fifty-five years since.

And then comes the correction, the anti-nostalgist.

FALSTAFF:  Lord, lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This
same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of his
youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbull Street;  and every third word
a lie.... He was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey,... And
now is this vice's dagger become a squire and talks as familiarly of John o'
Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him, and I'll be sworn he never saw him
but once in the tilt-yard, and then he burst his head for crowding among the
marshal's men.

And on and on, at great amusing length.

Shallow and Silence indulge their nostalgia;  Falstaff sees thing differently,
but whether he is a realist, a cynic or a curmudgeon is open to interpretation.

Source: 2022/10/soccer-boulder

Title: Where My Grandchildren Play Soccer
Date: October 25, 2022

Stunning, is it not? Just at the west side of our fair city, set against
the first manifestations of the Front Range. Six well-tended fields, scores
of players and many, many parents and grandparents (among them me, on sunny
Saturday mornings). I can't imagine a more idyllic and peaceful scene.

Do Luke and Caleb and Asher appreciate the glory of their situation? Why should
they, after all? It's what they've always known; they take it for granted that
soccer should be played in such lovely and prosperous surroundings. Later on,
they'll come to know more about the circumstances of less fortunate people.

It's hard for me not to compare Foothills Community Park with the P S 217
schoolyard of my own childhood. Ours was a representative "playground," no
better or worse than would be found in any other middle-class or working class
neighborhood. No grass, just solid concrete from one chain-link fence to the
other. It was where we ran races, played "two-hand touch," flipped baseball
cards, played punchball, stickball, basketball, softball, boxball, box baseball,
handball, and any other game that could be improvised with a pink spaldeen.
There were, as I remember, four basketball backboards and rims, arranged as two
full courts. But one of the backboards was missing, the pole having disappeared
many years ago and never replaced. Another of the poles had been set in the
ground at an angle of perhaps 80 degrees and never corrected. It was useless.
And then the two other baskets, on the Newkirk Avenue side, were set in ground
that was not level, so that the basket was 9' 6" or so if you shot from the left
side and 10" 6" on the right. Maybe this was a benefit; it helped us master
trigonometry.

The P S 217 schoolyard was crowded. Various sports overlapped and shared the
fields. If you were playing basketball, you had to watch out for line drives off
the bat of one of the softball players. This taught us to be alert.

I did not feel at all deprived or "underprivileged" -- it was life as I knew it
-- but I'm mighty glad that my grandchildren enjoy the luxury of grass and space
and peace. In the words of the great Sophie Tucker, "I've been rich and I've
been poor, and, believe me, rich is better."

Source: 2022/11/amnesia-on-film-the-majestic-2001

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Majestic (2001)
Date: November 02, 2022

Alas and alack, I've now known far too many folks who have endured serious
memory problems. As a consequence, I seem to have developed an interest in
amnesia not only in real life but also in fiction and film. There are many
many books on the subject and Wiki offers an astonishing list of 234 Hollywood
amnesia films -- some of which, judging by their titles, do not appeal to my
mature taste and which I promise never to view -- including such not doubt
remarkable productions such as Raft of the Dead, Zebraman 2: Attack on Zebra
City, and A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon.

I sometimes imagine that there are fewer actual cases of loss of memory than
there are films on the subject.

Literary amnesia is a recent obsession; while the ancients had their Lethe, the
river of forgetfulness, I can't recall amnesiacs wandering lost around Athens or
Rome. Shakespeare never wrote an amnesia play, though at one point Lear, who's
had a rough go of it, asks "Who is it that can tell me who I am?"

I suppose that we moderns put amnesia front and center because we are concerned
with the integrity and the continuity of the self. Loss of memory threatens us;
no memory, no identity. But let us not forget that amnesia is a cheap and easy
all-purpose convenient and superficial no sweat plot device. The formula: loss
of memory = mystery; restoration of memory =  anagnorisis. Very little thinking
required.

The Majestic is an eccentric unsatisfying fairy tale that provides the usual car
crashes but also lost love, the FBI, HUAC, and an art deco movie theater -- all
in the Capraesque context of small-town standards versus big-city corruption.
Pete Appleton, played by an uncharacteristically subdued and expressionless Jim
Carrey, falls into what is depicted as a total global amnesia. He lacks the
least glimmer of his past life. In "real life," any human forced to cope with
such an experience would suffer from anxiety, shock, disorientation, fear, and
worry -- but not so in this slice of hollywoodiana. Amnesiac Pete is calm and
patient, because he is rooted not in our communal vale of woe but in a movie
tradition where amnesia is ordinary and effortless. Don't worry, folks, he'll
recover his memory by the last reel. No big deal. And he does.

Once again, amnesia is a disease like none other.

Source: 2022/11/worlds-ugliest-building

Title: World's Ugliest Building
Date: November 04, 2022

The world's ugliest building, or at minimum a top competitor for the title, is
located just a block or so down the street from our present abode. Too damn
close, in fact, because it broadcasts its miasma of aesthetic gloom directly at
me. It's a large ungainly brick cube -- windowless, characterless, featureless,
probably designed by an untalented deadwood kind of guy who drew his inspiration
from a childhood of toying with Legos. "A doctor can bury his mistakes", said
Frank Lloyd Wright many years ago, "but an architect can only advise his clients
to plant vines." Vines is what this shameless structure needs -- thick ropes of
kudzu and lianas, whole Jurassic jungles of them -- but no such luck.

It's a CenturyLink building nowadays, but for what purpose it was originally
created is unknown to me. CenturyLink is an "internet provider." No doubt its
insides are more beautiful than its outside. How strange! Magnificent images and
lovely turns of phrase, unknown and invisible to its neighbors, portal in and
portal out!

I can't get a good picture of the entire building, but, please, take a good luck
at this street-side ornament:

Source: 2022/11/reading-obituaries

Title: Obits
Date: November 13, 2022

Like many of my peers, I've lately taken to reading the obituaries. When I was
a youthful fellow, I took pleasure in announcements of births and weddings and
anniversaries. No longer, alas; nowadays it's nothing but deaths. Reading about
the departed is not a habit of which I'm particularly proud. It's an unsavory
fixation upon the newly dead -- and is slightly ghoulish to boot. Yet daily
checking of the obits is not without a positive side: often it's exhilarating
to read about those amazing folks who have survived wars, dictatorships,
displacement, injury, and disease to live accomplished and joyful lives.
Obituaries are confusing.

It's not that I search out the obits -- they intrude upon me willy-nilly, like
it or not.

For one, there's the New York Times which every day memorializes a couple
or a dozen famous persons -- some of them people of my exact age cohort --
who have made a mark, for good or ill, in this our shared life. How does one
properly respond to such departures?  With empathy, certainly. But also, not
infrequently, with a touch of reluctant (and embarrassing) survivor-superiority.

I must admit that I'm frequently dazzled by these eminent people's list of
accomplishments, even if I haven't the least clue about exactly what they have
achieved. My own life has been, it would seem, so dominated by hearth and home,
so narrow and provincial that I cannot always appreciate the eulogized. Often
they have distinguished themselves in areas of expertise that have completely
passed me by: computer technologists who have created portals and platforms that
will always lie beyond my ken, physicists who have shed light (incomprehensible
to me) on dark mysteries, superstar rappers, mvp's in sports that I didn't know
existed, billionaire entrepreneurs with their 35,000 sq. ft. homes and their
stupendous megayachts, generals and spies, etc., etc., etc. It's astonishing how
little these famous folk have touched me; how little overlap there is between
their worlds and mine. Clearly, I've inhabited an impermeable bubble.

If so, why do I care, why do I read their obits, why do I bother to applaud or
(secretly and guiltily) pooh-pooh their contributions?

But hey, I can't blame it all on the Times. Every second month, I receive
an e-mail notice from the college that I attended, back there in the 50s,
that lists the recent deaths of my classmates. Only a few years ago, it was
a trickle, now it's a flood. While nothing forces me to open the electronic
envelope, nevertheless, I do so, "attracted" as David Copperfield once said
about Uriah Heep, "in very repulsion." Nor must I read the obituaries of members
of the graduate school through which I slipped, barely noticed, sixty-years ago.
Do I remember these people? Rarely, even despite occasional parallels in our
careers. In addition, I follow the obituaries in the local Daily Camera. People
I know, or, given my fifty-year residence in this fair city, those to whom I am
connected by a couple or three degrees of separation. Sometimes I am shocked
by the death of a person whom I hadn't heard was ill, or who died suddenly in
a bicycle crash or a fall from a step stool. Such revelations deeply disturb
a Sunday morning. And yet, is it so horribly wrong for me to congratulate
myself that it was not I but that other guy who was mowed down by a speeding
truck on Canyon Boulevard? (I had just crossed at that same spot a day before,
uneventfully. Luck of the draw!)

Does it matter that the obits that I read are not truly representative of
my contemporaries? They are accounts of people who have made something of
themselves, lived useful and noteworthy lives. I can't help thinking about the
others: the ones who slunk off the planet quietly -- those who were drunkards or
druggies, or who were seduced by some weird religious cult and disappeared into
the desert, or those who gave up the struggle and took their own lives, or those
who retreated. along with their six scrawny cats, to a dirty SRO on the upper
West Side (except when they venture to the street to harangue passers-by with
their idiosyncratic religious theories).

Even the obits that do come to my notice don't tell the whole story. They're
curricula vitae that 99% of the time are entirely laudatory. The ancient tag
"de mortuis nihil nisi bonum" is rigorously honored. The notices don't state
what everyone knows -- that the dearly departed was a notorious skinflint
who squeezed the last nickel from his tenants and his employees, stiffed his
partners, and regularly harassed his former friends with nuisance suits. They
fail to mention that an apparently upstanding citizen was also a neglectful
father who eventually ran off with his peroxided mistress and a Harley, or that
he was known to the neighbors as the guy who poisoned the Labrador retriever of
that nice elderly couple down the street. Or who was fired because he showed up
plastered once too often. Sometimes it's what's left out that's most revelatory.
Obits should be read with care; I don't always remember to do so.

But to tell truth it's not the obituaries themselves that bother me --it's my
own ambivalence and confusion. Why the fascination with obits? Is it the same
impulse that causes commuters to stop and stare at the wreck on the highway?
Could it be that I enjoy, genuinely enjoy, reading about the deaths of my fellow
creatures? And if I do so, what sort of morally defective person am I?  Do I
suffer from an incurable case of schadenfreude -- a delight in the misfortunes
of others? Or is it even worse -- mere undiluted gloating? For truly, I am
forced to admit, there is something almost triumphant about reading an obit.
"He's dead, but I'm alive." How pathetic and reprehensible a feeling -- and
how transitory!  When I am in a generous mood, I know that when I read an
obituary, I daren't gloat, but should rather mourn the common fate of all of us
poor fragile mortals. "Death is certain, sayeth the Psalmist." "No man is an
island entire of himself." Although I might gloat today, tomorrow I too will
be as dead as a doornail. Another bucket, mine, will be kicked. And yet I do
not always experience the fellow-feeling that I would like to admire in myself.
If I'm not a bad person, I'm certainly not always a good one. No question but
there's a chasm between what I feel and what I am convinced that I should feel.

Some obituaries present special problems. For example, I am immediately put
off when the the obituary begins with the foolish new age euphemism, "he
transitioned.... "  Such a phrase hardens my heart, I'm sorry to admit. Let's
face it; he didn't "transition." He died. But I'm equally saddened by the
obituary that announces that "he went to live with the Lord." Such pathetic
self-deception.

But the hardest moral problem for me occurs when I come upon the obituary of a
person I genuinely disliked. There aren't many of them; I'm not a hater. But
still, it's very difficult for me to find genuine empathy for someone I truly
loathed. It's wrong for me to rub my hands in triumphant glee because that nasty
s. o. b. is gone forever? I would prefer not to be the kind of person who dances
on graves.

Source: 2022/11/suicides

Title: My Suicides
Date: November 20, 2022

I seem to have plowed a path of destruction, suicide-wise, in my earlier years.

In 1958, I studied "intermediate algebra" with a cheerful, well-regarded
teacher named Ruth B. White. One Monday morning, she wrote her new name on the
blackboard; she was no longer Mrs. White; she was now Mrs. White-Green. Her
supportive students, I remember, applauded enthusiastically. But just as the
semester ended and we pupils moved on to trigonometry, newlywed Mrs. White-
Green, sadly and incomprehensibly, took her own life. What a shock and puzzle
for a gawky innocent Flatbush "yoot." Why, I asked myself, should re-marriage
lead so suddenly to suicide (if indeed the two events were at all related)? To
me, this tragic occurrence was an early indication that human psychology was a
heck of a lot more mysterious than cocooned me had imagined. And then, a few
years later, in the spring semester of my second year in college, I enrolled
for a course in medieval history with the very distinguished Professor Theodore
Maroon. Just a few months after the class concluded, Professor Maroon destroyed
himself. Moreover, the very next year, I surveyed early American literature in
a course taught by Professor Stephen Emerson Black, who, the following summer,
attached a hose to the car exhaust, shut the garage doors, and put an end to his
existence.

I need to reassure myself that it was only a few, not all, of my many teachers
who pulled the trigger after trying to educate me. Nevertheless, something of
a pattern emerged. The trajectory continued in 1960, when, two months after he
officiated at our wedding, cigar-chomping Rabbi Herschel Gray walked into Lake
Yahnundasis in order to drown himself. Why? I had nary a clue; still don't, in
fact.

Several other people with whom I've crossed paths have also chosen to leave life
behind. I remember dour Alfredo Naranja, a college acquaintance from Costa Rica
or perhaps Panama. He graduated from Cornell, returned home, and immediately
shot himself. I also remember handsome fair-haired Stanley Brown. He was a
classmate at EHHS; the two of us studied four years of Latin in the same half-
empty schoolrooms. He was not a close friend, though I clearly recall that we
occasionally trudged home from school together. Stanley went on to Columbia,
where, I was later informed, he graduated first in his class, which is no mean
achievement. I wasn't surprised -- he was smart and extremely serious about
schoolwork. Stanley then proceeded to Harvard Medical School. Cambridge was my
home at that time as well and although our paths had not crossed in four or
five years, Stanley telephoned me "out of the blue," as they say, and engaged
me in conversations that were longer than I wished. I realize now that I was
not as hospitable to him as I might have been. He was lonesome, I think. And
then came the news that he had killed himself. I now wish that I had been more
cordial -- but how was I to know that he was in such mortal pain? The story has
a coda: Stanley's grandparents owned a delicatessen on Ditmas Avenue between
East 7th and East 8th. Some years after the suicide, I stopped in at the store
for a salami sandwich (or something) and encountered the diminutive elderly
storekeepers -- a sad, crushed couple. I knew, or thought I knew, that they were
mourning the death of their promising grandchild. Was it my imagination, or was
my intuition correct?

And then in graduate school there was Arthur Blue. Arthur was a serious poet
and budding scholar. I was a close enough friend that I was invited to his
Episcopal wedding in, I think, Wellesley, Massachusetts, where, for the first
time in my life, ceremonious kneeling was required of me. Arthur and I kept up
an intermittent correspondence after I moved to New York and he to Seattle. I
remember congratulating him on the births of his two daughters. But then one
December, I received an end-of-the-year card from Barbara Scarlet-Blue, which
contained a most memorable sentence: "Of course you have heard of Arthur's
suicide." Well, no, I hadn't. I was later informed that Arthur had turned on
the gas at his summer house on Vachon Island, where he had been on a solitary
vacation. Barbara offered no theory to account for Arthur's act, but now,
fifty years later, I suspect, without evidence, that he had sexual identity
problems with which he could not cope. If so, he would be another casualty of
the commonplace bigotry of that era. Arthur's death is a suicide to which I am
not reconciled, and never will be.

And I must also remember Mary Crimson, wife of famous Shakespearean scholar
Reginald Crimson, who, depressed, slit her wrists in the bath. It was an
absolutely devastating act for Reg and his many friends and admirers.

And then there are the young people, the next generation, who made irreversible
decisions when they were far too young to do so. There's the horrible story of
Carol Pink, a daughter of friends, who jumped off a balcony in Lincoln Towers
in Manhattan and landed, twenty stories below, on the roof of a yellow taxi.
Apparently, she tried to grab her brother and pull him down with her, but
thankfully she did not succeed. And Alice Magenta, daughter of Hill neighbors,
who killed herself in her late teens, a disaster made more excruciating because
her elder half-brother had done the same deed few years before. Their parents
never recovered from the twin losses; but why should they?  Another young
person was twenty-two year old Francesca Crimson, the daughter of a pair of
famous artists and herself a promising photographer; another plunge from the
roof of a tall building. And also, the teen son of my longtime colleague Richard
Purple, who did himself in with drugs, though his religious family chose to
believe, against all the evidence, that it was an accidental overdose.

I respect suicides, even when I don't understand them, because I believe that
everyone has a right to do what they want with their own selves. But I am
saddened beyond ordinary sadness when very young people take their own lives.
If an adolescent or twenty-something boy or girl told me that they had suicidal
thoughts, I would say "almost everyone has a few bad years; almost everyone
is miserable during adolescence. But almost every one of these unhappy beings
turns out to live a productive, useful and essentially happy life. Give it a few
years; don't make a precipitous decision. Hold on; hang tough; trust me, it's
going to get better."

Source: 2022/11/trullo

Title: Another Astonishing Feat of Memory
Date: November 27, 2022

I've arrived at the age in which even a momentary lapse of memory is worrisome.
Have I at last begun the ineluctable descent into senility?

But then there's the contrary. When I happen to dredge up some bit of buried
knowledge, I experience a rush of triumph. I feel it as evidence that I've put
off the inevitable for another couple of weeks -- perhaps even months. And I
preen and strut shamelessly. I become unbearable.

At the Phillips, yesterday, we came upon a painting by Giuseppe De Nittis called
"Spring" (there's a pretty poor reproduction of it above). I glanced at the
picture, and in a flash, without hesitation, announced, "that's a trullo in the
left distance."  And I was correct -- my assertion confirmed by the scholarly
description on the accompanying wall plaque.

What is a trullo?  It's a building, obviously, a kind of drystone architecture,
common in Apulia, usually whitewashed and with a conical roof, often constructed
as a temporary shelter for shepherds and other agricultural workers and
occasionally for long term occupancy.

But how does a Flatbush yoot recognize and immediately name a trullo at first
glance?  I could be coy and say something like, "Oh, who doesn't know about
trulli?" and leave my friends baffled and dazzled by my prodigious memory.

But of course that would not be the full story.

Some seven or eight years ago, as turisti, we visited an Italian village called
Alberobello in Apulia in southern Italy. Here's a picture:

Source: 2022/12/young-philadelphians-paul-newman

Title: What We Read in the 1950s: The Philadelphian (1956)
Date: December 04, 2022

Richard Powell's novel The Philadelphian has not worn well. It was a best-seller
in 1956 and was made into a "blockbuster" film, starring Paul Newman, in 1959.
We watched the movie (called, for some reason, The Young Philadelphians) on TCM
and I was sufficiently intrigued that I ordered up the long-forgotten novel
through our blessedly-efficient Interlibrary Loan. Gosh, what a disappointment!
The Philadelphian is a pot-boiler, I'm afraid, very mid-century. It's got it all
-- three-generations of rags to riches, heroic army service, blighted romance
and cheesy sex, and a contrived climactic courtroom showdown. Powell's prose is
flat, unstylish, at its best "journalistic," but marred by flights of tough-guy
pseudo-Hammettian or Chandleresque prose: "He came slowly downstairs from the
bedroom, with the pulse of blood hammering inside his skull like a rivet gun";
"Her head felt like a boiling tea kettle, and her thoughts kept escaping from
it like steam"; "The applause had been a cheer for the underdog. Later it had
developed that a wolf was romping around in underdog's clothing". Frankly, I'm
surprised that the novel achieved such popularity in the years of my youth.
Sorry to say but it's a trashy piece of writing.

The film is a bit better; more honest and more disciplined, hugely reliant on
Paul Newman's youthful charisma.

Source: 2022/12/more-words-new-to-me

Title: More Words New to Me
Date: December 05, 2022

Calipash is the "gelatinous greenish material found underneath the upper half
of a turtle's shell." Perhaps this word is well known to turtle-fanciers, but
it's brand new to me. Calipash is "esteemed as a delicacy" but should not be
confused with calipee, which is a fatty gelatinous light-yellow substance
found immediately above the turtle's lower shell. Equally delectable, so say
connoisseurs. Here's a dish of mixed calipash and calipee. I confess that it
does not look delectable to me. Looks repellent, in fact, but each to his own.

Calipash could be served with pilaus, a Kenya spicey rice dish. One might, or
might not, add beeswing to the menu. Beeswing is the "filmy translucent crust"
that grows on port that has been bottle-aged.

Zenana is a word of Persian origin which refers to the part of a large house
reserved exclusively for women; it is therefore equivalent to harem.  Here's a
picture of a rich gentleman visiting a zenana.

Source: 2022/12/proverbs-for-a-latter-day

Title: Proverbs for a Latter Day
Date: December 05, 2022

You can take the boy out of Brooklyn, but you can't take the Brooklyn out of the
boy.  (Traditional)

The more you hold a baby in the first year, the less you have to hold it later
on. (Dr. Catherine Lodyjenski, pediatrician.)

Don't skate to where the puck is; skate to where it's going to be.  (Wayne
Gretzky)

Adolescence is not for sissies.  (EHP)

You can't coach seven feet. (Origin unknown)

Enough is as good as a feast.  (Traditional)

Enough is as good as a feast, and sometimes better.  (EHP)

"Both" is always an option.  (KM)

Everyone has a plan until I punch him in the mouth. (Mike Tyson)

Don't look back; someone might be gaining on you.  (Satchel Paige)

If you lose your man, go directly to the basket.  (Emanuel P.)

The only people who idealize the past are those who know nothing about it. 
(EHP)

The longer something has been believed by mankind, the less likely it is to be
true.  (EHP)

No one know what's going on between two people, even if you're one of them. 
(EHP)

What's sauce for the goose is not necessarily sauce for the gander.  (EHP)

The secret of life is to turn routines into rituals.  (Origin unknown)

Nothing ever happens until it happens.  (EHP)

Babies rewire the parental brain. (EHP)

Everything made of wood was once a tree. (Origin unknown)

Your father is an enigma who takes a lifetime to decipher. (Origin unknown)

Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed
to accept a favor from a friend.  (Emanuel P.)

Religion: my prince of peace can beat up your prince of peace.  (LERM)

No one owns anything;  the most you can say is that you have a lifetime
lease.  (Emanuel P.)

You should be at least as polite to a wife or husband as to a person you meet on
the street. (EHP)

Old age is not for sissies.  (Bette Davis)

You can't make old friends. (EHP)

You're immortal until the moment you die. (EHP)

There are no chocolate ice cream cones in the next world.  (LERM)

Source: 2022/12/words-kurgan-tarboosh

Title: A Few More Unusual Words New to Me
Date: December 07, 2022

A matamata is a species of turtle found in South America. It's odd looking, even
for a turtle.

Source: 2022/12/turtles-reincarnation

Title: Turtles and Metempsychosis
Date: December 13, 2022

I would not want to be reincarnated as a turtle. Not at all.

Should it happen that I were to be reincarnated, I would prefer to return as one
of those great sea birds -- the Wandering Albatross or the Great Frigatebird 
or the Northern Fulmar -- that cruise for hundreds of miles over the Pacific
-- soaring effortlessly, joyriding the thermals, blissfully savoring the salt
spray at dawn and dusk. It would be glorious -- although not entirely without
a downside, because if I were such a bird I would have to sustain myself on a
repulsive sushi diet of raw fish. Yeesh.

But to live the next or a subsequent life as a turtle -- what a grim unpleasant
prospect! Turtles do not soar; they're earthbound, and they move so slowly that
they're almost immobile. At very best, they slog or plod. It's not that they're
unsuccessful in their own way; after all, they've been around for 200 million
years. Generations, therefore, have plod, have plod, have plod. But is there a
creature on earth whose bodily configuration is more limiting, more dictatorial?
Turtles spend a lifetime schlepping carapace and plastron up and down hills or
over the desert sands. How can an animal constrained to eternally lug an outsize
ponderous shell experience any kind of freedom or joy?

Besides, turtles are ridiculously ugly.

Source: 2022/12/newkirk-theater-flatbush

Title: Neighborhood Movie Theaters
Date: December 19, 2022

When I was an unadventurous Flatbush "yoot" back there in the 1950s, there
were only two movie theaters that mattered: the Leader and the Kent, both
on Coney Island Avenue, and both within an easy walk. The Leader was closer
to my East 9 Street home and it was there that I spent many a rainy weekend
afternoon ostensibly watching a double feature while sprinting in the aisles,
hurling popcorn at the kids who were down in front, and dodging the "matron."
The Kent was more of an expedition but still less than a quarter of a mile
away. I once saw a show there with my father (Bad Day at Black Rock (1955)],
memorable because it was the only time I ever went to the movies with him -- he
was no frivolous moviegoer. In my childish innocence, I assumed that both the
Leader and the Kent had been in place since time immemorial and that moviegoing
began and ended with these two theaters. They were like mountains and rivers,
permanent features of the landscape (or, rather, cityscape). I was very wrong.
All is flux and movie theaters come and go. According to that most valuable
resource, Cinema Treasures, over 27,000 cinemas in the United States have been
closed or demolished, with many more endangered -- killed in the 1930s by the
Depression and then in my time by the TV and DVDs and discs and streaming and
covid. And also by self-inflicted wounds -- the studios and independents have
failed to produce a regular supply of films for grownups and instead fill the
shopping mall screens with CGI effects and infantile fantasies and "franchises."
Nevertheless, the Kent is still in business, as a small-screen "art" theater,
but the Leader long ago devolved into a bowling alley -- the Leader Lanes.
Later it became a pharmacy. I don't know what has become of it lately; probably
something dreadful.

There's much more to the story than the Leader and the Kent. In my youth, there
was also the Culver Theater, the outside appearance of which I knew very well
but never the interior. The Culver was located at the corner of 18th Avenue and
McDonald, just a block away from the McDonald Avenue branch of the Brooklyn
Public Library, where I shelved books for 75 cents an hour all through my
Erasmus Hall years.

The Culver was adjacent to and almost under the Culver Local, the "El" or
elevated subway, that ran along McDonald (formerly Gravesend) Avenue. ("Elevated
subway", by the way, is one of the most fabulous unappreciated oxymora of
our time). The Culver was a big spacious theatre that sat 1445 people. I
imagine that most of the paying customers had a tough time catching the dialog
when a train rumbled by. I wish I could identify what film was playing when
this picture was snapped, but alas the image is blurred. The styles of the
automobiles suggest a date in the late 1930s. The Culver has long disappeared
and nowadays the most prosperous commercial venture on its former block is the
Tashkent Supermarket.

Then there was the Beverly, located at the intersection of Church Avenue and
East 2 Street, just a few blocks from Erasmus Hall High School at Church and
Flatbush.

On the day of this photo, the Beverly was showing Away All Boats, a 1956 war
drama featuring Jeff Chandler, but as we all know, Jeff was in fact Erasmus
alumnus Ira Grossel. The movie in which he starred was playing just down the way
from his old high school -- a marvelous serendipitous coincidence. The Beverly's
second feature, Raw Edge, was a western with Rory Calhoun and Yvonne DeCarlo.
Did I plunk down my quarter to watch a war movie and a western? It was certainly
the kind of programming that would have attracted my seventeen-year-old self. I
have no recollection of either feature but I am able to bring to mind an image
of young lovely Yvonne DeCarlo. The Beverly operated from 1920 to 1981 and has
since, sadly, been transformed into a T-Mobile showroom.

There was also the Rialto

at the corner of Cortelyou Road and Flatbush Avenue. It was directly on my route
as I walked to Erasmus Hall High School with Steve Lewin five times a week
between 1952 to 1956. It was also a block or two from the Sears, Roebuck store,
where in the summer of 1956, I handed out parking tickets to drivers entering
the Sears lot. Their cars looked a lot like the ones in this picture. Last I
heard, the Rialto had transmogrified into the Cortelyou Road Church of God -- a
sorry fate.

In addition to the theaters that I attended or might have attended in the days
of my youth, there were another bunch that had already shut up shop. The most
prominent was the Newkirk Theater on East 16th Street -- and therefore only
five or six blocks from P S 217. It stood just across from Newkirk Plaza, the
shopping center that also housed an express stop on the BMT line. The Newkirk
started life as the TNF, named after the initials of its trio of builders. It
might have been, originally, a legitimate theater.

In 1928 it reopened as a cinema with a performance My Best Girl with Mary
Pickford (who lived for a while with Doug F. at 1320 Ditmas). It closed in
1940 and has since been demolished. It must have been quite an ornament to the
neighborhood, but I rode my bicycle on that street many times and never detected
the least sign that there had once been a handsome theater there. I wonder
also what became of the grand Robert Morton organ that accompanied the silent
films. Later the Newkirk acquired a proper movie marquee as can be seen in this
fragment of an image.

The Newkirk was gone for good in 1940.

Then there was the Dorchester, a the corner of Dorchester and Coney Island
Avenue. Here's how its building appeared a few years ago:

Source: 2022/12/what-i-read-2022

Title: Books I Read, 2022
Date: December 30, 2022

This year's list is incomplete. During the Vermont summer, I neglected to keep
good records. My porous brain can't bring to mind all I read in June, July,
August, and September. In addition, it's a list of books only, so no periodicals
(New Yorker, New York Review of Books), Northern Forests) or newspapers.

Abdulrazak Gurnah, The Last Gift; Daniel Fuchs, Williamsburg Summer; L. J.
Davis; A Meaningful Life;  Marc David Baer, The Ottomans, Jonathan Lethem,
Motherless Brooklyn; J.M. Quigley, Lolita in the Afterlife; Daniel Fuchs,
Homage to Blenholt; A J Rich, The Hand that Feeds You;  Alfred Kazin, Walker
in the City; Jonathan Lethem, Fortress of Solitude; Colm Toibin, Brooklyn; Paul
Auster, The Brooklyn Follies;  Emily Gould, Friendship; James Agee, Brooklyn
Is; Jenny Offill, Department of Speculation; Ursula Parrott, Ex-Wife; Kyle
Harper, Plagues Upon the Earth; Adelle Waldman, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel
P.; James McBride, The Color of Water; Jennifer Egan, Manhattan Beach; R. D.
Rosen, Tough Luck; David Crystal, The Story of English; Seth Lerer, Inventing
English; Paul Auster, Sunset Park; Richard Fortey, Fossils; Jay Neugeboren, Big
Man; Magocsi and Petrovsky-Shtern, Jews and Ukrainians; Henry James, Portrait
of a Lady; Yohanan Petrovsky-Shtern, The Golden Age Shtetl; Jay Neugeboren,
Imagining Robert; James Huneker, The New Cosmopolis; Roland Ennos, The Age of
Wood; Emily Bingham, My Old Kentucky Home; Marie Favereau, The Horde; John Dunn,
The Glitter in the Green; Mike Unwin, Around the World in 80 Birds; Douglas
Boyd, Plagues and Pandemics; David Abulafia, The Discovery of Mankind; Riley
Black, The Last Days of the Dinosaurs; William Shakespeare, The Second Part of
King Henry the IV; Pekka Hamaleinen, Comanche Empire; Thomas Doherty, Pre-Code
Hollywood; Julian Barnes, The Sense of an Ending; William Makepeace Thackeray,
Vanity Fair; An Italian Impressionist in France, Giuseppe De Nittis; Richard
Powell, The Philadelphians; Pekka Hamaleinen, Indigenous Continent; David
Anthony, The Horse, The Wheel and Language; Julian Barnes, Elizabeth Finch;
Jeffrey Lovich, Turtles of the World; Andy Borowitz, Profiles in Ignorance; Tim
Birkhead, Birds and Us; Julian Barnes, The Noise of Time; David Schiffman, Why
Sharks Matter.

Source: 2022/12/east-side-west-side

Title: East Side, West Side (1947)
Date: December 30, 2022

How should a person who is an enthusiast of classic cinema react when he finds
himself loving a film that has been panned, dismissed and ignored for seventy-
five years?

The movie in question is a Manhattan tale called East Side, West Side. It was
released in 1947 when I was a mere eight years and has sunk like a stone. It's
a domestic drama (or soap opera) for two-thirds of the way and then goes full
noir in its last thirty minutes. If East Side, West Side is remembered at all,
it's for squandering big-time talent: actors Barbara Stanwyck, James Mason,
Ava Gardner, Cyd Charisse and Van Heflin; writer Isobel Lennart and director
Mervyn LeRoy. I cannot remember a picture from that era that is studded with
more stars.

In The New York Times, Bosley Crowther, the grand khan of 1940s movie critics,
not only hated the film but was driven by it into a kind of moral uproar. "East
Side, West Side," he wrote, "just about hits the low-water mark of interest,
intelligence and urgency. And certainly nothing accomplished by the writers or
the actors of this film does anything to raise it into an even remotely vital
realm.... Frankly, we thought that films like this one had been put on the dud-
list years ago." Yikes. Even though Crowther almost popped an artery writing his
review, he was not explicit about what so offended him. Let me guess: "films
like this" focus on frank sexual desire and more specifically with adultery and
its consequences.

East Side West Side has rarely drawn much comment, but in 1991, when other
noir-y films of past eras were being re-evaluated and upgraded, this one was
still considered "static" and "lurid, unconvincing and artificially chic...." In
a word, "uninteresting melodrama trash."

And yet the two of us found it engaging and vital and not in any way lurid.

The plot is loaded with familiar post-War II elements. Brandon Bourne (James
Mason) is married to well-to-do Jessie Bourne (Barbara Stanwyck) and has
recently ended a too-public affair with ex-waitress Isabel Lorrison (Ava
Gardner). Isabel left town and Brandon returned to his forgiving wife, but now
the ex-"hash-slinger" is back in town and wants Brandon again. She gets him,
way too easily. Jessie puts up with her husband's shenanigans for a while but
eventually leaves him. Meanwhile, Mark Dwyer (played by the great underrated
actor Van Heflin), who is some sort of spy/journalist/all-around good guy,
returns from Europe and immediately falls in love with Jessie. At this point,
the movie suddenly veers from its domestic track. Isabel is murdered and Brandon
accused of the crime. Dwyer, turned detective, comes to his rescue.

It's an episodic but not unworthy plot. But there's more to the film than this
brief summary. Here on Walnut Street, we fans of TCM appreciated elements of
the film that Bosley Crowther, and many other viewers, had left curiously
unexamined.

ES, WS declares in its title that it's going to explore class tensions and
antagonisms. The well-known formula is that dwellers in the east side of
Manhattan are patrician, rich, and snotty, while the west side is inhabited by
down-to-earth working-class plebeians who are rough but joyful. The film both
elucidates and challenges the cliche. Brandon Bourne epitomizes what would
now be called "upper class privilege." He's rich (probably inherited money),
accustomed to servants and to getting his way. He carries himself as though he
was born in tux and tails. He loves his wife Jessie, he repeatedly claims, but
there's no warmth or snuggling or flirtation between the two of them, which is
the film's way of implying that she's cold and that he's not getting enough at
home. (That's the way things are on the Upper East Side, don't you know?) On the
other hand, there's ex-waitress Isobel Lorrison, who covets East Side wealth and
who is overtly sexual; she's an orgasm waiting to happen. She covets Brandon's
life of ease as much or more than he wants her passion. She has no compunction
about introducing her eager sexuality into the Bourne household, all the better
if it pollutes their establishment complacency and fancy dress.

Even though ES, WS gives us James Mason at his slimiest and Van Heflin at
his must buoyant and likable, it is a film that is dominated by its female
characters. It offers us five-count'em-five strong women, all of whom exhibit
gobs of what has lately come to be called "agency." Jessie (who finds her
strength only in the penultimate scene) and Isabel, of course, but also Rosa
Senta, played by Cyd Charisse, a young woman who makes a very good decision;
Jessie's mother (Gale Sondergaard), who has the best scene in the film, when she
tells Brandon to his face that he's a vain and a fraud; and also Felice Backett,
played by Beverly Michaels, a dame who is "built like the Empire State Building"
and who is not afraid to throw a punch. Some of the best dialog in the film (and
there's a lot of good stuff) is between women who are either the closest friends
or the most bitter antagonists. There is, for example, a striking confrontation
between mistress and wife:

Isabel Lorrison : Sorry I'm not more subtle. But, you must remember, I haven't
had your advantages. When your mother was busy being the Great Lady of the
theater, mine was in a burlesque show on 14th Street. And when your mother sent
you to Miss Cavanaugh's School for nice, young ladies, I was slingin' hash! Oh,
you learned how to pour tea properly and how to cross your legs at the ankles
only - and that plain pumps make you a lady, but, putting bows on them make you
something else. You learned how to make a good marriage. But, like all your
kind, you think by marrying a man, you've done enough. Well, there's one thing
that Miss Cavanaugh forgot to teach you. Something I learned: how to keep a man.
How to keep him wanting you!

Jessie Bourne : My husband doesn't want you. He's finished with you. He told
me so last night.

Isabel Lorrison : I'll call him and he'll come running.

That's classy writing.

The women are not the only vibrant and credible characters. There's also
Bourne himself, who is an exemplar of what would now, decades later, be called
"sexaholism." He wants to be faithful, or at least says he does, but he can't
help himself when Isabel Lorrison/Ava Gardner has a telephone in her hands.
Whether he's ill or just weak and pathetic is left to the audience to decide.

And by the way, the film was written by a woman (Isabel Lennart) who adapted
it from a novel by Marcia Davenport -- a writer well known in her day but long
forgotten. The novel has been out of print for decades, but Interlibrary Loan
has located a copy for me. It's now "in transit' and I'm waiting impatiently for
it to arrive.