

================================================================================Source: 2009/01/etymology-of-the-word-steerage

Title: Etymology of the Word "Steerage"
Date: January 06, 2009

The origin of "steerage," a word used to describe the part of the vessel
allotted to the poorest of passengers is not fully established. Some say that
"steerage" originally referred to the section nearest the rudder, but for this
theory I can find no confirmation. As far as I know, steerage passengers were as
likely to be housed fore as aft. Another guess is that the cables that ran from
the steering wheel to the rudder passed through this level of the ship. It's
also been ventured that emigrants were located on the same deck that was used
for transporting steers. This suggestion seems inherently unlikely, although it
is certainly true that in pre-refrigeration days, large numbers of livestock
were carried on ships in order to maintain a supply of fresh milk, eggs, and
meat.  Is it possible that the "-age" in "steerage" is used as in "storage" or
baggage?" "Steerage" seems to be unique to English. Other European languages
simply say "between decks"; so German "zwischendeck," Spanish "entrepuente,"
Swedish "mellandaeck," Norwegian "mellomdeck," French "entrepont," etc. Until
the nineteenth century, "steerage" simply meant "steering," as in Romeo's
picturesque "But he that hath the steerage of my course,/ Direct my sail."

Source: 2009/01/extrapolation

Title: Extrapolation
Date: January 11, 2009

When you consider an adult whom you've known from infancy, you're tempted to
think that their traits at maturity were evident from birth. You saw it in them.
Shyness or assertiveness or enterprise or doggedness or volubility or curiosity
-- all there right at the starting gate. "It stands to reason that she would
have entered the field of medicine -- she was always so compassionate." I'm
never convinced when people say such things. I think that it's easy to make
retrospective claims. If a child is interested in fifty things, we look back and
only remember the ones that "foretold" -- so to speak -- her mature interests.
We forget about the traits that didn't develop or which metamorphosized.

As simple as it is to claim that the mature being is a predictable exfoliation
of childhood traits, just so difficult is it to make actual predictions. In my
experience it's almost impossible to look at a two-year-old or a five-year-old
or even a sixteen-year-old and extrapolate to the adult. In fact, it's far
easier to misjudge a child than to get him or her right. No matter how well you
might think you know them, children are hard to read.

These thoughts are prompted by reading Nicholas Murray's skillful new Life of
Matthew Arnold. The poet's father, the famous education reformer 'Arnold of
Rugby,' a man who should have known better, was absolutely wrong about his son.
According to Thomas Arnold, Matt was 'not likely to form intimate friendships;"
"He flitters about from flower to flower but is not apt to fix."  "I do not see
how the sources of deep thought are to be reached in him." " He  does not know
what it is to work because he knows so little what to think."  The best he can
say: "I think he is not so idle as he was."

Idle! and shallow!  Has there ever a been a more colossal misjudgment of a son
by a father? Or did Matthew Arnold live the most of his life with a giant "I'll
show him" chip on his shoulder?

Come to think of it, I'm rather glad that I don't know what judgments or
predictions my father or other adults might have made about me.

Source: 2009/01/actively-dying

Title: "Actively Dying"
Date: January 15, 2009

Grandma is 96+ years old.  She's an accomplished, strong-willed, tough old
lady who has survived just about everything life can throw at a person: polio
in childhood, over two dozen major surgeries, diabetes, and then two times in
the last decade, cancer. Now she's very close to the end.  She has been in
a nursing home for four years, declining almost imperceptibly from day to
day. Until last week, she could carry on a conversation of sorts. But then
something happened. She lost the ability to move, even a little; she became
agitated, her long-term memory collapsed, and she could not, however hard she
tried, complete a thought (though she was able to say, and repeat, "This
dying business doesn't bother me").  She recognized only one person, her
eldest daughter, and it was not clear that she knew her own name.

For the last six months someone at the nursing home has had to help her with
fork and spoon. Last week, we decided that to prop her up, sit her at the table,
feed her cake and then propose that her insulin intake be increased was
a senseless, bizarre procedure.  A compassionate doctor suggested that it
was time for insulin and other non-palliative medicines to be withdrawn. We
readily agreed. We confronted the head nurse at the nursing home; she announced
to us that the home's chief of medicine would reverse the order to withdraw
insulin;  Grandma must be fed ("We're a nursing home," she said, "we nurse").
Last Friday, we moved Grandma from the nursing home to our local hospice. 
Grandma immediately stopped eating and drinking. I would like to think that she
chose to give up food, but there's no way to know. Her eyes have a glazed,
far away look on the rare occasions that she is strong enough to open them. She
fumbles with the sheets.

Nevertheless, on Monday, hospice told us that they couldn't keep her. She's not
"actively dying" -- according to the official Medicare rules -- and is therefore
not eligible for hospice. Where to take her?  Unclear.  We negotiated a
two-week reprieve. Grandma will be allowed to remain in hospice as a private
patient for fourteen days, but unless she starts "actively dying" during that
period, she'll be expelled. We cried.

Yesterday, however, we were told that Grandma had taken a step forward.  She's
"entered her process" --another bit of hospicespeak.  She's experiencing,
we're told, sufficient pain to warrant morphine and her heartbeat has
become rapid and irregular.  She is "less responsive."  Good news for
Grandma, I guess.  Unless she "plateaus" and stops "actively dying," she'll be
allowed to stay to the finish, which, if there's any mercy, will not be very
long.

Here's what Kent says about Lear, at the end.  "O let him pass.  He hates him/
Who would upon the rack of this tough world,/  Stretch him out longer."

January 17.  Grandma died last night, having squeezed the last drop out of life
and sliced through the last shred of bureaucratic red tape.

Source: 2009/01/two-bumper-stickers

Title: Two Recently-Sighted Bumper Stickers
Date: January 21, 2009

A.  "Tattoos Get You Sex."  A forthright, undisguised sentiment.  Here we
have an enormous advertising establishment working indefatigibly to imply
that the car, the beer, the perfume, the toothpaste, the sneakers will get
you laid.  But do they ever come out and say so directly?  No.  It's
all implication and suggestion (except for the commercials for Viagra/Cialis
-- a special case).  But here's a bumper sticker that lays it on the line. 
No sly metaphors or beating around the bush.  But is it true that there's an
alignment between sex and tattoos?  Where's the double-blind evidence?  I'll
wait until I see the utterly unbiased report from the National Association of
Tattoo Artists.

B    "Ann Coulter is a Man."  This one puzzled me a bit because it didn't
say whether Ann was born a man or had recently been surgically tranformed
into one.  In any case, I'm not all skeptical about the accuracy of the
assertion.  What else could account for the fact that Ann (or Andrew, let us
now call him/her) acts and speaks like an ignorant, show-offy, foul-mouthed,
testosterone-fueled teen-age boy?

My evaluation:  A is false in most cases;  B is certainly true.

January 30.  Here's another bumper sticker, encountered yesterday.  NO MORE
DUMB PRESIDENTS.  'Nuff said.

Source: 2009/01/worst-nightmare-yet

Title: Worst Nightmare Yet
Date: January 22, 2009

I was a night game, and I was playing left field,  The batter hit a long fly
my way.  I saw it clearly as it came off the bat, studied the trajectory, and
knew that it was nothing more than a loud foul  --  only to hear the ball
plop down not more than ten feet behind me.  The huge crowd of spectators
broke into wild laughter.  Runners were circling the base paths.  I turned to
run after the ball, but my feet were lead weights, perhaps because I was wearing
hiking boots instead of spikes.  Eventually, I retrieved the ball and tried to
hit the  cut- off man, but the ball skittered out of my hand and carried only
a few feet.  The crowd laughed again, uproariously.

It was horrible. I woke up with a nosebleed.

Source: 2009/01/inauguration-highs-and-lows

Title: Inauguration Highs and Lows
Date: January 26, 2009

I couldn't bear Rick Warren.  I have no tolerance for the unctuosity of
preachers, and Rick busted all standing records for unctuosity.  I thought
he was entirely too Christian -- if there is one event that should be absolutely
ecumenical, it's an inauguration.  Also embarrassing was Elizabeth Alexander's
poem -- poetry by the yard, absolutely prosy, undistinguished, predictable, and
read in such a pretentious I-am-a-poet-all-hail-poetry-and-me voice that I
had to leave the room.  The Perlman-Yo-yo Ma thingy left me cold.  Why not
play some proven piece of celebratory music, especially since Aaron Copland
had already made a major work out of "simple gifts."  Three cultural low
points, as far as I am concerned, but all of them redeemed by Aretha Franklin's
hat. Praise to Luke Song, its designer, and all hail the queen of soul, the
queen of hats, and also the absolute and utter triumph of undiluted,
unparalleled African-American churchladyness. The hat made the whole day
worthwhile.

I also liked Obama's speech and Bush's helicoptering the hell out of there.  
And wheel-chair bound Dick, who hurt his back trying to smuggle out boxes of
top-secret stuff that he should have left behind.

Hey, Barack, do you want my advice for 2012?  In a nutshell: less religion,
more hats.

Source: 2009/02/academic-reminiscence

Title: A Pitiful Reminiscence of Academia
Date: February 01, 2009

In an earlier life, Dr. M. served as chair of a large academic department
at a state university out here in the American west.  On the whole, the
teachers that Dr. M. nominally supervised did their work very well.  They
were responsible, self-motivated, liked their teaching and reading and
writing, and fortunately, did not expect to be lavishly rewarded either in
salary or appreciation or assistance.  But there were a few employees who were
difficult.  There always are.  Ten per cent of the people take 90% of your
time, no matter what the enterprise.

We had very little secretarial staff -- not even enough people to take and
relay telephone messages, So (this was before the advent of sophisticated
electronic communication), innovative chair that I was, I took some scarce
departmental funds and purchased inexpensive, tape-driven answering machines
and attached one to each professorial telephone.  The theory was simple: 
most of the faculty weren't in their office many hours a week (nor were they
paid to be), but the new technology would allow them to come to work, listen
to yesterday's telephone calls, and return messages rapidly and efficiently. 
Ninety-five per cent of the faculty was happy with the new system.  But a
few of them rebelled.  One particularly recalictrant member of the faculty
-- let us call him RR -- categorically refused to touch his new machine. 
His reasoning:  pushing the button and playing back the tape was not a
"professorial responsibilty";  it was mere secretarial work, and in his view 
the new system asked that a professor lower himself to the level of staff. 
It would be "unprofessional" for him to listen to recorded telephone call,
asserted RR..

I should mention that RR was the least distinguished member of our faculty. 
He was a poor teacher and his contributions to scholarship lay somewhere between
non-existent and negligible, depending on the decade.  You might think that his
sense of nobility derived from a ducal or regal grandfather, but not so --he
came from a working-class Kansas background, if I remember correctly.

"Professional" is a word about which I have ambivalent feelings. In its best
incarnation, when it denotes adherence to an internalized set of responsible
and shared values, it's a damn good word and an uplifting concept. But there
are many occasions when "professional" is used to camouflage willfulness,
laziness, and privilege, and then it is a word of which I am ashamed.  I
take the case of RR to be an example of "professional" used in order to
justify indolence.  For the rest of my faculty, it was "professional" to make
ourselves available to the students whom they state paid us to educate and
assist; not for RR.

I think that RR had a peculiar, retrogressive understanding of university
life.  He didn't like students or scholarship, but he did enjoy ceremony.  He
was the parliamentarian at meetings of the university's governing board.  And
every year, at commencement, he was the person who led the procession, bearing
the university's mace (or whatever the heck that strange object was).  Not a
born teacher, he was a born presider at rituals.  A large, ponderous fellow,
he was a terrific mace-bearer -- and a truly crappy colleague.

I never did find a way to make him use his answering machine.  If I owned
the company, I would have fired him in a flash.  But the university likes
to separate responsibility from authority, so all I could do was cajole
and beseech and shame -- a procedure that proved in his case to be totally
without effect.  You can't shame the shameless.

Source: 2009/02/what-the-heck-is-an-elfskin

Title: What the Heck is an Elfskin?
Date: February 05, 2009

In one modern edition of Shakespeare's The First Part of King Henry the Fourth,
Falstaff, in a fit of exuberant swearing, describes Hal as an "eel-skin." 
But in another edition, the word is "elfskin."  What's going on?  Only one of
these curious words can be "correct."

Paunchy Falstaff attacks Prince Hal with a string of half-comic, half-offensive
epithets:  "you starveling, you elfskin (or eel-skin), you dried neat's tongue,
you bulls-pizzle, you stockfish...."  A "starveling" is a person emaciated
by hunger, "stockfish" is desiccated cod, and a "bull's pizzle," which an
Elizabethan might dry to use as a whip, is self-explanatory.  But "elfskin"
or "eelskin?"  "Elfskin" is the original reading, although in actual fact the
earliest quarto prints not "elfskin" but "elsskin" where the first "s" is
the old-fashioned "long s."  "Elsskin" was as incomprehensible then as now
and someone who participated in the making of the 1623 Folio changed the word
to "elfskin" on the grounds, it is easy to imagine, that the first of the two
long s's properly signified an "f."  If "elfskin" is a word, then it's a
Shakespearean coinage -- the word being otherwise unknown and the skin of elves
not a subject of speculation even in an era that took such imaginary beings
more seriously than does ours. Is it possible that, considering the context,
"elfskin" could carry the meaning "as thin as fairy skin" -- even though elves
were generally described as small and stunted rather than diaphonous?

The alternative, "eel-skin" is the inspiration of Sir Thomas Hanmer, whose
edition of Shakespeare's works appeared in 1744.  "Eel-skin" jibes with
"stockfish" and "neat's tongue" as an example of Falstaff's fixation on edibles,
although it was the eel itself rather than its skin that was the delicacy.  As
Hanmer well knew, Shakespeare had used the word "eel-skin" in a not dissimilar
context in King John, when Philip the Bastard described his feeble half-
brother's skinny arms as "two eel-skins stuffed."

"Elfskin" is therefore the earlier reading, closer by 150 years to William S.
himself, but "eel-skin," though it dates only to the mid-eighteenth century, is
much more colorful and apposite. It's therefore entirely possible that Hanmer
restored Shakespeare's original intention.  Possible, but not proven.

Source: 2009/02/sursum-corda-brain-surgery

Title: Sursum Corda;  Brain Surgery
Date: February 08, 2009

Last night I awoke from troubled sleep with a mysterious and
inexplicable Latin phrase drumming on my agitated brain. As best I can
remember the dream, I had taken a razor to an essay I was writing and had
cut out the two words--and I mean "cut out" as in scissored, not merely
deleted--"sursum corda."  And then there I was with a slip of paper on
which the two words were inscribed -- andnow comes the nightmare part--I
couldn't translate the damn phrase. I went so far (still in the dream!)
as to hypothesize a past participle "*sursus" of the verb "surgere" (to
rise)--although, as everyone knows, the proper form would be "surrectus"--but
I still couldn't parse the phrase (*"sursum" or "risen", would be a singular,
"corda," "hearts," a plural). I forced myself out of sleep, distressed that
I couldn't make sense out of what my dreamatorium was screaming was an
important phrase. So there I was in the middle of the night, checking the
Latin dictionary to discover that "sursum corda" is a versicle in the Roman
mass generally translated "lift up your hearts," but, inasmuch as "sursum,"
I can now attest, is not a participle but an adverb, might more properly come
into English as something like "upward your hearts." OK, now I understand
the phrase, but why in the living bejeesus was I a) dreaming in Latin, b)
dreaming a part of a mass, and c) slicing the phrase out of some papers of my
own composition?

Enough of that. Back to bed, back to sleep and then, holy moly, another weird
dream. No more Latin, at least, but now I'm being held responsible for the low
rate of pollination of apple trees. Whose apple trees?  I can't say.  And
what is the remedy. Brain surgery -- and on my brain. The surgeon announces
to me (somehow we're in a very official looking operating room) that "we're
going to remove the smallest bone in the human body, which is in the hinge to
the top of your head."He takes his scalpel, cuts through my hinge, and flips
opens my skull. Inside the dome (somehow I can observe the interior) right
where my brain should be, is a heap of glowing stuff that looks like orange
Jell-o.

OK, that's enough. Time to wake up once again.

Unanswered questions. a) why am I responsible for the fruiting of apples? 
Blame the lazy bees, for goodness sake. b) Who says the smallest bone in the
body is this imaginary hinge?  The smallest bone is in the inner ear--the
stirpes, I think. c)  what's with the Jell-o? Just because I couldn't translate
"sursum corda," must it therefore follow that my brain is gelatinous?  Some
of your most intelligent Wall Street investors and bank presidents couldn't
translate sursum corda, and they must be the most accomplished people we have,
at least to judge by their annual bonuses.

On the whole, I think that both of these dreams put me in somewhat of a
bad light. Nevertheless, I'm impressed that my unconscious is so gosh-darned
creative. Let's face it - it's a ton more imaginative than my daytime self,
which doesn't much concern itself with either the Latin mass or the pollination
rates of mali domesticae.

Source: 2009/02/oscar-wilde-as-a-replacement-child

Title: Oscar Wilde's Siblings
Date: February 11, 2009

According to Richard Ellman, whose 680-page extremely- detailed Oscar Wilde
(1988) I've now read and enjoyed, Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde
came out of more colorful family situation than is generally known. 
Oscar's father, the famous eye surgeon Sir William Wilde, brought three
children to his marriage with Jane Elgee -- apparently by three different
mothers, none of whom he bothered to marry.  The first child, a boy named
Henry Wilson, was supported by his father and eventually became a partner
in his medical practice.  The girls, Emily and Mary, born two years apart,
were adopted by Sir William's older brother "as his wards" and were also
acknowledged to be part of Oscar's family.  Emily and Mary were not so
fortunate as their older half-brother. "In the course of showing off their
ball dresses before a party, one went too close to an open fire, caught her
crinoline in the flames, and was terribly burned.  So was her sister, who
tried frantically to rescue her.  Their gravestone records that they both
died on the same day, 10 November, 1871. Sir Williams's grief was intense,
and his groans could be heard outside the house."  The girls were twenty-four
and twenty-two years old.  Oscar, born in 1854. was just seventeen at their
deaths.  Although he wrote voluminously about his own life, Oscar nowhere
records this horrific event. But was he affected? Certainly the knowledge that
his father lived a second, darker life seems to have made a contribution to
the plot of Dorian Gray -- a novel in which Dorian is in love with a woman
of questionable birth.  Matters of legitimacy are raised in two of Wilde's
best known plays.  Nevertheless, it seems extraordinary that the tragic deaths
of two half-sisters should have left no mark either on Wilde's public or private
personality. It might be argued that Wilde's lifelong aim was self-destruction
and that his sister's deaths served as a template for his own tragedy -- but
such an argument would be weak in evidentiary support.  The sisters and the
fire is a terrible tale that may signifiy nothing beyond its own horror.

Source: 2009/02/life-lessons-from-f-p-schubert

Title: Life Lessons from F. P Schubert
Date: February 15, 2009

Our local chamber players, the Takacs, performed the Schubert Quintet (D.956).
It's a glorious work -- one of the finest in the entire chamber repertoire --
and was brilliantly performed.  It's a turbulent, nervous, tense piece of
music. With the last notes, the entire audience rose simultaneously to cheer. 
There were fist-pumpings, whistles, "bravos," "yesses," and other spontaneous
shouts of pleasure from the octogenarian listeners.  It was a rock and roll
moment at Grusin Hall.

I cheered too, but not so much for the Takacs as for Schubert.  It's so often
the case that the interpreters are rewarded while the creator is neglected. 
Here's Schubert, dead of poverty and syphilis and mercury poisoning at age
31, never having made a nickel out of his many compositions.  In desperate
straits, with only two months to live, Schubert sent his new quintet to the
Leipzig publisher H. A. Probst. Probst rejected it, asking instead for something
"easily understandable."  The world "does not yet sufficiently and generally
understand the peculiar, often ingenious, but perhaps now and then somewhat
curious precedures of your mind's creations."  The quintet was first performed
in 1850, twenty-two years after Schubert breathed his last.

Is there a moral?  Yes, I think there is.  If you're in the composing or
painting or novel-writing business, do it your own way -- not the easy way.  If
you lose, you lose.  So what?  If you win, you win big.

Source: 2009/02/another-crack-at-moby-dick

Title: Another Crack at Moby Dick
Date: February 16, 2009

I read this great so-called classic of American literature once in the '50s and
twice in the '60s and I just didn't get it.  I've now re-read it and, after
forty-something years of seasoning and experience, I'm still a dissenter. Moby
Dick is like opera or ballet -- it's so highly stylized that either you buy into
it or you don't, and I don't. To me, Melville is a quite ordinary GrubStreet
quill-driver whose every sentence screams at the very top of its lungs, "Look
at me, I'm Shakespearean."  I resent Melville's attempt to draft using WS as
puller. Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between
me and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between me
and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the thinnest plot in the history of
800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds whale, and (last ten pages) whale
wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make
them laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first
two of these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby
Dick but I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them
wait" part.  Totally.

Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them
laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first two of
these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but
I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them wait"
part.  Totally.

Source: 2009/02/actual-dialogue-captured-in-the-wild

Title: Actual Dialogue Captured in the Wild
Date: February 22, 2009

Telephone conversation with an eighty-two year old cousin.

"Evreryone down here, all they ever talk about is their pains, their doctors,
their diets, their diseases.  Now I have something to talk about.  For
years I went to this doctor, maybe forty years, he's almost as old as I am 
Every time I go into see him, with a sore knee or pains in the chest or
whatever, he'd look at it, and he'd say, 'what can you expect at your age? 
You're lucky to be alive.'  I'd go in with a sore throat.  He'd say, 'Can you
swallow. So what it hurts. You're too old to worry.'  If I had a headache,
he'd say, 'whatever happens, happens.  You're old, enjoy the day.'  Finally
he retired.  He took a job as a dance instructor on a cruise ship. I'm not
kidding. He leads exercises or something.  So I went to a younger doctor.  He
listens to me breathe, pokes around a bit, puts me in the hospital, and now I
have three stents."

Source: 2009/02/what-we-should-have-read-in-the-fifties-two-years-before-the-mast

Title: What We Should Have Read in the Fifties:  Two Years Before the Mast
Date: February 23, 2009

It's been a long time since I enjoyed a book as much as Richard Henry Dana's Two
Years Before the Mast, which describes events of 1834-36 and was first published
in 1840. It's a great piece of writing. I've heard about it since I was a
child, but just got around to reading it this week. It's a book that alters my
understanding of the early nineteenth century.

Why did I like it so much.  Let me count the ways.

1.  It's a sensitive work. Dana's a Boston patrician but instead of going to sea as a junior officer, which he could easily have done, he enlists as a common seaman. He describes life on board the ship from the seaman's point of view. I don't know another book that's so honest, so real, and so uncomplaining. Dana later put what he learned to work, becoming an advocate for sailors' rights. His is not a modern sensibility, but on the whole there's far less of the deplorable racist and sexist assumptions that disfigure the earlier literature and make us cringe for our ancestors.

2. I've always loved sea stories. Wasn't I transfixed, as a child, by the Bounty and Hornblower stories?  But Dana is leagues ahead. Two Years  is non-fiction that is more compelling reading than most fiction. I couldn't put it down. Besides, I had just read Moby-Dick, a thoroughly romanticized version of life on sea. Melville is poetic; Dana is gritty and detailed. I'm sorry, but I'm almost always happier in the world of the enlightenment than the world of nineteenth-century romanticism.  Something in the mitochondria, perhaps.

3.  A large hunk of the book takes place in California, when it was still part of Mexico and there was a shack or two where there's now Santa Barbara or San Diego or Monterey.  It's an invaluable record of California before the gold rush, both picturesque and enlightening

4.  It has great characters:  ship captains both competent and cruel, sailors brave and cowardly, as well as the occasional onboard eccentric.  A good account of naval camaraderie.

5.  Language. Some of us enjoy specialized vocabulary of any sort.  This book is a treasure trove of words unfamiliar to a landlubber like me.  "It was clew up and haul down, reef and furl, until we had got her down to close-reefed topsails, double-reefed trysail, and reefed forepenser."  "I threw the downhaul over the windlass, and jumped between the knight-heads out upon the bowsprit.  The crew stood abaft the windlass and hauled the jib down, while we got out upon the weather-side of the jib-boom... the great jib boom flying out to leeward and slatting." "The cook made us a mess of scouse." "Dessert was duff." Sometimes Dana lays it on a bit thick, but it's worth it.  What is a martingale anyway?   Well, "it comprises the parts of the standing rigging which strengthen the bowsprit and jib boom against the force of the head stays"  Clears that up.  Who's up for a great big helping of scouse?

Source: 2009/03/aunt-harriets-story

Title: Aunt Harriet's Story
Date: March 02, 2009

"I was born in 1920 in Bayonne. I had four older sisters. When I was eleven,
my mother died and my father disappeared. I was taken in by my sister Jennie
and her husband Jack. She was eighteen, he was nineteen. They raised me. I
graduated from Bayonne High School in 1938. For years I worked for an
insurance company in New York City. I started at $5 a week. I lived with
Jack and Jennie in Bergenfield. I took the bus and then a train and then a
subway. One of my girlfriends was seeing a guy, I can't remember his name, but
he had a friend named Dave. I married Dave in 1942. He was sent overseas, I
didn't see him for three years. In Oman, he was coming off a ship, they were
shooting at them, he was wounded right here, if it had been an inch this way I
wouldn't have any children. Dave's father had a business, Broadway Arcade on
Broadway and 53rd Street. Dave took over the business. He was a good mechanic.
We had Madame Esmerelda the fortune teller. Pinball, skiball. In the basement
were pool tables, we sublet the space. It was a good business. We were famous
for our nuts. We had two boys, Steve and Mark.  Steve ran the Arcade after
we moved to Florida, Mark is a food chemist. The Arcade is closed now -- the
landlord kept raising the rent. If we had bought the building I'd be rolling
in it. Dave died at 68 in 1987. I play mah-jong once a week. I go bowling
once a week. My team is in first place. I take my sister Sophie with me but
she can't see well enough to bowl. She's ninety-six. So I've been married, it's
sixty-seven years.  Hard to believe."

Source: 2009/03/the-big-sevenoh

Title: The Big Seven-Oh
Date: March 13, 2009

In the course of the Great Downsizing, a long-buried letter emerged from the
"archives."  It's from my long-gone father, and was written in December of 1974
on the occasion of his seventieth birthday.  A most fortuitous discovery --
inasmuch as I am now exactly the age that Pop was on the day that he wrote to
me.  In his letter, Pop reports that he is taken aback by the person whom he
has become.  Who is this guy with the gray hair and the "little paunch" who
"takes a day or two to recover from any physical activity" and who "finds events
repeating themselves."

"In my mind," he says, "there is another me, a real me," who looks upon this
present self as a "stranger and an interloper."

It appears as though my father's self-image was lagging behind the reality of
things

I hadn't remembered reading the letter -- it sat in a box for thirty-five
years -- but I'm not surprised by its content.  My father was a strong,
athletic, handsome man who didn't easily accept the inevitable changes that
come with septuagenarianism.  I vividly remembering him saying, at eighty, "I
hate my body."

I'm with him, but only a part of the way. Of course I'm dismayed by the
decline. The gray hair, the thickened figure, yes.  The deterioration
of memory, certainly.  But I don't share Pop's sense that my real or
better self is somewhere in the past. True that I can't jump as high -- yet,
paradoxically, I feel more like myself, more comfortable being me now
than ever before.  I'm also more cheerful, on the whole -- although not at
nighttime, when i sleep just as badly as ever my father did). When I look in
the mirror, I don't see a face ravaged by age -- I see a face that now looks
like it was always destined to look and finally got there.  I have become more
like myself, so to speak, every year. But how long until the me-ness starts
to plummet? It must happen eventually. Time will tell.

My father used to say, "You're entitled to your biblical three score and
ten.  But after seventy, you're in extra innings."  o which I would respond,
"In some sports, extra innings is known as sudden death."

But hey, let's not forget that the extra innings are frequently the most
exciting part of the game.

Source: 2009/03/a-merchant-mystery

Title: A Merchant Mystery
Date: March 24, 2009

In the middle of The Merchant of Venice, right out of the blue, without warning,
the audience is suddenly told that Launcelot the clown has gotten a "Negro"
pregnant. Who is this 'Negro'? Why haven't we heard of her before?  Why does
Shakespeare introduce her into his play?  And why, having invented her, does
he precipitously drop her? A loose end, to be sure.

The pregnancy seems to be unplanned, both by the characters and the author. It
occurs at the point in the play when Shylock's runaway daughter Jessica, newly
married and newly converted to Christianity, engages her bridegroom Lorenzo
and their clown/servant Launcelot in a bit of superficial banter. Launcelot
puts forward the barren jest that Lorenzo is "no good member of the
commonwealth," for "in converting Jews to Christianity, [he] raises the price
of pork." Lorenzo veers from the context to reply sharply. "I shall answer
that better to the commonwealth that you can the getting up of the Negro's
belly. The Moor is with child by you, Launcelot."  Up until this very moment,
there had been no mention of a "Moor" or "Negro" (north Africans and sub-Saharan
Africans were not always distinguished in the Elizabethan imagination). It's
a sensational, unanticipated accusation and one that Launcelot does not
deny. Instead, he attempts to deflect Lorenzo's indignation with clownish
wordplay. The subject is abandoned as precipitously as it was raised and the
pregnant Moor vanishes from the play.  Neither Launcelot nor any other
character has alluded to a "Negro" before, nor had there even been the
slightest hint that Launcelot has been wooing a lady  A perplexed editor simply
shrugs his shoulders: "This passage has not been explained."

But where there is no explanation, there is room for conjecture.

The fleeting and mysterious black woman reminds us that The Merchant
of Venice explores questions of exogamy. Jewish Jessica elopes with
Christian Lorenzo, while the heiress Portia, a native Venetian, is pursued
unsuccessfully by Morocco, a "tawny Moor." When Morocco fails the test that
might have won him Portia for his bride, Portia expresses pleasure in words
that were acceptable then but are unpleasant now: "Let all of his complexion
(i.e. race) choose me so." So it would seem that one possible explanation for
Launcelot's insemination of the Moor is that Shakespeare started a hare that he
didn't bother to pursue; he was sufficiently intrigued by interracial sexual
doings to provide Launcelot with a non-white lover, supplementing comedy with
farce -- but he lacked either the inclination or the space to develop the
relationship more fully. (The fertile subject of love between the races was one
that Shakespeare had previously engaged in Titus Andronicus -- in which Aaron
the Moor fathers a child upon Tamora, the queen of the Goths -- and would become
the tragic motif of Othello.

There's a second possible explanation for the presence of the pregnant Moor. 
It's known that as originally perormed, the part of the clown Launcelot was
played by the much celebrated comedian Will Kemp, whose part Shakespeare might
have wanted to sweeten.  Who now can imagine with what facial expressions or
gestures Kemp, in 1596, responded to Lorenzo's charge.  The visual comedy of
the past is unrecoverable.  Even though Launcelot's quibble on the homonym
Moor/more ("It is much that the Moor should be more than reason...") lies
absolutely limp on the modern page, we can guess that it would have been made
much of (who knows how?) by the great comedian for whom it was composed.

So that while Launcelot's getting the Moor pregnant must remain ultimately
mysterious, its odd and curious introduction at this juncture of the play very
possibly offered its original audience a moment of humor which later readers and
playgoers will never understand or appreciate.

Unsatisfying answers I know. But we must accept the fact that the past is not
always explicable.

Source: 2009/03/another-merchant-mystery

Title: Another Merchant Mystery
Date: March 28, 2009

In The Merchant of Venice, as it appears in one up-to-date modern edition,
Portia's husband-to-be Bassanio is attended by a pair of friends named Solanio
and Salerio. Yet In another equally authoritative edition of the play, the
friends are named Solanio and Salerino -- and moreover, in this edition, a third
and apparently separate character named Salerio enters half-way through the
play. What's going on? Why the inconsistency?

First some onomastic context. Shakespeare could be quite casual about the naming
of his characters. In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, there are two
distinct figures, one named Bardolph and the other, for no good reason, Lord
Bardolph. Two separate and very different Jacques complicate As You Like
It, while in The Taming of the Shrew, easy-to-confuse Gremio and Grumio have
needlessly perplexed generations of readers. Even in The Merchant of Venice,
Shakespeare twice used the name Balthazar -- initially for a servant of
Portia and then a second time, gratuitously, as the pseudonym that Portia
adopts when she poses as a Paduan lawyer. But nowhere is Shakespeare quite
so arbitrary as he is with the names of the two (or is it three?) Sallies.

Solanio, Salarino, and Salerio all inhabited Merchant when it first appeared in
the 1600 quarto edition known to scholars as Q1, but whether Shakespeare meant
there to be two characters or three is a matter of mystery. It's possible, in
fact, that the playwright changed his mind in the course of writing. And what
would be evidence for Shakespeare's indecision? Scholars have now determined
that the first Merchant quarto was set in type by compositors who worked
from a manuscript in Shakespeare's own handwriting -- an "autograph" --
that preserved evidence of the writer, quill in hand, in the very thick of
invention. Shakespeare himself, it appears, vacillated about the names by
which to denote the Sallies and also about how many of them there were to be.
His waffling was reproduced by the compositors who dutifully set what they
had in front of them -- first thoughts, re-thinkings, revisions, errors, and
all. No wonder that modern editors have been baffled.

Here's a brief outline of a complicated textual tangle. In the stage direction
with which the play begins, Shakespeare introduces two of the characters in
question. "Enter... Salaryno, and Salanio."  In terms of personality, the
pair seem to be conceived as twins or doubles. Both are excessively talkative
-- long on enthusiasm and short on common sense. It appears that Shakespeare
not only cast the two characters from the same psychological mold, but that
he also decided to underline their similarity by giving them near-identical
names -- and it is from this initial decision that the confusions springs. The
trouble begins right there in the play's first scene. If Shakespeare had
retained his original names and followed his customary procedure, he would
have assigned Salaryno and Salanio the abbreviated speech headings "Sala." and
"Sala." -- clearly a recipe for disaster. So before he had entered fifty lines
into the scene, the playwright traded in one vowel for another and transformed
Salanio into "Sola." It's a curiosity that in the first scene of The Merchant
of Venice (as it appears in Q1), Salanio enters but Solanio exits. Oddly
enough, the pattern repeats itself when Solanio re-appears in the subsequent
scene in which the Sallies and Lorenzo plan Jessica's elopement. Solanio is
once again Salanio in the initial stage direction and Solanio or "Sola." in the
speech headings. Was Shakespeare irresolute or simply forgetful?

And now Salanio/Solanio's companion, Salarino, also begins to mutate. When
Jessica steals from Shylock's house, she is accompanied by a character who bears
the name Salerino -- that is, Salarino/Salaryno rechristened with a medial
"e."  We're now a third of the way through the play, and readers have already
encountered two characters, one of whom is named Salanio/Solanio and the other
Salarino/Salarynol/Salerino. At this point things become truly messy. Jessica
elopes with Lorenzo and they and their co-conspirators flee Venice for Belmont.
Gratiano, first to arrive at the country retreat, greets Lorenzo and his bride
Jessica and an accompanying friend. "But who comes here?" he inquires. "Lorenzo
and his infidel?/ What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?"  Who, we may ask,
is this Salerio?  Readers who have been paying attention know that Gratiano
doesn't have an "old Venetian friend" Salerio. Instead, he has two old Venetian
friends -- Solanio and Salarino. Is Salerio a new character? Or, given the
whimsicality of Q1's spellings, is he simply a orthographical variant of one of
the Sallies with whom readers are already acquainted?

The action then returns immediately to Venice where a new scene begins with the
following stage direction: "Enter the Iew (i.e. Shylock) and Salerio."  But
Salerio, if he's anything more than a spelling error, can't be in both Venice
and Belmont at the same time (in fact, he's just been commisssioned to carry a
message from country to city). An editor vents her frustration: "Q1's Salerio
cannot be right, as he is on the way back to Venice." Apparently Shakespeare
himself was totally befuddled about whom he had named what and where he had
sent whom. Certainly, the printers themselves were baffled. The three earliest
editions of The Merchant of Venice each assign a different name to the Sally
who remained in Venice in the company of Shylock. In Q1, as we've just noted,
it's Salerio; in the lightly-edited second quarto (dated 1600, but actually a
forgery printed in 1619), he is Salarino, and in the 1623 Folio, it's Solanio.

If Q1 did, as is supposed, follow Shakespeare's manuscript, then the playwright
himself made the muddle, but who can say for certain that the confusion couldn't
have been the fault of one of the various scribes, book holders, compositors,
or editors through whose hands the manuscript might have passed.  In any case,
the snarl wasn't untangled in Shakespeare's time, and it hasn't been sorted out
since. Some editors give two characters, some three;  some name the characters
Solanio and Salarino, and some add a Salerio to the mix.

Why didn't Shakespeare simply create one all-purpose Sally? Because the
duplication makes dramatic sense. When one of the Sallies attacks Shylock
venemously, his bigotry might be dismissed as personal idiosyncrasy, but
when two of them gang up, they speak not as individuals but as a chorus that
expresses the nasty side of Venetian society.

But why didn't Shakespeare himself fix the problem? Did he leave it to his
actors to work it out on the stage, or was he a big-picture guy indifferent to
such details? Perhaps he did sort it all out in a scribal or subsequent version
of the play to which Elizabethan printers never gained access?

In any case, Shakespeare learned a lesson from his adventure with Salerio,
Solanio and Salarino. When he next came to invent characters who were doubles
or twins, he took the precaution to give them names that were impossible to
confound: Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Source: 2009/03/on-aggasiz

Title: On Aggasiz
Date: March 29, 2009

Louis Agassiz was, Darwin aside, the nineteenth century's most acclaimed
naturalist. He was the first to speculate about the ice ages and the first
to suggest that mastodons and other giant quadrupeds had become extinct as a
consequence of the deep freeze in Asia and America. Agassiz was much celebrated
in his lifetime, and at his death, Harvard, where he taught, shut down for a day
for his majestic funeral. James Russell Lowell contributed an eleven-page elegy
to the Atlantic. "Seldom, if ever, has the death of a man of science been so
deeply felt," reported The Nation.

These details are drawn from Barry Werth's Banquet at Delmonico's (2009), an
oddly-titled but informative and accessible history of Darwinism in gilded-age
America.

Here's a striking and crowded sentence about Aggasiz, also drawn from
Werth's book. "The son of a strong-willed assistant pastor to the Protestant
congregation of a lakeside village in French-speaking Switzerland who married
well, he was his parents' fifth child but the first to survive infancy."

Agassiz was a therefore a "replacement child" with a vengeance. He "replaced"
four lost siblings (but whether male or female Werth does not say). Imagine his
parents' pain; imagine how young Louis must have been cherished and protected
but also, possibly, afflicted with the 'guilt of the survivor.' Or how he must
have unconsciously competed with his deceased and therefore perfect brothers and
sisters. And then try to imagine both his mother's suffering and also how his
aspiring and apparently devout father might have responded to such an appalling
succession of family tragedies.

Agassiz was America's foremost opponent of evolution. He rejected natural
selection because, he claimed, "Darwinism" led inevitably to "atheism" -- which
hasn't turned out to be the case, although I personally can't imagine why it
hasn't. Agassiz took his own idiosyncratic route and proselytized for the
curious and retrograde doctrine of "polygenism" -- the idea that the various
races of man were separately -- and hierarchically -- created. Agassiz imagined
eight different kinds of humans, ranked according to their "cranial capacity"
-- Caucasian, Arctic, Mongol, American Indian, Negro, Hottentot, Malay, and
Australian (thereby running afoul of both "monogenists" like Darwin and bible-
worshippers who acknowledged only one creation -- that of Adam and Eve). For
Agassiz, each species was "a thought of God." An odd path for usually observant
scientist. Agassiz was the favorite intellectual of slaveholders and their
apologists.

Agassiz was also a virulent and odious racist. Here's what he wrote to his
mother when he stopped at a hotel in which he was served by black waiters. "It
is impossible to repress the feeling that they are not of the same blood as us.
Seeing their black faces with their fat lips and their grimacing teeth, the
wool on their heads, their bent knees and elongated hands, their large curved
fingernails, and above all the livid colors of their palms, I could not turn
my eyes from their face in order to tell them to keep their distance, and when
they advanced that hideous hand toward my plate to serve me, I wished that I
could leave in order to eat my bread apart rather than dine with such service.
What unhappiness for the white race to have tied its existence so closely with
that of the Negroes. God protect us." And so on, and more, and worse. I can't
remember reading a paragraph that more turned the stomach or that more cried out
for psychological analysis.

I cannot help wondering whether there might not be a connection between
Agassiz's status as a replacement child and his embrace of polygenism. Is it
possible that he unconsciously thought that he was a special and superior
person because he, of all his siblings, was chosen for survival?  And that in
the same way, white people were chosen and superior among all the "races" of
humankind. His deeply-held resistance to the evidence that persuaded almost all
of his fellow naturalists is inexplicable -- unless he clung to the doctrine of
special creation for reasons that were fundamentally irrational. Put it this
way: Agassiz's unusual situation required him to believe that he, and people
with whom he could identify, were marked for distinction -- and that all others
were inferior. One of five among the siblings, one of eight among the races.
How else could he free himself of the guilt that he lived and thrived while his
apparently less deserving siblings had perished?

Broad-brush cheap pop psychologizing, to be sure -- but let's reserve
judgment until we find some time to get ourselves to the library and learn a
little about this brilliant, disgusting man.

Source: 2009/03/this-old-house-

Title: This Old House
Date: March 30, 2009

We've left the old place for a slick new condo.

It was a good ol' house. A 1912 arts and crafts bungalow, probably built
right out of the Sears, Roebuck catalog.  When we arrived, in 1973, she
had been much abused:  some of her fir woodwork painted, some removed; the
stained-glass window and the original prairie-style chandeliers long gone;  the
handsome five- paneled living room window (prominent in the old photographs)
replaced with an Eisenhower-era "picture window," the original fireplace mantle
superseded by a monstrosity in native stone; the brass registers covered with
layers upon layer of paint, all those beautiful, then-fashionable pre-World
War I built-in cabinets carted to a dump; the classic oak floors covered with
wall-to-wall carpets.  Over the years, little by little, we did what we could
for the old lady: insulated her walls and ceilings, replaced the primitive
electrical wiring, stripped and refinished the woodwork and the registers,
fabricated a "new old" mantle and "new old" bookshelves and cabinets, modernized
the heating system, removed the asbestos, and (Boulder is hotter than it was a
hundred years ago) retrofitted it with air-conditioning. We updated the kitchen
-- brought the kitchen into the modern world.

We left the old dear in far better condition than we found her. Trust me on
this.

And let's not forget the backyard garden.  Where there was once an
incoherent jumble of thorny plants, there are now peonies both herbaceous
and tree (Including my favorite, the ever-larger Joseph Rocks), irises
bearded and Siberian, a variety of multiplying day lilies, climbing roses, a
thriving weigela, a Rose of Sharon, an abundance of clematis, and fences draped
with thick healthy ivy. I'm sorry to report that I never did get around to
replacing the sticky, aggressive bear-berries.

Are we sad to leave?  A little, but only a little. We did well by the old
house, and the house did well by us. We leave with a good conscience. But the
time has come to move along. It's only an object, after all; a machine for
living.

So here we are now, in this bright shiny new apartment. Floor-to-celing windows.
Fancy new appliances. A "great room," a "master bedroom."  An elevator.  It
took almost a full month to move, but in that month we progressed from the turn
of the previous century to the turn of the next.

And it feels right. It's OK.

Source: 2009/04/classic-announcerese

Title: Classic Announcerese
Date: April 05, 2009

NBC NCAA announcer to MSU coach Tom Izzo at the end of last night's game: "This
is one of the great atmospheres I've ever been able to watch."

Source: 2009/04/nick-and-the-candlestick

Title: Nick and the Candlestick
Date: April 09, 2009

Sylvia Plath's "Nick and the Candlestick," a scalpel of a poem, is exasperating
in its details but crystal clear in "plot" and feeling. Here it is in its
entirety. Read it through; don't be alarmed if it seems impenetrable or opaque;
it's not. Or not entirely so.

I am a miner. The light burns blue.Waxy stalactitesDrip and thicken, tearsThe
earthen wombExudes from its dead boredom.Black bat airsWrap me, raggy
shawls,Cold homicides.They weld to me like plums.Old cave of calciumIcicles,
old echoer.Even the newts are white,Those holy Joes.And the fish, the fish----
Christ! They are panes of ice,A vice of knives,A piranhaReligion, drinkingIts
first communion out of my live toes.The candleGulps and recovers its small
altitude,Its yellows hearten.O love, how did you get here?O embryoRemembering,
even in sleep,Your crossed position.The blood blooms cleanIn you, ruby.The
painYou wake to is not yours.Love, love,I have hung our cave with roses.With
soft rugs----The last of Victoriana.Let the starsPlummet to their dark
address,Let the mercuricAtoms that cripple dripInto the terrible well,You are
the oneSolid the spaces lean on, envious.You are the baby in the barn.

Here''s the story in simple outline: the candlestick-bearing poet enters a dark
bedroom in which she finds rugs on the wall, an aquarium, and her sleeping
infant -- the "Nick" of  the title. The poem's import: simply that the world
may be dangerous and hostile, but is redeemed by the child. It's a simple tale
in a traditional form ("dramatic monologue") but its language and imagery
are startling, intense, even revolutionary. The poem's governing idea is not
unusual, but it is conveyed with magnificent electric imagery and emotion.

Some lines are clear, others entirely mysterious. A line-by-line commentary
follows.

"I am a miner." For the purposes of the fiction, the poet bluntly transforms
herself into a miner and explorer. The space into which she enters is a
bedroom, which in terms of the metaphor, is cast both as a mine and a
cave. What minerals will the miner extract?  Both the rich and rare (a ruby)
and the poisonous (mercury).

"The light burns blue."  The candle that she carries is nearly extinguished
(or, alternatively, there is a gas heater in the room).

"Waxy stalactites drip and thicken." Candle drippings, in the poet's
imagination, become stalactites; we are in a cave. But she holds a candle as
it would be employed in worship. It is through the agency of the candle that
religion (specifically Roman Catholicism) enters the poem.

"Tears/ The earthen womb/ Exudes from its dead boredom." The room, the
mine, the cave, is now figured as a womb. Tears/womb extends and transforms
candle/cave. The series of terms  "room" (implied) "mine," "cave," "womb") is
the metaphorical center of the poem -- the "spaces" that will be evoked in the
poem's next to last sentence. The womb is the previous home of "Nick," who is
also a babe of larger meaning in the climax of the poem.

The phrase "from its dead boredom" is not clear, at least to me. It's tempting
to say that the poet transfers her own emotion onto the wax/stalactite/tear
-- so that "the womb is crying just as I am" -- but nevertheless the phrase
"dead boredom" is too personal and vague to communicate perspicuously. The
room/cave/womb, at this point in the poem, seems to be infertile ("dead") and
un-engaging. But that will change.

"Black bat airs/ Wrap me, raggy shawls,/ Cold homicides." I understand why the
poet encounters bats in her cave, and it makes sense that she defines her own
clothes as a tattered shawl. It is also clear that the room into which she has
entered is dangerous and inhospitable. The syntax of the sentence is less than
clear. Does the phrase "cold homicides" stand in apposition to "airs?" Who are
these "cold homicides?" A "homicide" can be a murderer or a victim of murder or
even an abstraction. In what sense can a poet be "wrapped" in "cold homicides?"

"They weld to me like plums." The least explicable line in the poem. "They"
seems to refer to "black bat airs" -- but how airs can "weld like plums" is
beyond me. In the same way way that plums weld to me?  What way is that?

"Old cave of calcium/ Icicles, old echoer." Calcium icicles are clearly the
stalactites and a cave is certainly a place of echoes. But "old? Once again,
tired, unproductive, never fertile, but possibly also "old" in the sense of
familiar, as in "old friend."

"Even the newts are white,/ Those holy Joes." The stalactite-dominated cave with
its calcium icicles is drained of color. So too are the newts, or salamanders,
which ought to be red. Newts are traditionally associated with fire, but not
here. In Christian symbolism, they stand for faith, because, in the legends,
they survive the fiery passions of disbelief. Why are they "holy Joes?" The
only meaning of "holy Joe" with which I am familiar is "military chaplain,"
which isn't pertinent. But "Joe" is significant, because Joe or Joseph is the
absent father of the baby in the barn. But why is there a salamander in the
room, unless it lives in some sort of aquarium or terrarium?

"And the fish, the fish---/Christ! They are panes of ice,/ A vice of knives,/A
piranha religion, drinking/ Its first communion out of my live toes." Not just
a newt in this room/cave/womb, but fish as well. Fish, of course, are the pre-
eminent symbol of Christianity -- the Greek word ixthos, fish, signifying Jesus
Christ theos ouk soter (god and savior). But these fish, like the salamander,
are anything but redemptive. On the contrary, they stand for a "piranha
religion" and a sacrament not of communion but consumption -- with the poet
herself, or perhaps only her toes, the sacrifice.

These lines bring to conclusion the first part of the poem, which does not offer
any good news. But then begins the second movement of the poem, which is of a
more optimistic character.

"The candle/ Gulps and recovers its small altitude,/ Its yellows hearten." Well,
that's encouraging. The candle was almost extinguished, and with its return
comes a bit of color, at last. And perhaps some cheer.

"O love, how did you get here?/  O embryo/ Remembering, even in sleep,/Your
crossed position."  How, my child, did you find yourself in such a cold and
inhospitable universe. The baby is newly arrived, his legs still crossed as
they were in the womb -- "crossed," being, of course, an obvious reference to
"the cross."

"The blood blooms clean/ In you, ruby." No original sin in this jewel of a
child.

"The pain/ You wake to is not yours." It is the world's pain to which the
innocent child must gradually accommodate -- but not yet, and not in this
poem.."Love, love,/ I have hung our cave with roses./ With soft rugs----/ The
last of Victoriana."  The room is momentarily figured as a better world -- a
pre-modern world. It's comfortable, blooming; a room in strong contrast to the
colorless, cold cave of the first movement of the poem.

"Let the stars/ Plummet to their dark address,/ Let the mercuric/ Atoms that
cripple drip Into the terrible well," "Let" has the force of "even if." Even if
the world ends, even if the earth is polluted and poisoned, the poet exclaims,

"You are the one/ Solid the spaces lean on, envious." You, Nick, my infant
child who makes the world whole, are the "one solid," the only palpable
reality, which the spaces (vacuities, caves, rooms, emptinesses of all sort)
lean upon. And finally, at last,

."You are the baby in the barn."  You, my own newborn infant, are the baby
in the barn. Which is to say, you, not Him. You, not Jesus, are my savior. As
we've seen, the poem is not traditionally reverent. The baby in the barn is
stripped of religious mystery. The poet has already made clear her feeling about
Christianity -- it's a "piranha religion." But the "baby in the barn" -- Jesus
in the manger -- that's another thing. This barn-born baby (barn, not cave) is
a universal, trans-religious symbol of rebirth, of hope. "You are the baby in
the barn" invests meaning in Everyinfant. It repudiates the claim to special
importance of any particular child, even the god/man of theology. The poet
rejects Christianity in favor of a universal human and natural relationship
(parent-child) that underlies and precedes all religion.

It's a poem that travels a great distance in a handful of lines.  Brilliant,
isn't it?

Source: 2009/04/the-singing-man-of-windsor

Title: The "Singing Man of Windsor"
Date: April 14, 2009

In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, it is reported that Falstaff once
boldly compared the King to a "singing man of Windsor" -- and was assaulted for
doing so. Who, then, is this controversial "singing man?"

The evidence that might solve this mystery is buried in the dark backward and
abysm of time. The throwaway reference to a "singing man of Windsor" may have
tickled Globe audiences, but later playgoers (and scholars) don't have a clue as
to why.

The singing man owes his shadowy existence to Mistress Quickly, who inserts him
into a one of her ungainly rambling narratives, the point of which is to claim
that Falstaff has promised to marry her. "Didst thou not swear to me... when the
Prince broke thy head for liking his father to a singing man of Windsor...," she
complains.

Presumptuous indeed for Falstaff to compare his King to any ordinary mortal --
but what, we may ask, was so offensive about the "singing man" that his mere
mention provoked the prince to violence?  Misshapen, ugly, drunken,
foolish?  There must have been more jeer to the "singing man" than is now
obvious.

The phrase "singing man" was a technical term that described not popular
balladeers but professional choristers, usually priests, who were associated
with a church or college. Shakespeare knew about a priest of Windsor named
Maudelen -- the story is in Holinshed's Chronicles -- who resembled Richard II
and was deployed as a figurehead in a plot to overthrow the king. Is it possible
that Falstaff''s "singing man" referred to Maudelen and therefore challenged the
legitimacy of Henry's kingship?  Maudelen is not known to have been a singer,
and so the theory, weak as it is, seems to founder badly.

More likely is that there was a real, notorious Windsor singer, offensive in
some unknown way, who enjoyed local celebrity in the 1590s. Would Shakespeare
insert a real person into the history play?  Well, yes, he does such things.
This sequence of Henry plays, nominally set in the early decades of the
fifteenth century, is given to anachronism and occasionally introduces one of
Shakespeare's contemporaries into the story, perhaps as some sort of private
joke. A "William Visor of Woncote" who was very likely a member of the Visor
or Vizard family of Woodmancote in Gloucestershire is mentioned by Shallow's
factotum Davy. And then there's "Clement Perkes a' th' Hill," who as been traced
to the Purchas or Perkis family who dwelled on Stinchcombe Hill. And also the
"red-nosed innkeeper of Daventry" (Daventry is a village on the London-Coventry
road that Shakespeare no doubt frequented.)  These imagined beings are
indulgences on Shakespeare's part that might have amused the knowledgeable but
can only puzzle us.

The "singing man of Windsor" stands as another such bafflement. It's a clue to
Shakespeare's temperament, but a clue that leads nowhere.

Source: 2009/04/some-euphemisms

Title: Some Euphemisms
Date: April 24, 2009

"Physical pressure" is entirely too vague -- goodness gracious, it could refer
to something no more serious than a firm handshake -- and as a result it's
impossible even to guess what's being euphemized. "Abuse" is similarly hazy.
Verbal abuse?  Spousal abuse? Gosh, it's hard to say. "Harsh methods" and
"harsh tactics" offer more of a clue, except that nowadays the word "harsh" can
be used semi-comically, as in the teen-age "oh, that's harsh." You don't want
inadvertent comedy when you're inventing prize-winning euphemisms. But "harsh"
has more heft when used in combination with other adjectives, as for example
"harsh interrogation methods" and "harsh interrogation techniques." The three-
word phrases sound as though they've been translated from the original German,
always a plus when language is being corrupted. "Rough treatment" is not very
imaginative. I definitely prefer "abusive treatment," and "abusive techniques."
"Coercive interrogation" has a nice ring -- and it leaves a lot of room for
the imagination. "Brutal treatment" and "brutal methods of interrogation" --
well, what's the point? Once you start using words like "brutal", you might
just as well just abandon euphemism altogether and say "torture," for goodness
sake. "Enhanced interrogations" and  "enhanced interrogation techniques"
effectively combine euphemism and bureaucratese. It's a stroke of genius to
take the word "enhanced," which ordinarily denotes an improvement, and transfer
it to the world of thumbscrew and electric shock. "Enhanced" is much more
effective than its alternative "extreme," as in the widely used but colorless
"extreme interrogation methods." My personal favorite is "advanced interrogation
techniques," in which the word "advanced," customarily employed to describe
progress in civilization, has been thoroughly perverted to refer to primitive,
barbaric practices. "Advanced interrogation techniques." Now that's what I call
a world-class euphemism! Credit another success to our government and to our
compliant journalists.

Source: 2009/04/our-glorious-past

Title: Our Glorious Past
Date: April 24, 2009

William Dean Howells, editor of the Atlantic Monthly and one of the great,
insightful novelists of Victorian America, visited the great Centennial
Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1876.  He toured the pavilion in which native
American crafts were displayed.  Howells' judgment:  "the red man, as he
appears in effigy and in photograph in this collection, is a hideous demon,
whose malign traits cannot inspire any emotion softer than abhorrence."

Am I naive that I continue to be shocked by the barbarities of the past?

Source: 2009/05/modern-radio

Title: Modern Radio
Date: May 04, 2009

For the new downtown apartment, we've purchased a Sonos ZonePlayer. What does
this oddly-named machine do?  It simply allows me to capture the signal of
radio statios all over the world (through the internet connection), pipe them
through the amplifier, and broadcast them on our old but functional speakers.

Quite a step up in standard of living, especially since over-the-air receptio n
in our mountain town is severely compromised by the bumpy terrai               n

With this new device, I can listen to classical music stations from all the
capitols of Europe -- all over the planet, in fact. I can choose from among 5
or 6 crystal-clear stations dedicated entirely to opera, as well as a few that
specialize in the baroque period, or in chamber music, or piano. There are also
five Beatles stations, one of them from Moscow!  Several "big band" stations.
An all Grateful Dead specialist beaming directly to me from Connecticut. An
all Bruce, all the time.

I love the "Paris Chanson" station, twenty-four hours a day of Edith Piaf and
friends, from Tokyo.

But so far my favorite is the all doo-wop station out of Winter Haven,
Florida, which, on demand, has the power to return me to my teen-age
years. Just now I heard the Jacks' plaintive, "Why Don't You Write
Me," a song which functioned, earlier in my life, as a personal anthem
of self-flagellation. And just at this moment, a glorious version (and one
that I didn''t know) of the much-recorded "The Glory of Love."  Aural bliss!

What's missing?  A good American roots (1920s and 1930s) station. A
station specializing in 1940s and 1950s black gospel -- definitely not
"contemporary gospel" -- which, according to AH, the world's expert, is called
contemporary because it is both a "con" and "temporary."  An all Gilbert and
Sullivan station -- but perhaps that would be a gift too precious to imagine?

But if  there can be eight all-Elvis stations, shouldn't there be at least
one that is all-Haydn, all the time?

And yet I've only begun to search.  Who knows what other pleasures are out
there in modern radioland?

Source: 2009/05/etymological-panic

Title: Etymological Panic
Date: May 11, 2009

I can't remember what I was dreaming, but I woke up in a state of
pure etymological panic -- over the revelation that I didn't know the
derivation or meaning of the "welter" part of "welterweight."  How could this
be?  Context was not the least help:  lightweight, welterweight, middleweight,
light- heavyweight, heavyweight.  Why not the more logical, more consistent
"light- middleweight?"

What does "welter" mean?  I was barely awake, but I skimmed my mental
resources.  German "welt" -- world.  "Worldweight." Nonsense.  "Welt" as in
a wound on the skin caused by a punch.  Possible, but, all boxers raise welts
-- that's what boxers do -- not just welterweights.  A possible past tense
of "weld."  No, that won't do. Boxers don't weld, or repair, anything. It
was now time for a quick check of the mental Shakespeare concordance.  Whoops,
a blank.  Mental Milton:  hold on, now, here's something:  the phrase
"welter to the parching wind" in Lycidas.  But that particular "welter" means,
I had always assumed "roll." In what sense would a welterweight "roll" more
than any other size of boxer?  Another dead end.  OK, it's now time to get
out of bed, fire up the computer, and check the on-line etymological dictionary.
"Welterweight    1832, "heavyweight horseman," later "boxer or wrestler of
a certain weight" (1896), from earlier welter "heavyweight horseman or boxer"
(1804), possibly from welt (v.) "beat severely" (c.1400)." Now I'm starting to
relax;  the panic is beginning to fade.  Nothing more calming than to discover
that the internet doesn't have a better answer than I do.

But what the internet knows is intriguing. "Welterweight" used to
mean "heavyweight" and then somehow devolved into something less than
middleweight (147 pounds, to be exact, in American boxing)?  By what
etymological process?  It all sounds arbitrary and inexplicable to me. 
What is the root of "welter" in the sense of "heavy?"  To what words is it
related.  And when and why did it come to be demoted?  Well, there are,
as a well-known epistemologist liked to say, "known unknowns and unknown
unknowns."  The history of "welter" is unknown to a power.

On the other hand, the word "welter" standing all by itself is very
much known: "to roll or twist," c.1300, from M.Du. or M.L.G. welteren "to
roll," from P.Gmc. *waltijanan (cf. O.E. wieltan, O.N. velta, O.H.G. walzan "to
turn, revolve," Ger. wälzen "to roll," Goth. waltjan "to roll"), from PIE base
*wel- "to turn, revolve")."

But hold on here.  The noun meaning "confused mass" is first recorded 1851. 
That's the "welter" in, say, "his mind was a welter of confused etymological
ideas."  Could the welterweight welter and the confused mass welter be
related -- in the sense that a "welterweight" is neither light nor heavy? 
Well, it's a theory, but frankly, not a very good one.

Besides, it's still the middle of the night, and it's time to return to bed. 
The etymology of "welter" remains a mystery, but at least the symptoms of
etymological stress have faded. Will sleep come  -- or will I welter in a
welter of confused thoughts?

Source: 2009/05/ps-217-prosopography

Title: P.S 217 Prosopography
Date: May 15, 2009

After the passage of oh-so-many years, I've become shamelessly curious to
know what happened to the friends and classmates who graduated from P. S. 217
in June of 1952. There were about 175 of these golden lads and lasses, and you
can see their pictures here.

I know just enough to pique my curiousity. Lester Silberman became a
gynecologist, Stephen Lewin an editor, Herman Bressel was career navy, George
Coven an entrepreneur, Fred Litto a professor in Brazil, Buddy Sogluizzo a
librarian, Melvin Polay a CPA.  Allen Guday emigrated to Israel and Stuart
Blickstein to South Carolina.  Nicky Antonucci died in Korea.  But I have
no information on 90% of the boys and 100% of the girls.  Hey, guys and gals,
check out the pictures and help me track down those missing members of the
class of 1952.  Where the heck are you?  What have you been doing since 1952?

We're all 70 years old;  It's now or never.

Am I the only one who's curious?

Source: 2009/05/told-you-so-said-i-did

Title: Told You So, Said I Did
Date: May 18, 2009

A while back, I complained about Allen Iverson.  Here's what I said:  "he
can do everything on the basketball court except win....  When the Nuggets
come down the floor, whether Iverson eventually shoots or not, he clings to
the ball and dribbles around while the rest of the team stand and watch. 
Iverson turns his teammates into spectators....  He isn't going to become a
team player;  he's 31 years old and he's averaged 23 shots a game with a .422
shooting percentage for an entire career."  "The Answer," I said, was not the
answer.  Not even close.

But things have changed for the Nuggets.  They finally unloaded Iverson
-- which would have been blessing enough.  Detroit put him on the shelf
-- didn't even play him at the end of the season.  But in exchange the
Nuggs received Chauncey Billups, who is everything Iverson is not:  a skilled
point guard, an intelligent man, a team player.  A leader, a defender.  It's
marvelous how one player can change the complexion of a team.  The Nuggets are
now a serious contender.  I like their chances against the Lakers.

Was it a brilliant move by the team owners and management?   I'm not privy to
the details, but I'd say, not brilliance -- just plain dumb luck.  I don't
think they knew either how bad Iverson was or how good Billups could be.

Bad planning, in any case.  If management could have guessed that the Nuggets
would make it to the western conference final, would they have let Marcus Camby
and Eduardo Najera slip through their cheapskate fingers a year ago?  No --
they would have made the investment that one makes when a championship is a
possibility. The Lakers can put three seven-footers (Bynum, Gasol, Odom) on the
floor at the same time -- wouldn't we love it if we could bring in Camby (an
all-league defensive player) to help Nene?  And who's going to guard Bryant? 
Dahntay Jones will take a crack at it, but wouldn't it be helpful if Najera
could have given us some minutes as well -- if not to stop Bryant, at least to
bang him around a bit?

And hey, does anyone remember that we gave up not only Andre Miller but two
first-round draft picks for 'The Answer'?  We might have had a dynasty in
the making if we had played our cards right -- and been willing to pay the
freight.  Two first-round picks, I repeat.

So the Nuggs have a chance -- but not the chance they might have had if they'd
been a little smarter, a little more imaginative, a little less tightfisted..

Source: 2009/05/medicarese

Title: Medicarese
Date: May 24, 2009

We're still dealing with the bureaucratic fallout from Grandma's death in
January. One consequence is that we receive impenetrable, inexplicable documents
from Medicare every few days.

Here's an opaque paragraph from the latest missive. Try to judge at what level
-- your choices are sixth grade through twelfth grade remedial -- this entirely
irrelevant and gratuitous advice is written.

"Medicare may pay for services that you get while on board a ship within the
territorial waters of the United States. In rare cases, Medicare may pay for
inpatient hospital, doctor, or ambulance services you get if you are traveling
through the territorial waters of Canada without unreasonable delay by the mos
(sic) direct route between Alaska and another state when a medical emergency
occurs and the Canadian hospital is closer than the nearest American hospital
that can treat the emergency. Medicare won't pay for this service since you
didn't meet these requirements."

It's the transition between the that long snake of a penultimate sentence and
the final injunctive sentence that throws me.  I made no request, so why the
prohibition: "you didn't meet these requirements?"  I never claimed to meet
them; in fact, I've never (nor did Grandma) traveled from Alaska to the lower
forty-eight by waterway. What the heck is Medicare talking about? Yikes! Double
yikes!

And what's with the idiom "get services."  Isn't it "receive services?"  Or
better yet, "receive care?"

There is no word more overused in American English than "get, got, gotten." Can
we agree to ban all forms of the word "get" from our vocabulary for a year. 
Get it out of our collective systems. Except, of course, in classic exchanges
such as, "Get it?" "Got it." "Good."

Is it possible that there are insurance-company moles in the Medicare system?
They've infiltrated the bureaucracy and they cleverly undermine the drive for
socialized medicine by generating cascades of dark, bilious, fearful prose.

Source: 2009/05/de-pecunia

Title: De Pecunia
Date: May 27, 2009

I've never understood money.  It doesn't do you any good until you spend it,
and once you spend it, you don't have it anymore.

I never understood income, either.  I was employed for most of my life at a
frugal, let's call it, state university.  I earned much less money than friends
in the "private sector" or the trades, but it didn't seem to matter much. 
I never missed a meal, I sent my kids to good colleges, and I enjoyed the
security of knowing that I wouldn't be laid off.  Meanwhile, I spent a good
hunk of my life reading books and talking about literature with young people. 
On the whole, it seemed like a good deal.

I did have some resentments, however, one of which was the disparity in salary
between faculty and adminstrators.  If we were all working in the same place,
why should the guy who ran the student union, or who managed "public relations,"
or who lobbied the legislature, or who was in charge of campus parking or
admissions, or who coached the linebackers, or who was second assistant vice
chancellor for this-or-that receive a salary twice or three times as large as
mine?  I never grasped the reason.

But then I discovered that the real money in the University system wasn't
in these areas.  It was in managing the University's portfolio.  A few
years ago, Harvard Magazine reported that the managers of its endowment were
receiving annual salaries of $8,000,000 to $10,000,000 -- or about 100 times
what I was pulling down.

But, it was reported, they earned these phenomenal salaries because they were
such financial geniuses -- and their genius could be judged by the enormous
growth of the endowment.

I have to say that I was sceptical.  I remembered one of my father's
maxims:  "when the stock market is going up, everybody's a genius."

Then I received a letter from Harvard's President, reporting on the steep
decline in the value of the endowment.

In a fit of pique, I wrote to President Faust (her real name).

Dear President Faust:  when the stock market was flying, the managers of
Harvard's endowment were geniuses and were paid astonishingly high salaries. 
Now that the endowment has lost 30% of its value, do you plan to a) lower
the salaries of endowment managers to realistic levels, and b) ask them to
recompense the university for their absurd past overcompensation ?    Yours,
Vivian de St. Vrain  (Ph.D. 1966)

I didn't expect an answer, but after several months, I received the following
letter, which, truth to tell, I regard as rather cold and perfunctory.

Dear Dr. St. Vrain.

Although I cannot comment on matters of employee compensation, I understand and
appreciate your concern for Harvard’s wellbeing.  Please be assured that the
endowment management remains entirely focused on supporting the University’s
most fundamental education and research priorities.Regards,Drew Faust Whoa. 
Back o' the hand to poor Vivian.

OK, that's it.  In retaliation, I'm striking Harvard out of my will. President
Faust will have to find someone else to endow that new administration building.

Source: 2009/05/0h-no-not-again

Title: 0h no, not again!
Date: May 31, 2009

Here's my latest 'personal best.'  It's now seven consecutive airplane trips
in which the person next to me has been an obese hulk. The kind of person who
spreads his (or her) legs, drips his (or her suet) onto and over my armrest
and claims and colonizes territory that I have purchased and which should be
inviolate.

As usual, we've arrived early.  We have the aisle and the middle, and we're
hoping that the window will be unoccupied, but we know that to wish so is
probably hopeless.  I watch the doorway.  Any number of slim - size 2,
size 4 -- young ladies appear, progress down the aisle, glance at my row,
and continue on their way.  Small nine-year-old boys whom I would joyously
welcome emerge from the doorway.  They too pass by.  Elderly grandmothers,
too frail and slight to threaten my space, totter to the rear. Then,
finally, here he is, my destiny.  Just my luck once again!  An enormous
whale, big enough to block the sun, swims and jiggles me-ward.  Clouds
of thick tobacco smoke rise like mist from his clothes.  He pauses. "May
I?" he says, unapologetically, shamelessly.  We stand, exit the row, and
wait in the aisle while he slowly maneuvers his massive bulk into place,
sighs, and crushes his seat. He loosens the seatbelt to maximum girth. By
the time I return, he's already claimed the armrest  and his keachy elbow
has broken the imaginary plane.  Now he spreads his heroic sumo thighs.  In
all fairness, there's no way he could get both legs under his seat, nor any way
that his flabby arms could be confined to the space that he has paid for. I
huddle to one side, forced to list to the left.  I am majorly pissed but too
polite (or inhibited) to utter the vindictive words that form themselves in my
brain:  "Hey, buster, next time buy yourself two seats. Or a whole row."

In my near future:  four-and-a-half hours of undeserved compression. Back ache.
Head                                                                       ache.

Why little old me?

Source: 2009/06/les-tits

Title: Les Tits
Date: June 08, 2009

We drove from DC to Bradford, Vermont. Not desrious of hazarding the I-95
corridor, we veered far to the west, almost to Scranton.  It was a mostly
pleasant ride. Travelers, remember the Taconic State Parkway --  it's
underused, neatly landscaped, truck-free.

Along the way, we encountered a road sign which said, Lititz, Pennsylvania.

Lititz. I know that name. How? Have I been there?  No. Did I have a
Lititzfriend from ?  I searched my mind.  Nope. Some famous person come from
LititzLititz?  No.

It bothered me. Something in my mind connected with Lititz but I couldn't
recall it.

Is it LIT-its?  Luh-TITS?

We at last we arrived here in Bradford, Lititz still puzzling me.  What kind
of word is Lititz? Time to fire up the wikipedia.  OK, here it is. "Lititz
was founded my members of the Moravian Church in 1756, and was named after
a castle in Bohemia named Litice....  For a century, only Moravians were
permitted to live in Lititz, and until the middle 1800s only members of the
congregation could own houses  The lease system was abolished in 1855." Nice
little exclusivist Pennsylvania Dutch town, but still the question lingers  --
how do I know it?

"Lititz is also home to Linden Hall School, the oldest all-girls boarding school
in the United States, founded by the Moravians in 1746."  That's an interesting
piece of news.

Do I know someone who attended Linden Hall?  No, I don't think so.

I went to sleep, puzzled. Why is Lititz, PA so familiar to me?

Next day, we started spring-cleaning the house and ran into distinct signs of
recent mouse habitations.  I got out some mousetraps, the kind with the spring
that I've been baiting with peanut butter at various catless times these last
50 years.  They're Victor mousetraps.  Aha. Printed on each one, in small
letters:  "Woodstream Corporation, Lititz, Pennsylvania."

Mystery solved.  Next time through, perhaps we'll stop at Lititz, check out the
church, the school, and the Moravian mouse-trap factory.

Source: 2009/06/latest-news-from-nightmareville-

Title: Latest News from Nightmareville.
Date: June 16, 2009

I had to dispose of the corpse.

My choice was either to take it to the dump, piece by piece, weekly, or bury
it on the property.  Whose body?  Don't know.  How did it get into the
freezer?  I put it there, in a black plastic bag, after I killed him.  I gave
careful consideration to the pros and cons of each method.  If I took it to
the dump, there might be fingerprints or perhaps pieces of paper with my name
on them.  And it might take weeks to complete the process.  If I buried it on
the land, it would always be here.  Who knows what excavations there might be
in the future.  I started to bury it, but just as I put a shovel in the earth,
a small, yappy dog started pestering me.

Time to wake up.  Hey, good deal.  I didn't murder anyone.  I'm clean.

Source: 2009/06/the-love-song-of-governor-mark-sandford

Title: The Love Song of Gov. Mark Sanford (in his own 'eamailed' [sic] words).
Date: June 29, 2009

-I-

You were basking

in what seems a great spot.

I am most jealous

of  your salad

under the palm trees.

I do not want to raise expectations

about feelings

and things.

You are special

and unique

and fabulous

in a whole host of ways.

I will write you a longer note

with a few more profound thoughts

tomorrow

or

Wednesday.

It won't be worthy of bedside placement.

-II-

I went out and ran the excavator with lights until the sun came up.

There is something wonderful

about listening to country music playing in the cab,

the air conditioner running,

the hum of a huge diesel engine in the background

the tranquility that comes with being in a virtual wilderness

of trees and marsh,

the day breaking

and vibrant pink becoming alive in the morning clouds.

And getting to build something with each scoop

of dirt.

It is admittedly weird.

-III-

Do you really comprehend

how beautiful your smile is?

Have you been told lately

how warm your eyes, and how they softly glow

with the special nature of your soul?

The rarest of all commodities in this world is love.

You already had

a full tank of love

in the emotional bank account.

Since our first meeting there in  the wind-swept

somewhat open air

dance spot in Punta del Este,

I felt that you had that same rare attribute.

You have a level of sophistication that is so

fitting

with your beauty.

You have the ability to give magnificently gentle kisses.

I love the curves of your hips.

I love your tan lines.

You have a particular grace and calm that I adore.

In the faded glow of night's light

that we spoke of

at the steakhouse.

-IV-

This soul-mate feel

I alluded to

is real.

How this lightning strike snuck up on us

I am still not sure.

My heart wants to get on a plane tonight to be in your loving arms.

My head says how do we put the genius back in the bottle

The bottom line is two fold.

----------------------------------------------------

(Words by South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford with the assistance of Maria
Belen Chapur;   poetastical typography by Vivian de St. Vrain.)

Source: 2009/07/our-lady-of-internal-combustion

Title: Our Lady of Internal Combustion
Date: July 07, 2009

I stopped at one of those highway gas-station convenience stores a few weeks
ago, searching for some invigorating M&Ms. I couldn't find them, but I said to
myself, this is America and I'm an American, and if there's one thing I know
it's that there are going to be M&Ms somewhere in this quickstop. I poked around
a little more and sure enough, just a little out of the way, there they were
-- five different kinds of M&Ms. I went for the classic multi-colored ones. Am
I the kind of person who's going to experiment with peanut butter M&Ms?  It
wouldn't be me.

But I'm off the point, which is, that when you're a native of the place, you
know more or less what to expect. You're not likely to be taken by surprise
very often. But every once in a while, something hits you right between the
eyes, and you say, where the heck am I? I had such an experience today when I
read a flyer from the West Fairlee Center Church, which is right over there on
Middlebrook Road, not more than three or four miles from where we live.

I have no quarrel with the "Old Fashioned Community Hymn Sing" on July 12 or
the "Shape Note Singing" on August 2 -- that's exactly what I would expect
from a church in West Fairlee Center. I'm a little puzzled by the "Blessing
of the Animals" on July 19, but then I remembered St. Francis, in some ways my
favorite saint, and I remembered that he preached to the birds and that when he
was dying, he thanked his donkey and (this is a bit hard to believe but what the
heck) his donkey wept. So I'm OK with blessing the animals, although I myself
would feel hypocritical blessing the particular animals that I was preparing
to transubstantiate into lambchops or hamburger.

But what makes me feel like a stranger in a strange land is the event that
is scheduled for August 9 -- the "Blessing of the ATV's" (sic). ATVs,
for those of you who don't know, are "all-terrain vehicles," and are very
useful if you're out on the range in the vast West patrolling miles and miles
of barbed-wire fence, but which in the crowded East are used mostly for
"recreation," which seems to involve tearing up private land (someone else's
private land, that is) or government land, making a whole lot of noise, and
sometimes driving underage and illegally, and much too fast, on our usually
peaceful "unimproved" dirt roads. No mufflers, no insurance, no license.

So what's with "the blessing of the ATVs?"

St. Francis has become the patron saint of environmentalists. Is
"the blessing of the ATVs" supposed to be a rejoinder to St. F and to
ecological thinking? Are we experiencing a Christian sanction of
anti-environmentalism?  Or have these back-country bible churches long been
blessing tractors and balers and pickups and backhoes, and I've just not
noticed?

WTF is going on? Am I in the America I know and understand?  Why am I
feeling vertiginous?

Would St. Francis have thanked his ATV?  And if he did, would his ATV have
wept?

Source: 2009/07/updyke

Title: Updike
Date: July 07, 2009

I've shamefully neglected the writings of John Updike.  I read the first Rabbit
novel when it appeared in 1960 and was struck by its vigor and authenticity. 
A talent to watch, I said to myself -- but then I lost track.  I loved one of
the Bech books, devoured on an airline ride from somewhere to somewhere else
twenty years ago.  I've been dazzled by short stories in various anthologies
and by art criticism in the NYRB.   But for a writer considered an American
master, nominated for a Nobel  -- well, I've been inattentive.  And now Updike
is gone.  I'm late (as usual).  To remedy the personal deficiency, I hastened
to the Bradford Public Library, where, sad to say, the only Updike on the shelf
was one I'd never heard of,Villages, published in 2004.

Villages is billed as an autobiographical novel and appears to be so.  It's
eminently readable, slickly written (sometimes so facilely that it crosses into
self-parody).  But, my-oh-my, what an embarrassingly bad performance.  It's
no more than a sexual history of "Owen Mackenzie" in which the succession of
women Owen encounters are diffentiated only by the size and shapes and degrees
of mucosity and erectility of their reproductive organs.  It's an adolescent
novel written by a seventy-year-old eminence.  What the heck was Updike
thinking?. Why would he waste precious time on such unambitious, indulgent
stuff -- unless he took a long-ago manuscript out of a drawer and fooled around
with it a bit?

Disappointing indeed. A few years ago, I read through the novels of Philip Roth,
who is an exact contemporary of Updike.  My conclusion:  that Roth (see Books
over there on the side of the page) was a writer of arrested development.  Oh
no, not again!

Let's see if the BPL has anything else by Updike today.  Let's hope for the
best.  Villages has got to be an aberration.

Source: 2009/07/updike-ii

Title: Updike- II
Date: July 15, 2009

In Terrorist, Updike takes us inside the head of a young,malleable, soft-spoken
Islamist fanatic.  The protrayal is persuasive, in part because the horror
bigotry is understated and casual.  It's quite a feat of imagination on the
author's part.  It's a good novel -- a page-turner, as they say.  It's
most remarkable feature is that the hero of the novel is a tired and bedraggled
high school guidance counsellor;  What a breakthrough -- the guidance
counsellor, figure of o-so-much contempt and satire, as savio!.  Of course,
the contrived/dramatic ending in which the terrorist and the counsellor square
off is totally unbelievable, but at least it doesn't involve fistfights
or animatrons.  On the whole, Terrorist is a very readable, imaginative and
largely satisfying novel.  It's a bit spare, laconic  -- but perhaps it
only seems so because I'm also reading Doestoevsky.  It's not a novel for the
ages -- it's too obviously occasional.  And I must say, I'm suspicious of
a piece of fiction about the interaction of various ethnicities in which the
only two Afro-Americans are a whore and a pimp named Tylenol.

Off to the Bradford Public to see what else is in their Updike holdings.

Source: 2009/07/pastorale

Title: Pastorale
Date: July 18, 2009

Sharon was here yesterday.  She has a new method to keep the raccoons and the
rats out of the food bins.  "The rats gnaw through the plastic garbage cans,
the raccons open them unless I bungee them real tight. Galvinized works, but
what we do now is buy junk refrigerators or freezers.  The rats can't get into
them.  Of course, what you spill is feast for the mice."  Sharon's husband
is a vet, but at lambing time last winter he was still recuperating from
a hip replacement.  "One of the ewes," Sharon says, "was having a hard
time delivering her lamb.  I went out to help pull.  I pulled out a head
and a leg.  The lamb must have been dead for a long time.  I whipped out the
cell phone.  I said to David, 'I don't care how long it takes to limp down
here, you're in charge.'  He took one look, got the rifle, and shot the ewe."

Source: 2009/07/starlight-dewdrops-etc-

Title: Starlight, Dewdrops, etc.
Date: July 31, 2009

The Stephen Foster songbook was a staple of my childhood. My mother sitting at
the old Hardman baby grand, sang "Camptown Ladies" and "O Susanna" and "Old
Black Joe." But times change and Foster was pushed to the sidelines years ago.
Too racist, too sentimental, too 'soft'. It's undeniable that the lyrics of many
of his songs are reprehensible.

Now we're enjoying a Stephen Collins Foster Revival and Festival in our very
own home. It began with the discovery of the "American Dreamer" cd that Thomas
Hampson recorded in 1992.  Hampson, opera lovers will know, is the world
champion of living baritones, and in this cd, he does Foster proud -- to the
inventive accompaniments of Jay Ungar and Molly Mason. No question but that
Foster was a truly superb melodist -- with a long string of songs that would
have gone double-platinum, if there had been such a thing, in pre-Civil War
America.

Hampson sings the Foster songs as if they're Schubert lieder, but there's
another recent cd, "Beautiful Dreamer" -- a "tribute album" in which Suzy
Bogguss, John Prine, Allison Krauss, Mavis Staples and a bunch of excellent
lesser-known (to me) but wonderful musicians lay into these tunes with
enthusiasm and verve. Who would have guessed the "Beautiful Dreamer" was
country before country was cool? Pure country.

Foster was a better melodist than poet. Often his lines are awkward and time-
bound and mawkish, but occasionally he hits the nail on the head. I like
"beautiful dreamer, queen of my song"; I think that "slumber my darling the
birds are at rest" is fine, but a succeeding line in the same song -- "thy
pillow shall sacred be" -- is bad beyond ordinary bad; "weep no more, my lady"
is positively Shakespearean and "all the world is sad and dreary/ every where
I roam" is well-rooted in the medieval contemptus mundi  tradition; "long
may the daisies dance the field, frolicking far and near" is far too pseudo-
Wordsworthian for my palate. Foster's best lyric, in my view, is "Hard Times
Come Again No More" --  "'Tis the song, the sigh of the weary/ Hard times, hard
times, come again no more/ Many days you have lingered, around my cabin door/
Oh! hard times, come again no more."  It's inspired, heartfelt, and eternally
pertinent -- and also, wedded to an excellent melody. "Hard Times" was not known
to me in the days of my youth -- more's the pity.

Old guy, maybe a bluesman, bottle of hooch in a brown paper bag, sits on a bench
in the middle of the night, downtown, playing air-sax, nodding. Young fellow
comes by, cheerful, asks him, "Crosstown buses run this way?" Blues guy looks
up, pauses for a second, and then drawls, "Doo--dah, doo-dah."

Source: 2009/08/updikeiii

Title: Updike-III
Date: August 01, 2009

Two more Updike novels down the hatch. The first, Seek My Face, published in
2002, is an extended short story rooted in the author's prodigious knowledge of
the contemporary art scene. It's casually written -- as if Updike didn't try
very hard. Should I be insulted that Updike didn't extend himself to invent a
plot?  The second novel is Rabbit at Rest, composed back in 1990 when Updike
was trying harder. Harrry "Rabbit" Angstrom, "hero" of four novels, is a force
in modern fiction. He's nasty, amoral, and crude, but hardly more so that the
gaggle of suburbanite creatures who surround him. Updike mercilessly draws
attention to everything odious in America culture -- he's the poet laureate of
tacky. Rabbit is fascinating but repellent. Whatever happened to "to teach and
to delight?"

Every once in a while Rabbit, always, alas, comprehensible, becomes momentarily
sympathetic. But then Updike allows him to speak -- and Rabbit's words are
invariably aggressive and offensive.  I think that the gap between what Rabbit
thinks and what Rabbit says is a major structural flaw in the novel -- and
one that will eventually push the novels from center to periphery. But time
will tell. For now, the Rabbit books are a guide to our own American kind of
shallowness -- and so here I am, off to the library or to the second-hand
bookstore to hunt down the earlier novels in this series. What does Dickens say
about Uriah Heep -- something about "fascinating in his own repulsion."  Yes, I
think that phrase will serve nicely for Updike's Rabbit.

Source: 2009/08/ligawinitude

Title: Ligawinitude
Date: August 03, 2009

The word "ligaw" in Pilipino, a language of which I am totally ignorant,
apparently means both "totally lost" and "courtship." And therefore the
adjective "ligawin" refers to someone who is both "directionally disabled"
or "directionally dyslexic" and also "attractive to persons of the opposite
sex." What a wonderful correspondence, especially to those of us who regularly
lose the car in the parking lot and to whom a walk in a strange city is
a fearful and daring adventure.  My lexicography is contributed by a
Manila reader whose forthright and thoughtful blog can be accessed at
this address.)  "Directionally dyslexic" is an ugly phrase, filled with
self-loathing; "ligawinitude" trips off the tongue. Well, almost trips; 
it's certainly superior to "ligawinness" -- which sounds like the female of an
extinct predator.

Here are some examples of ligawinitude (fellow sufferers will empathize) which I
have borrowed from Ana in Manila:

"I am so ligawin I still lose my way around the UP campus after 30 years working
there. I am so ligawin I'd enter the main door of an unfamiliar office, transact
my business, and then try to let myself out through the door of a conference
room right smack at a dozen people all gaping at me. I am so ligawin that when
I eat out, I can get lost going back from the comfort room to my table at a
big restaurant till my friends are about ready to page me....  When I am in a
strange place and I wish to explore it, I walk a straight path. When I reach a
fork, I turn back."

Ana claims to be "the most ligawin person in the world."  t's a hard claim to
substantiate. The instances of ligawinitude that she cites -- well, I can match
them with one hand tied behind my back. We won't crown a world ligawin champion
until we tabulate the results of the International Ligawinitude Olympics.
Nevertheless, it is curious to me that the ligawinitudinous often boast of the
severity of their condition.  No one says -- "Oh, I am the most colorblind
person in the world," but we (the ligawinoids) take a perverse pride in topping
our lost friends. "Loster than thou" is our odd claim.

Because the general public and even our closest friends treat us as comic, we
respond by boasting of our affliction. In effect, we identify with those who
laugh at us.

The chronically lost require liberation. We're not clowns;  we're just subject
to ligawinitude.

Which means that we're a) lost and b) sexy.

Source: 2009/08/pond-news

Title: Pond News
Date: August 18, 2009

Last week, we had a great blue heron act in a most unheron-like way. The great
blues are ordinarily skittish birds. We can't get closer than fifty yards before
they're up in the air, beating their slow, graceful, pterodactyl wings. But
this guy kept us company even with the grandchildren floating on the plastic
boats,  squealing and keening. The kids watched as he speared a small fish and
swallowed it whole. I worried:  perhaps he's hurt and can't fly.  But after
a day or so, he rose into the air, wheeled about, and off he went. Was he a
poorly-educated juvenile out on his own for the first time?  We'll never know.

And then, yesterday, a new critter. The pond has become home to a muskrat, which
swims slowly along the opposite bank. Should we be happy about this? Muskrats
eat cattails, of which we have a more-than-adequate supply. But they also eat
small frogs, and we love our frogs. They are philoprogenitive, reproducing like
rabbits. We don't want vast colonies of these lemming-like creatures.  And
they burrow into and undermine banks -- which is not good if they damage the
artificial dike. OK, Mr. Muskrat, here's the deal -- you stay on your side of
the pond, the natural side and we'll be good friends, but don't try to make a
home on the artificial side.

When I was a boy in the unenlightened 40s, women wore fur coats. One of the
common furs was called "Hudson seal." Guess what?  "Muskrat fur that is dyed,
plucked, and sheared to resemble seal."

Two can play the same game. If anyone asks, that rodent over the on the far side
of the pond with the long ratlike tail -- that's a Hudson seal.

Source: 2009/08/zucchini-news

Title: Zucchini News
Date: August 23, 2009

In our part of Vermont, the common wisdom is, "never keep your car unlocked in
August, because someone will open your door and throw in a couple of zucchinis."
Like most local gardeners, I'm drowning  in the  squash. We can't eat our
zucchinis fast enough. And no matter how vigilant I am in picking them, I wake
up in the morning to lift one of those huge hairy leaves and there it is ---
another baseball-bat long, sumptuously fat zucchini, staring its one-eyed stare
at me. To make matters worse, this year I'm growing two kinds of zucchinis --
the standard green supermarket variety and a fancy striped "Romanesco."  Also
another exotic squash, a buttery globe called "Ronde de Nice," most plentifully
produced.

Last week I was weeding in the garden when I had an unexpected visitor --
unusual for our dirt-road, off the beaten track neighborhood.  I can't remember
having to deal with a solicitor since two barely fledged Mormons popped by,
fruitlessly, in 1978. This young man, who arrived noiselessly on bicycle was
from VPIRG, and he came to tell me about the hazards of the Vermont Yankee
atomic power station. I told him right up front that I wasn't going to donate
any money and I told him why -- it all went to Obama.  But he was cordial
nevertheless, and we chatted. He's a Latin major, just graduated from UVM,
off in the fall to join Americacorps. Nice kid, I thought, but an easy mark.
After twenty minutes, he rode off with no donation but with  two substantial
zucchinis and a Ronde de Nice in his backpack. Also a large head of broccoli and
a handful of beets.

Source: 2009/08/sheepdeer-interaction

Title: The Slightness of the Lambs
Date: August 25, 2009

As far as I can tell, the deer generally keep clear of the back field where
the Morgans and the Scottish Blackfaces are pastured. Perhaps it's because
the domestic animals eat down the grass, or perhaps the deer just don't like
company. But a few days ago, I watched four white-tailed deer -- a doe with
three fawns, I believe, though such a group makes an unlikely family -- chase
twenty-two sheep out of the field and back to their fold. Sheep are notoriously
skittish, but then, so are the white tails. It was a battle of cowards. It was
especially painful to watch because one of the sheep was the ram, McCavish,
and it's his job (aside from the annual servicing, at which he performed
brilliantly) is to guard the ewes. McCavish is the "herd sire," new to the
flock. He was recently imported from Wisconsin; his grandfather came from
Scotland in the form of a vial of sperm packed in dry ice. What was Mr. McCavish
thinking when he ran from the field?  I was embarrassed for him and for the
entire flock. Query:  will the sheep stand their ground or will they allow
themselves to be intimidated by the wild turkeys?

Source: 2009/08/richard-poirier-19252009

Title: Richard Poirier (1925-2009)
Date: August 31, 2009

Richard Poirier died last week at age 83. The New York Times paid tribute with
a long obituary and an appreciative essay. Poirier was a "distinguished man of
letters" and also a Professor of English.

In 1960, as the juniorest and least-sophisticated graduate student in the
history of the universe, I enrolled in an AmLit course taught by Poirier. Fifty
years later, I can affirm that it was the single course in my graduate career in
which I performed the absolute worst -- both in the instructor's judgment and
in my own. I'm still embarrassed at the woeful mess of a paper I offered him.
I remember little of it, except its incompetence and the recollection that I
used the phrase "a writer of his ilk" -- I can't remember to which I writer I
referred -- and that Poirier wrote a longish exasperated note explaining to me
that I did not have the standing to treat any American author with disrespect.
However, the honest-to-goodness reason why I did so badly in the course was that
Poirier expected his students to think -- and thinking was not an area in which
I was gifted. I had discovered early in my educational career that my memory
was far superior to most of my contemporaries, that I had an ear for language,
and that I had a moderately fluent prose style. But I never, ever, possessed a
logical, orderly, or penetrating intelligence. (I could remember sentences and
phrases and whole poems, but not arguments or chains of reasoning).  My skills
were sufficient for literary study -- indeed I doubt that I could have managed
an academic career in any other discipline.

In fact, I did rather well in studies with most of my graduate-school
professors -- distinguished and learned gentlemen all of them -- who were so
happy to encounter facility that they didn't notice the want of brain.

It is curious that some of the most profoundly learned of my professors were the
least adventurous of thinkers. I remember, particularly, Douglas Bush, now a
mere trivia question, but a most renowned scholar in his day, whose superficial,
fey, conservative, neoChristianist, pixie observations on Spenser and Milton I
duly recorded. for two endless semesters, learning absolutely nothing of worth
or value.

Poirier was more serious. Only 35 (I was 21), he was thinking deeply about the
qualities that made American literature distinctive (he was formulating the
ideas that came together in A World Elsewhere). He was an intellectual rather
than an academic. It would have been wise for me to have listened carefully to
him. I might have learned something.

It's shocking to me that the young, dashing lecturer whom I remember so clearly
could be so old, so dead -- but there's no denying that half a century has
slipped away since I last listened to his rumbling voice.

Source: 2009/08/late-blight

Title: Late Blight
Date: August 31, 2009

It seems so allegorically named, late blight, especially appropriate to your
septuagenarian gardener. But it's more than symbolic -- late blight is here
and it's real. It's official name is phytophthora infestans. It's a noxious
fungus and it appears just when you're about to start harvesting your abundant
tomatoes. Late blight blackens and putrifies leaves, stems, and the fruits
themselves. It leaves nothing edible, and there's no recourse but to pull out
your plants, and then either burn them or put them in black plastic and take
them to the dump. We're trying to rescue a few of the tomatoes by pulling off
the bad leaves, but it's a losing cause.  All that work -- starting the seeds,
watching and watering, fertilizing and staking and tying up -- all wasted. What
a pity.

Late blight also affects potatoes. In fact, this nasty fungus is responsible for
the great Irish famine of the 1840s. So while we're mournful, we're glad that we
don't depend on our tomatoes for sustenance or income.

Why this year?  Some say that the disease comes to us from the great factory
farms in the south, where tomato plants are started early and then shipped north
in late spring. My neighbors put the blame on Wal-Mart. But in all honesty, I
must admit that all my tomatoes were started locally, by friends and relations.
The fungus can't be transmitted through the seed, so the tomato factories are
off the hook. The real culprit is the weather -- the soggy cold of June and July
was hideous if you're a tomato but just perfect if you're a blight.

I think I'll take a year off from tomatoes -- let the garden go fallow, or just
plant flowers. I couldn't bear to lose another crop. I'll follow the official
advice -- root out every single volunteer tomato and pull every weed in the
nightshade family. No tomatoes until 2011.

Source: 2009/09/new-bird-in-town

Title: New Bird in Town
Date: September 03, 2009

A creature previously unknown to me has appeared in the pond. After a few
moments with the binoculars and a glance at Peterson's classic Field Guide to
the Birds along with some intense internet research, I could make a positive
identification. It's a double-crested cormorant, usually found at the seacoast
but sometimes in rivers and lakes, which has been "recently extending its range"
and which has just now arrived on Hackett Hill Road. Although it's exciting
to encounter a new bird, especially a large graceful swimmer and diver, the
cormorant arrives tarnished by a bad reputation. Cormorants form very large
colonies and over-indulge their voracious appetites -- they gobble fish, frogs,
salamanders, clean out the lakes. Is it after our trout? They've become a pest
on Lake Champlain, where the authorities are "taking measures" to reduce the
population. I don't mind one cormorant, but I certainly don't want to host a
horde of them.

When the first wild turkey arrived, about fifteen years ago, everyone would stop
and stare. Now turkeys are as common as pigeons, but as far as I can tell, do
no damage (unless they get into the garden, which they haven't, so far). They
eat insects, not frogs. Plus they're good eating. I've never heard of anyone
salivating over roast cormorant.

I'd trade the cormorant, and the turkeys for that matter, for some of the birds
that have disappeared over the last forty years. We used to have a symphony
at dawn and dusk -- now there's hardly a peep, except for the robins and the
bluejays. I'd give a lot to hear a white-throated sparrow at daybreak. It's
been years since I've seen a bluebird, a wren, an indigo bunting, an oriole, a
purple martin, a red-wing blackbird, a sandpiper, a tanager, a vireo. Or seen
the swifts overhead. Even our once-abundant swallows have become rare. Where are
they?

[November 9, 2020: the cormorant never returned. Nor did any of his friends or
relatives.]

Source: 2009/09/my-first-racist

Title: My First Racist
Date: September 07, 2009

There was this nasty kid in our class at P. S. 217, back there in the Flatbush
'50s. I'm not going to name names, but if anyone is cares to look, you can
tell him by his superior, know-it-all smirk in the picture of our eighth
grade graduating class. For convenience, I'll call this guy K. K was not
particularly smart, or athletic, or talented, or attractive, or congenial,
so he was quite a way down the social pole, a resident of the land of the
nebbishes. But to give him his due, he was intense, dogged, hard-working, and
perpetually argumentative. He was not afraid to offend. He took positions
that no one else in the schoolyard supported. I remember him haranguing me on
the subject of social security. It was a bad thing, he asserted, because his
father could make more money by investing on his own rather than contributing
to the pot. "But, but, but...," I remember stuttering, "it's insurance, and
not everyone is a good investor." This exchange must have taken place during
the Truman years. In the P. S. 217 schoolyard, where everyone was the child
or grandchild of immigrants, FDR was our guy and social security was a
revolutionary improvement in the quality of life. Wasn't it the case
that my widowed grandmother received $32 a month from social security --
not sufficient to live on, surely, but a great help, enough to pay her rent?
To argue against social security -- where in the world did K get such weird,
off-the-track ideas?  Plus, equally astonishing, K was an enthusiastic Yankees
fan. What an unholy, contrarian jerk!

Then K disappeared for a month or a year -- some period of time, I can't
remember exactly how long. He had relatives in a southern city -- Baltimore, I
believe -- and he lived with them for an extended while. When he returned,
he starting spouting the most grotesque racist claptrap. It's engraved on my
memory:  "they have a lot of uppity blacks down there, they won't even get
off the sidewalk for you." Whoa, daddy. First of all, no one said "blacks" in
those days -- they were "Negroes." And second -- "uppity?" I had never heard the
term before and was shocked out of my skull. And "get off the sidewalk" --WTF???
 These were words and sentiments far beyond my experience or conception, beyond
anything I had ever heard uttered in our part of the universe. I was offended
and flabbergasted. Remember, dear readers, that the only person more sacred to
P. S. 217 schoolyarders than FDR was Jackie Robinson. It was from K that I
first heard the grotesque sentence, "Would you want one to marry your sister?"

I tell you, I gave K a lot of room after those conversations. Truth to tell,
there was no need for our paths to cross -- we weren't in the same classes and
K didn't play softball or basketball -- as I said, he was pretty much of a
klutz.

Recently I looked up K on the internet. He's a retired professor of economics
and is a "fellow" at a right-wing think tank. He's made a career out of opposing
third-world development and supporting "free market solutions" to all our ills.
That dogged dullness has produced a number of books. I've even found a picture
of him -- where he was once flabby and pimpled, he's now bald and sleek, with a
malevolent cast to his eye.

There's always been a connection in my mind between conservatism and racism. The
link is narcissism. "I've got mine, let "them" take care of themselves." For
the Ks of the world, it's not "how do we take care of less fortunate and of our
old people?"  It's, "how do 'we' deal with 'them.'"  And "they" are usually,
almost always, darker-skinned than "we."  I'm sure that K would deny that his
"free- market" views have anything to do with racism. But I know better -- I was
there at the beginning, before K became quite so sleek.

Source: 2009/09/notes-on-the-tarpaulin

Title: Notes on the "Tarpaulin"
Date: September 12, 2009

We're packing up, getting ready to go -- even though there hasn't been the
slightest hint of frost. When I loaded the metal sculptures into the bed of the
truck, I realized that it would be a good idea to cover them with a tarpaulin.
So down I drove to Main Street and to the recently enlarged Aubuchon. "Where
do you keep your tarpaulins?" I asked the young clerk. "What is a tarpaulin? 
I've never heard of it?"  "Never heard of a tarpaulin," I replied, taken aback,
"you use them to cover boats or cargo or the backs of trucks." "Oh," he said,
brightening, "a tarp," and he took me right there where the shelves were loaded
with blue "polytarps" -- canvas being virtually extinct, at least in our part of
the landlocked world.

The young feller didn't know the world "tarpaulin" and looked at me as if I
were some sort of pretentious snob. But "tarpaulin" goes right back to my
childhood -- it might be the first three-syllable word I ever learned. Not
that I was nautical, not in any sense a "tar." But when it rained at Ebbets
Field, the ground crew would roll out the infield tarpaulin and then we'd all
sit and listen while Red Barber and Connie Desmond chatted for an hour or so
until either play resumed or the game was postponed. "Tarpaulin" is not a hard
or obscure word -- certainly not to baseball fans who can remember when fields
didn't have roofs. But the big linguistic question is -- will the word tarpaulin
survive in all its glory or will it be truncated into a pathetic apocopic
monosyllablic shadow of itself?  Or will it be confused with the TARP, which is
a horse of another acronymic color. Troubled (or more accurately, Toxic) Asset
Relief Program.

Well, I bought the "tarp"  -- not at Aubuchon, which didn't have the right size
-- but down at the Farm-Way. So now we're one step closer to shoving off for DC
and then back home. I'm overwhelmed with pre-nostalgia.

Source: 2009/09/my-entry

Title: Another P.S. 217 Picture
Date: September 13, 2009

Is it my imagination, or did we mature later in those days than kids do now? 
These handsome juveniles are thirteen and fourteen years old.  To my eyes, the
girls look barely half-grown, the boys variable but distinctly unfledged.

Claire R., who sent me the picture (thanks so much, Claire!!), looks womanly,
but the others --not far out of childhood.  The boys in the second row look
as though adolescence has not yet begun to rear its unhandsome head.

Want to know the names of these unpromising lads and lasses?  Search here.

I

Source: 2009/09/updike-part-iv

Title: Updike -- Part IV
Date: September 13, 2009

The Updike-athon continues  Since my last report, I've read Museums and Women,
Bech is Back, In the Beauty of the Lilies, Rabbit Run, Rabbit Redux, Rabbit is
Rich, and Rabbit at Rest.

The good news:  Updike is fluent, a masterful stylist, a remarkable story-
teller, a distinguished craftsman.  He's original, entertaining, bold,
inventive.  The section of Beauty of the Lilies that describe Alma DeMott's
childhood in Basingstoke, Delaware is as good as anything I've read in years --
a truly classic piece of writing

The bad news:  Updike's characters have no heart  They're almost uniformly
small-minded, bigoted, hateful, unloving and, in fact, incapable of love.  The
novels are distressing and depressing.  And inconsistent.  The Rabbit quartet
is reputed to be Updike's masterpiece, but the long section about Skeeter in
Redux is a ludicrous mess, a total bomb, a failure that disfigures the entire
series

A reader who knew America only through the Rabbit series would be
convinced that Americans in the second half of the twentieth century were
selfish, money- grubbing, racist, entirely without culture, sex-obsessed,
alcoholic, uneducated, insecure, obnoxious, undisciplined and knowledgeable
only of TV trivia.  I suppose that there are such people -- but there are also
substantial citizens, artists and artisans, and good, functioning families. 
I must say that four large novels in the company of Updike's folk can wear a
reader down.  I think it's time to re-read Trollope's Palliser novels, where
there is villainy but also redemption.  I crave an antidote.

Source: 2009/09/plastic-flowers

Title: Plastic Flowers
Date: September 15, 2009

Our property adjoins the old West Bradford cemetery. The two- or three-acre
plot of ground is the most visible remnant of the dairy, sheep and apple
community of  West Bradford, which was hacked out of the steep slopes above the
Connecticut river in the first part of the nineteenth century, peaked before the
Civil War, and then went into decline more than a century and a half ago. West
Bradford lost its post office address in the 1920s and its schoolhouse (if word-
of-mouth can be trusted) before W W II. We still have a few sheep and horses and
some beef cattle but also an ever-increasing number of commuters who head down
I-91 for their employment in Lebanon or Hanover.

The history of West Bradford can be read in the cemetery's gravestones. There
must two hundred of them. The oldest are made of local slate and are only a foot
or eighteen inches in height; these date from the 1820s. One or two of them
feature lugubrious, stunted iconic weeping willows which rain and wind have
rendered barely visible. The markers that date from the end of the nineteenth
century are larger, made of marble that was quarried thirty miles to the west of
us, and reflect the area's growing prosperity. They're laconic  -- just name
and dates -- and entirely bereft of adornment or decoration. They celebrate
the Baldwins and Cunninghams and Lows and Tebbetses who cleared these hilly
fields with horses and oxen and who left behind all those massive and beautiful
stone walls that snake and twist their way through lands that are once again
deeply forested. There are women buried here who have been denied even the brief
immortality that a grave marker affords: a man's name and dates and the notation
"his wife" or sometimes even "his wives."

Quarter-size headstones, numerous and unincised, attest to unbaptized infants.

There's a new part of the cemetery, still in use, which to my eyes is less
sturdy and more frivolous -- an emblem of a culture in decline. Just because
it's possible to laser a prancing reindeer onto a granite headstone doesn't
mean that it's a good idea to do so. How all those long-bearded and puritanical
Emersons and Pipers would have railed against such trifling?

A few years ago, one of our local Thurstons erected a pink granite stone with
a plastic cross epoxyed to its surface. The cross, it was said, was to be a
perpetual lantern -- lit until the end of time by some sort of device that
gathered energy during the day and discharged it at night. "Oh no," I thought
the first few times that I came home late at night and was greeted by a ruby
and unwinking polysterene crucifix, "how ugly, how tacky, how out-of-keeping."
Fortunately, the perpetual light only lasted a year or so before extinguishing
itself for good.

I rather enjoy having a cemetery is nearby. "Quiet neighbors," as they say
here. Our house lies halfway between the cemetery and the pond. It's satisfying
to be flanked by crucial symbols of life and death. My only quarrel is that
occasionally a visitor to the cemetery, perhaps a decayed descendant of one of
the pioneers, will pitch an old vase or some sun-faded plastic flowers onto
our land. I don't so much mind picking up a few pieces of trash as I object to
my property being used as someone's rubbish heap. It's disrespectful. But any
person who would think to commemorate his mother with polycarbonate or acrylic
geraniums will generally not be the most mannerly or ecologically sensitive of
souls.

One day, many years ago, I was sitting on the cemetery's split-rail fence with
D., a local farmer. We were chatting about the weather and such. He suddenly
swung around and pointed to one of the headstones: "That's the boy that died of
eating the crayons."

To honor both the visitors and the inhabitants of the West Bradford cemetery,
I've composed a country-and-western quatrain.

Remember me in marble and in granite;

Remember me with rose and lilies brave;

Remember me in sunshine and in shadow

But don't put plastic flowers on my grave.

Source: 2009/09/some-midcareer-baseball-deaths

Title: Some Mid-Career Baseball Deaths
Date: September 25, 2009

Ray Chapman, the most notorious of  the dead-in-mid-career, was batting .300
when he was hit on the head by a spitball thrown by Carl Mays in August of 1920.
"Big Ed" Delahanty, a Hall-of-Famer, fell drunk off the International Bridge at
Niagara Falls in 1903.  Cory Lidle, Thurman Munson, Nestor Chavez, Ken Hubbs
and the great Roberto Clemente died in plane crashes.  Many players, including
Nick Adenhart, a pitcher of great promise until April 9, 2009, have died in
car crashes.  Danny Frisella died in a dune buggy accident.  Steve Olin and
Tim Crews ran their motorboat into a pier in 1993.  Steve Bechler was a 2003
victim of Ephedra. Tiny Bonham and Jake Daubert died of appendicitis, Harry
Agganis of a blood clot, Darryl Kile was found dead in his hotel room, having
succumbed to an unsuspected heart defect. Urban Shocker died of pneumonia,
Danny Thompson of leukemia.  Dernell Stinson, Gus Polidor, Dave Shotkowski and
Lyman Bostock were murdered.  Just last year, Geremi Gonzalez was struck by
lightning. Jim Umbricht died of cancer at age 34. His ashes were spread over
the field he loved.  Unfortunately, he played at domed stadium with artificial
grass, so after a few days, he was vacuumed up and spends eternity in a Texas
landfill.

Source: 2009/09/on-noise

Title: On Noise
Date: September 27, 2009

Even as my hearing deteriorates, I become more and more disturbed by excessive
noise.  For example: coffee shops, which in any sensible world, would be oases
of tranquility, have become positively uninhabitable. When I visit such a place,
I do so either to talk with a friend or to read silently.  I do not go to
be assaulted by what the tattooed, benose-ringed young staff fancies to be
"music" -- grating sounds amplified to 11 on the Nigel Tufnel scale.  And then
last week I went to a baseball game at one of the new stadiums where they have
embraced to the ultimate the philosophy of  the "total entertainment package,"
which means bright blinking lights, almost constant "music," and exhortations
on the giant scoreboard to "Get Loud."  But baseball, more than any other
sport, requires thought and concentration.  It's a subtle game, not enhanced by
distractions. And yet it seemed that very few of the spectators around me were
actually paying attention to the events on the field.  The noise forbade it. 
When our side's left fielder played a routine fly ball into a single -- an act
which would have provoked indignation and jeers at the low-tech Ebbets Field of
my youth -- the crowd remained preternaturally silent, reserving its roars for
the inter-inning "kiss-cam" and similar travesties.

Do we truly enjoy or are we simply inured to the noise that has become so
constant at the old ball game, in the restaurant, or even on the leafy suburban
street, where the egregious leaf-blower has become an oppressive commonplace.
(Why do we not ban a mega-decibel machine that is less efficient than the time-
honored and virtually silent broom)?

The noise of machines and the noise of amplified sound is a relatively new
phenomenon.  Until 1650 or so, no such sounds oppressed our ears. There was the
occasional thunderstorm, and there were church bells, and there was the clatter
of horse and coach on cobblestone streets  -- but there was nothing comparable
to the sea of noise in which we daily swim. Our ancestors lived for a million
years in a world that we would judge to be virtually silent.  There were no
factories, no trucks, no airplanes overhead, no electric guitars and, inasmuch
as 95% of the people were village-dwelling agricultural workers, not even large
crowds.  The noise that we routinely endure is unprecedented and unnatural. 
And unhealthy as well.

Source: 2009/10/yellow-face

Title: Yellow Face
Date: October 06, 2009

"Yellowface" is the Asian equivalent of theatrical "blackface," as in the case
of Warner Oland (a Swede) or Sidney Toler (an Scottish-American) impersonating
Charlie Chan. "Yellow Face" is also the name of an uncharacteristic Sherlock
Holmes short story -- one that is unusual among Conan Doyle's compositions in
that no crime is solved nor none committed, and also because Sherlock Holmes'
overconfident deductions prove to be entirely erroneous.

Grant Munro has married a young widow, Effie Hebron, who returned to her native
England after her Atlanta husband died of yellow fever.  After some years of
blissful marriage, Effie begins to act most strangely;  she sneaks out to a
neighboring house in the middle of the night -- a house at the upper window of
which her puzzled husband catches sight of a strange and unnaturally immobile
yellow face.

After listening to Munro's narration, Sherlock Holmes confidently theorizes
that Effie's first husband did not die, but has secretly returned to England
to blackmail his erstwhile wife.  But when Munro, Watson, and Holmes break
into the house, they discover at the window not a husband come back to life
but a young girl, Effie's daughter, wearing a mask to conceal the fact that
she is a "little coal-black negress."  The mystery is solved:  Effie has
been behaving peculiarly not because she is seeing another man (as Munro seems
to fear) or because she is being blackmailed, but because she was afraid to
confess to her second husband that her former mate was black --  even though,
she proclaims,  "a nobler man never walked the earth."

And so the story proceeds to its climax.  How will Munro respond to the
revelation? Will he reject his wife, or embrace her?  "It was a long two
minutes [ten minutes in the first American edition!!] before Grant Munro broke
the silence....  He lifted the little child, kissed her, and then, still
carrying her, he held out his other hand to his wife, and turned towards the
door. 'We can talk it over more comfortably at home,' said he.  'I am not a
good man, Effie, but I think I am a better one that you have given me credit for
being.'"

"Yellow Face" is designed to be an uplifting story of tolerance and trust and
in truth it is extraordinarily progressive, even radical, by the standards of
1894.  But it's also a naive story.  It elides and dodges the complications
that it raises, especially about matters of race.  Is it credible, or is it
not more fear than fact, that a mixed-race husband and an English woman would
produce a "coal-black" offspring. Doyle's belief that such an engendering is
possible is a mark of the simplicity of his thinking about race.  Moreover,
there were strict "anti-miscegenation" laws in Georgia in the last part of the
nineteenth century. How did Effie and John Hebron manage to evade them?  In
what way did they live?  Hebron managed to leave a considerable estate to his
wife?  How did he achieve his wealth?

Doyle is interested in making a case for tolerance and he is interested in
Holmes.  But he does not much concern himself with the other characters that
he creates.  He does not explore the psychological costs for Effie when, as
she says, "she cut herself off from her race."  What prompted her to violate
so strong a taboo?  And why would a strong and independent woman suddenly
become so fearful when she re-married?  What did it cost her, emotionally,
to leave her child behind in Georgia where a dark mixed-race girl would be so
awkwardly situated?  How could she conceal so much of her history from Grant
Munro without overwhelming guilt?  How did she manage to achieve so blissful
a union with him while carrying many important secrets?  And what about the
poor child?  Born to an illegal union that is soon fractured by death, then
abandoned, then reclaimed and brought to a strange land -- and asked to wear a
yellow mask for fear the someone would be shocked by her pigmentation. Doyle
does not even broach the question of the damage to the child?   And what kind
of future can be in store for her in England?

Doyle seems to consider that "Yellow Face" concludes happily -- but does it?
While it is certainly to the author's credit that he is unfazed by the taboo
against "intermarriage," it is also true that he rests satisfied with easy,
superficial, and naive answers to hard questions. Or rather, he does not even
seem to realize that he has started a whole pack of hares in motion.

It's curiously negligent that Doyle does not even give a name to the "coal-black
negress."  She remains a plot-device, not a person.

It is equally odd that Doyle does not find fault with Sherlock Holmes' inability
to think past the convention of the genre, where blackmail is a commonplace. 
Intermarriage, Doyle seems to suggest, is so exotic, so unusual, that it would
not occur even to so brilliant a detective as Sherlock Holmes that a yellow mask
might hide a black face.

Source: 2009/10/why-i-love-health-insurance-companies-reason-453

Title: Why I Love Health Insurance Companies, Reason # 453
Date: October 14, 2009

I hate to fetch the mail nowadays because there are so damn many importunate
communications from doctors, hospitals, from medicare, and from insurance
companies.  Even though I'm in relatively good health and need only routine
servicing, each time I visit a doctor the system manages to generate one piece
of paper after another -- most of them written in codes that are almost entirely
inexplicable.  Could anyone have devised a more lunatic, more inefficient
health-care system?

The other day I received a letter from Great-West Healthcare, my "supplemental
carrier,"  to this effect:

"We recently reviewed one of your claims and discovered that we mistakenly sent
you a benefit check for $31.80.  We now realize that payment should have been
sent directly to your provider.  We have reprocessed the claim to pay the
provider.  Therefore, this letter is a request for the $31.80 paid to you in
error.  Please send a check for $31.80 to the address on the back of this
letter.  If you have any questions, please contact our service center at the
number on the front of your health plan ID card.  Thank you.

Of course, there was no address on the back of the letter, so I could not
respond.

But if there had been an address, this is what I would have said:

Dear Great-West Healthcare:

Thank you for you letter of August 10.  I will be happy to refund the $31.80. 
However, I have no record of this transaction, so before I pay you, I need
the following data.

A copy of a cancelled check for the amount that you claim to have sent me.

Evidence that you have actually paid the funds to the unnamed "provider." 
This evidence should be in the form of a cancelled check but if the $31.80 was
sent as an electronic deposit, a notarized affidavit from an officer of the
"provider" will be ample.

If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call me at my home
phone number, which can be conveniently found in the local telephone book
or obtained online, so that I can play you some nice elevator music while you
languish on indefinite hold.

Thank you. Your call is important to us.

Source: 2009/10/another-baseball-dream

Title: Another Baseball Dream
Date: October 26, 2009

I have recurrent baseball dreams, most of them nightmarish. The most frequent
is that I hit a sharp line drive to right, start for first but run as if I were
stuck in a sea of mucilage.  My legs won't move. The right fielder throws
me out before I'm halfway down the line.  I leave the field in disgrace,
thirty- thousand fans vigorously booing.  What does it mean?  "I can't get
to first base" sounds like an adolescent sexual worry, but I suspect that such
an interpretation might be too specific. Let's just say that the theme of the
nightmare is ineffectiveness and frustration.

What a relief, then, that this World Series time I can report on a very pleasant
dream.  My team (Dodgers or Phillies or just a bunch of nameless guys) was
pounding the Yankees.  (Cultural context for you non-Brooklynites out there in
Bloglandia: the New York Yankees represent all that is evil in American society,
and have done so since the days of Joe Page and Snuffy Stirnweiss and Charley
Keller, or for some sixty-plus years.  There is no question but that the rich,
whiny, crybaby Yankees are the special favorites of Bernie Madoff, Ann Coulter,
and Dick Cheney.)  In the dream, my side hit one opposite-field line drive
after another and the score went from 5-0 to 13-0 to 17-0.  Finally, we brought
to the plate a cute, tow-headed four-year-old boy.  He blasted the first pitch
over the head of their center fielder and knocked in three more runs. I woke up
elated, and in an aroused condition that gave me confidence that, yes, I could
get to first base. Possibly to third base.  Perhaps even score.  .

Source: 2009/10/a-visit-to-a-new-healthcare-provider

Title: A Visit to a New Health-care Provider
Date: October 29, 2009

Today I went to see a new doctor, a specialist.  His receptionist sits
behind a sign that reads "Co-payment must be made at the time of service. 
Failure to pay the co-payment will result in an additional charge of $10."  I
took a seat to wait and to fill out various forms -- and to be apprised of
a "policy change":  "A patient who misses an appointment without canceling 24
hours in advance will be charged $45."  I read a little further:  "Extended
telephone conversations will be subject to a charge of $15."

I know that doctors have to make a living and I don't begrudge them a decent
wage.  But goodness gracious, must they transform themselves into shameless
nickel-and-dimers?

I want to have confidence in my doctor.  I want to think that he's the
heir to Aesculapius, Hippocrates, and Jean Hersholt. I don't want to think
that he's a money-hungry "provider" whose primary aim, transcending all others
(especially healing), is to squeeze me for a buck here and a buck there.

Which is in fact what I did think.  Not a good first impression, Dr. Provider!

Source: 2009/11/updikes-gamble

Title: Updike's Gamble
Date: November 02, 2009

John Updike's novels are loaded to the ever-loving gills with invocations of the
most evanescent and ephemeral manifestations of "popular culture."  I can't
think of another writer who is so relentlessly fascinated by the most trivial of
things.  If his novels are to be read in a hundred years, they will not be
fully understood unless encrusted with extensive and elaborate footnotes.

"Roy has been carefully shaping can his Total mush into a kind of a pyramid with
the back of a spoon."  Who will understand the meaning of this sentence. 
"Total mush?"  I imagine a footnote:  "'Total' was the brand name of a fibrous
dry packaged breakfast food which, when liquids such as milk were added, could
be formed into a paste."

Here's another example.  Rabbit is musing.  "Biblical names.  Rachel,
Esther.  Not always.  Barbra, Bette."  And here's the putative footnote. "In
this passage, Harry muses about the names of Jewish women.  "Barbra" (sic)
refers to Barbra Streisand, a popular Jewish-American singer and actress of the
period.  Professor Harvey Wrongbody's assertion that "Bette" refers to Bette
Davis is clearly uninformed, as Miss Davis was not Jewish. "Bette" as Professor
Wrongbody should have known, references Bette Midler, a performer famous in her
day for impersonating Janis Joplin (see Index) in The Rose."

In the first few pages of Rabbit at Rest --  which is perhaps the most
consistently fine of Updike's novels, there are dozens or scores of allusions
that will test a future annotator's learning.  It's highly unlikely that with
the passing of generations anyone but specialists in late twentieth-century
Americana will be able either to identify or grasp the significance of  "this
guy Bundy who murdered dozens of women in dozens of states."  (Bundy?  Is that
King Kong Bundy?  McGeorge Bundy?  Al Bundy?)  Or have the least idea what
is meant by a "Cabbage Patch doll with its bunchy beige face" or the possible
thematic significance of "Cara Lott Gets Hot" or "Winn Dixie" or "Ekerd Drugs"
or the National Enquirer or "Planter's Peanut Bar" or "Melanie Griffith"
or "Deion Sander's recent arrest."  It's only twenty years since Rabbit at
Rest was published, and I was there, paying reasonable attention, but frankly,
I'm already becoming a bit vague about some of  the details.

If I were a novelist of Updike's talent, I would think twice about loading up on
trivia that cannot help but  barricade the novels from future readers.  But
perhaps Updike doesn't care.  Perhaps he's only interested in the moment and
in readers of his own generation.  To me, it seems as though he doesn't give a
royal fig for the future.

Shakespeare, a writer not for his age alone but for all time, occasionally
included references to fleeting phenomena.  I rather like it that he did so. 
I'd be intrigued to learn, once and for all, who was that "red-nosed innkeeper
at Daventry" to whom Falstaff refers.   But neither Shakespeare nor any other
writer with whom I'm familiar so saturated his work with multitudinous and
forgettable popcultch trivia.

But perhaps Updike has made the right choice.  Perhaps the density of reference
makes the novels so credible, so real, that scholars will be happy to annotate
and readers will revel and glory in the footnotes.

It's a gamble.  My guess is that it's a losing one, but time will tell.

Source: 2009/11/staas

Title: STAAS
Date: November 05, 2009

The woman with whom I've shared the last fifty-plus years has developed an
alarming new symptom.  She disappears in markets.

We'll be together, innocently pushing the basket in the vegetable section, for
example, and I'll wander off to fetch some cream cheese and a half-gallon of
milk.  When I return, she's gone.  Nowhere to be found.  I walk up and down
the neighboring aisles.  Nothing.  She's completely dematerialized.  I walk
up and down, back and forth, vainly searching.

After a twenty minutes, or half-an-hour, she's back, but teleported to an an
entirely different part of the store.  She doesn't even know that she has
vanished.  Sometimes she pretends that it's I who has disappeared.

I can understand that she could lose herself in the acre-and-a-half King
Soopers, or in the McGuckin prairie, or on the vast Costconian steppe.  But
in Bradford's minuscule P & C?  Or in Bradford's Main Street, comprised as it
is of far fewer square feet than any mid-size contemporary Walgreen's?  No,
there's more here than meets the eye.  This is no natural process.  Something
supernatural is going on.

It took some serious reflection before I came to the realization that it's a
clear case of abduction by aliens.  There is no other credible explanation.

I've given a name to the disorder.  I call it Spousal Transient Alien Abduction
Syndrome, or STAAS.

I've made some inquiries, and it seems that STAAS is not a condition found
only in my family.  In fact, it's quite common.  More than four-fifths of
the people that I questioned had experienced recent instances of STAAS. 
Curiously, it's much more frequently discovered in long-marrieds than among the
recently- hitched.  And less common among women than men.  In fact, men tend
to disappear for longer periods of time than women.

Moreover, just as might be expected, not a single one of the disappeared
remembers that he (or she) had ever fallen into the ungentle hands of aliens
-- which is certain proof that the abduction took place, inasmuch as it is
well known that these extraterrestrial beings possess the ability to scrub
human brains and obliterate memory.

I don't know what can be done to arrest the spread of this alarming syndrom   e.
Perhaps a Federal task forc                                                   e.

Source: 2009/11/damn-yankees

Title: Damn Yankees
Date: November 06, 2009

The Yankees 2009 payroll was $201,449,189, exceeding the next largest (the
Mets) by more than $50,000,000.  The median major league payroll was about
$80,000,000 and the lowest $36,834,000.  With 103 wins in regular season,
each victory cost the Yankees $1,955,810.  The other teams that made it
to the playoffs incurred considerably smaller but greatly varying costs per
win:  Boston Red Sox, $1,285,300;  Philadelphia Phillies, $1,215,097; Los
Angeles Angels $1,172,325; Los Angeles Dodgers, $1,056,995; St. Louis Cardinals,
$852,803; Colorado Rockies $817,402;  Minnesota Twins, $816,165.  Should
we be surprised that the Yankees could beat the Phils?  Given the numbers,
it would have been shocking if they couldn't.

Cheers to the Cardinals, Rockies, and Twins.

Cost per victory is a measure of management efficiency.  By far the most
effective 2009 team, dollar for dollar, was the frugal Florida Marlins, who won
87 games at a cost of just $423,379 per win.  On the other end of the scale,
the woeful New York Mets, with just 70 successes, were the only team to pay more
per win than the Yankees.  It cost the Mets $2,133,910 each time that they
walked off the field in triumph.

As long as the Yankees are allowed to pay salaries one-third larger than
their nearest competitors and two and a half times more than the median, it must
be expected that they will win regularly  -- which is why I'm for rigorous,
enforced parity.  Let's level that playing field.

And with all that money, how to account for the fact that the Yankees sported
such an entirely run-of-the-mill outfield.  Melky Cabrera?  Nick Swisher? 
Gosh, there must be better players than those to entice to the brand new
ballpark.

Which brings us to the next spending spree. free-agent outfielders wanted. 
Must be able to hit the short porch. Bring joy to the eyes of George S.

Source: 2009/11/adh22-in-my-life

Title: ADH2*2 in My  Life
Date: November 16, 2009

I can't drink wine, beer, or spirits. Alcohol of any kind, no matter how
sophisticated or elegant, makes me ill. In this respect, I'm similar to my
father and to one of my sons. People who know me only slightly  imagine that
I am unsociable or ascetic. Or that I'm a recovering alcoholic. In fact, I
suffer from an inherited disability.

Now at long last the culprit gene has been fingered. It's ADH2*2, "a rare
variation of ADH2, which produces a more active form of alcohol dehydrogenase,
the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in alcohol metabolism."

Alcohol dehydrogenase? There are more than a sixpack of them: "alcohol
dehydrogenases are a group of seven dehydrogenase enzymes that facilitate the
interconversion between alcohols and aldehydes or ketones with the reduction of
NAD+ to NADH...." More succinctly, "they break down alcohols." I don't know
whether ADH2*2 digests alcohol too fast, or too slow, or just idiosyncratically,
but the effect on me is stomach-ache, headache, and general queasiness. Wine,
"the merry cheerer of the heart," sours my digestion.

The eccentric allele occurs in 20 to 30 percent of Jewish populations
"suggesting that ADH2*2 is one of the factors explaining the low rates of
alcoholism in this group." Recent investigations have demonstrated "significant
relationships between ADH2*2 and alcohol use ... in all Jewish groups studied."
"Those with the variant gene have been seen to drink less frequently, consume
less alcohol overall or have more unpleasant reactions to alcohol."

This analysis makes perfect sense to me, but Science is apparently unsatisfied:
"the exact reason why ADH2*2 tends to discourage heavier drinking isn't known."
Well, Science, let me see if I lend a hand here. If you get sick rather than
high from a few sips, you stop drinking -- unless you're a complete and total
Schmuck."

Perhaps because I'm a teetotaler (though a reluctant one), I have little
tolerance for drunken excess. I'm not amused by loss of inhibition, by sloppy
speech, or by too-loud staggering enthusiasm. I've honored my father's warning
-- "never get into an argument with a drunk" -- to the letter. In actual fact, I
try very hard not to engage the alcoholically-addled in any discussion, whether
serious or flippant.

I regret that I can't participate in wine-tastings -- the stuff looks and smells
so good. But even there, I'm skeptical of the poetic language that oenophiles
employ -- hints of rubber and raspberries and old leather and that sort of
hyperbole. I tend to sniff deeply, and then proclaim, "tumescent but not
rigid."

It's not hard to be witty when you're sober and your Falernian audience has been
quaffing the pinot grigio.

Source: 2009/11/help-i-need-somebody-not-just-anybody

Title: Help, I Need Somebody Not Just Anybody
Date: November 17, 2009

I did so write a check to register the car, it turns out, but since we have
changed our residence, the registration certificate and the little adhesive
tab that you're supposed to fix to the license plate never arrived here, and
of course I forgot all about the legality of the vehicle. Had no idea. The
upshot is that while driving to the airport, I was stopped by a police guy who
was lurking in the shadows to pounce on malefactors such as I. I was issued an
expensive ticket. Very annoying. I'm generally a law-abiding citizen and I'm not
used to being in trouble with the authorities.

Not immediately able to figure out what went wrong, I hustled down to the Motor
Vehicle Bureau out there on 33rd Street. I took a number, sat down and rehearsed
what I would say to the clerk on duty. All I could think of was, "I need help."

When my number was called, I walked up to the designated clerk, a woman of
uncertain age. The sign on her desk said, in rather large letters, "Rhonda." And
so I did it. I couldn't help myself. I said, "Help, help me Rhonda." And then,
of course, I was immediately chagrined. "I'm sure you hear that all the time,"
I apologized, admitting to my appalling banality. "Not all the time," she said,
"but often enough."

It could have been even worse. I could have declaimed the entire poetic chorus
to the Beach Boys' 1965 hit:

Help me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me
RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp,
help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me Rhonda, yeah.

Source: 2009/11/sons-of-japheth-sons-of-ham

Title: Sons of Ham, Sons of Japheth
Date: November 23, 2009

In Caroline Hentz's The Planter's Northern Bride (1859), Eulalia, the daughter
of a New England abolitionist, has married a slave owner and traveled with him
to his home in Georgia.  Here's what she sees. Warning: be prepared to be
shocked and revolted.

"All around, far as the eye could reach, the rich rolling fields of cotton,
bearing the downy wealth of the South, stretched out a boundless ocean of green,
spotted with white, like the foam of the wave.  Soon returning in grand march
from the fields, came the negroes, poising on their heads immense baskets,
brimming with the light and flaky cotton. Little children looking very much
like walking semicolons, toddled along, balancing their baskets also, with an
air of self-importance and pride. Eulalia recollected all the horrible stories
she had heard of negro insurrections, and thought what an awful thing it was
to be at the mercy of so many slaves, on that lonely plantation. When she saw
her husband going out among them, and they closed round, shutting him in as
with a thick cloud, she asked herself if her were really safe. They gathered
around him, eager to get within reach of his hand, the sound of his voice, the
glance of his kind, protecting, yet commanding eye. More like a father welcomed
by his children than a king greeted by his subjects, he stood, the centre of
that sable ring. She had never seen him look so handsome, so noble, so good.
As she looked at her husband, standing in their midst, the representative of
the fair sons of Japheth, wearing on his brow the signet of a loftier, nobler
destiny, every lineament and feature expressive of intellect and power, and
then at each of that dark, lowly throng, she felt a conviction that freedom, in
its proudest latitude, education with its most exalted privileges, could never
make them equal to him. She never dreamed that slavery could present an aspect
so tender and affectionate. Do the hundreds and thousands buried in the black
coal-pits and wretched dens of Great Britain, who have never heard, in their
living graves, of the God who created, the Saviour who redeemed them, pass their
sunless lives in greater comfort or fuller enjoyment."

Hey, it's good to be a slave. Apparently. "Tender and affectionate????

I was aware that there were anti-Uncle Tom's Cabin novels, designed to showcase
the glories of slavery, but I had never read one. The Planter's Northern Bride
is supposedly one of the best of the genre. It has the power to make you despair
for the intelligence of the entire human race. Some samples:

"Merry voices singing in the fields of labour or filling up the pauses of
toil...."

"The joyful songs and exhilarating laughter of our slaves...."

"The negro has an intense appreciation of beauty and grace, and feels the
influence of mental superiority."

"You will see the negro, not as he is at the North, an isolated, degraded being,
without caste or respectability, a single black line running through a web of
whiteness, but surrounded with the socialities of life, and though doomed to
labour, yet free from the cares and anxieties that rest so heavily on us."

Here are the words that Caroline Hentz puts in the mouth of one of Eulalia's
slaves.

"I tell you what, Crissy, when de nigger have good massa and good miss, dey well
off. When dey have bad massa and missis, dey bad off. Talk 'bout us being on a
'quality with white folks, no such ting. De Lord never made us look like dem. We
mustn't be angry wid de Lord, for all dat: He knows best, I 'spise. Look a'me,
black as de chimney back, -- dey, white as snow; what great, big, thick, ugly
lips I got, -- dere's look jist like roses. Den dis black sheep head, what de
Lord make dat for?  Dey got putey, soft, long hair, just like de silk ribbons.
Now look at dat big long heel, will you?" added Judy, putting out her bare foot
in the moonshine, giggling and shaking;  "who ever saw de white lady with sich
a heel as dat?  I do wonder what the Lord made us nigger for? I spect de white
dust gin out, and he had to take de black."

Slavery deformed society.  Arguments in support of slavery deformed the
intellect. The attempt to find supernatural sanction for slavery perverted
religion. Slavery incapacitated the slaveholding states. One hundred and fifty
years after slavery, they have still not caught up and they are still pulling
the country down.

Does Caroline Hentz believe the words that she puts on paper?  I believe she
does. I believe that she makes these observations and arguments with total
sincerity. I also believe that the kind of utterances to which she gives vent,
though no longer respectable, no longer made in public, are not dead but
continue to appear in VFW halls, in bowling alleys, in union halls, and in truck
stops all over the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Source: 2009/11/oh-no-whats-happening-to-me

Title: Oh No!  What's Happening to Me?
Date: November 27, 2009

So, a couple of days ago, we were watching some basketball on the HDTV, and
despite the fact that Carmelo was going to the rim virtually at will, I was kind
of down and depressed. Trying to cheer me up, the companion of fifty-plus years
says, "I'll tell you what. I'll get you anything you want -- absolutely anything
at all."  Meaning, of course, anything edible, anything from the kitchen. We'll
I'm not abstemious, I've always been a good eater, and I recognize that food has
the power to confer good cheer, so I thought and thought, and finally I said, "I
know what I'd like. How about a cup of decaf tea and two prunes." And then after
a few seconds, I screamed, "Holy moley, what in the living heck has happened to
me?"  Is it now the case that the outer limit of my once-voracious imagination
is a cup of decaf tea and two prunes?  So embarrassing, so downright geezerish.
What ever happened to ice cream sundaes with Fox's U-Bet and real whipped cream,
to rich and gooey lasagna, to late-night salami sandwiches on deli rye (not
that we would have any of those ingredients stocked in our bland healthful-but-
tasteless-low-cholesterol refrigerator). It's all downhill, this septuagenarian
eating. Ou sont les pepperoni pizzas dantan?  Where are the bacon cheeseburgers
of yesteryear?

Source: 2009/11/-a-further-note-on-nineteenthcentury-horsedrawn-vehicles

Title: A Further Note on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Vehicles
Date: November 29, 2009

Modern readers of the great classic novels of the previous era generally have
no clue about the significance of horses and horse-drawn vehicles. As I wrote,
right here on this blague a couple of months ago, "no, I'm not obsessed, it's
just that I have this little bee in my bonnet about the fact that we gasoline-
era moderns understand the exact social significance of jeep, Jaguar, Jetta,
and jalopy, but we are, except for specialists, utterly clueless as to the
valence of barouche, basket carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard,
buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, coupe,
croydon, curricle, cutter, daumont, dearborn, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly,
four-wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, jaunty car, jersey-wagon,
kibitka, landau, phaeton, post-chaise, rockaway, shandrydan, shay, spider-
phaeton, spring-van, stanhope, sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury,
tarantass, trap, troika, victoria, vis-a-vis, wagonette, and wurt."

What does it tell us when our hero arrives on the scene in a wurt?  Does it
mean that he is rich and stylish, or vulgar and pretentious, or tasteless, or
downtrodden.  We don't know, and so we read our own traditional literature with
one hand tied behind our backs.

Well, I though that I had made my point, and I thought also that I had exhausted
the list of nineteenth-century horse-drawn vehicles. But then I came upon
this passage in Edith Wharton's The Age of Innocence (a truly splendid novel
published in 1920, though the action is set in the 1870s).

They [Archer and Countess Olenska] walked back toward Beacon Street, and
near the club Archer caught sight of the plush-lined "herdic" which had
carried his note to the Parker House, and whose driver was reposing from this
effort by bathing his brow at the corner hydrant. "I told you everything was
predestined!  Here's a cab for us.  You see!"  They laughed, astonished at
the miracle of picking up a public conveyance at that hour, and in that unlikely
spot, in a city where cabstands were still a "foreign" novelty.

The novelty, the herdic, was "a kind of carriage invented by Peter Herdic
of Williamsport, Pennsylvania, in 1881" (so Wharton is guilty of a tiny
anachronism).  "A predecessor of the taxicab, the herdic was a small
two-wheeled carriage that had side seats and an entrance at the back.  Their
low entry made it easy for passengers to enter and exit the cars.  The first
herdics carried up to eight passengers.  The earliest herdics were painted
bright yellow."

Cheers to Peter Herdic, forgotten father of the Yellow Cab.

Source: 2009/12/english-teachers-

Title: English Teachers Are Such Jerks
Date: December 02, 2009

English teachers are such colossal jerks, at least whenever they appear in
movies. A case in point is Smart People (2008), which is the second-best
academic movie ever made in Pittsburgh (Wonder Boys is superior). Smart People
offers us a Carnegie-Mellon Professor of English, played by a shambling Dennis
Quaid, who is a depressed, angry, uncommunicative, and miserable being, and
who insults and patronizes both his students and his family. He's the perfect
embodiment of traditional and persistent American anti-intellectual stereotypes.
Book-learning has turned him into a mere grammarian, a pedant, who must learn
about "real life" from his rolling-stone, improvident, frequently-stoned but
streetsmart brother. Smart People is constructed around stereotypes that were
exhausted when Shakespeare created Holofernes and Sir Hugh Evans more than four
hundred years ago.

I've known a lot of English teachers -- some good, some bad -- but I've yet to
encounter the shallow stereotype.

English teachers make their way into a disproportionately large number of
movies. There are two reasons for this phenomenon. The first is that the writer
of the film wants to illustrate some thematic point, so he brings his characters
into a classroom where a pompous old fart or fartess can provide some cheap
laughs while explicating a poem or novel that is tangentially related to a point
the film is trying to make. The second reason is pure revenge. In films in which
English teachers figure, there's often --almost always, in fact -- a young man
whose writing is unappreciated by the narrow-minded professor. In Smart People,
he's the son of our own nasty hero, and his sparkling poem is published in the
New Yorker while his indifferent father is still waiting to hear whether his
critical-theory manuscript has been rejected yet once again. This character --
the brilliant but unappreciated young poet or playwright or novelist -- stands
in for the writer or director of the film, who is saying, in filmspeak, "look
at me now, you colossal jerk. I'm making movies and you're still back in high
school or at State U., grading freshman term papers. So there!!! That'll teach
you to give me a C+."

By the way -- Smart People is an intelligent, well-written film. I heartily
recommend it.

Source: 2009/12/dinner-conversation

Title: Dinner Conversation
Date: December 06, 2009

A:  Do you remember Walter Peter, used to teach history at the university?

B.  Yes, he had quite the reputation.

A.  Lazy as sin, among other things. I was his grader in the late 60s. He never
looked at a paper or at an exam. When a girl would complain about a grade, I'd
tell them to go see Professor Peter. Some of them would, some of them wouldn't
dare. There was this one young nubile maiden, very beautiful. She had a D on
the mid-term and didn't show up for the final, so of course I gave her an F.
She was one of those who were willing to see Professor Peter in his office. I
never heard back from her but eventually I took a look at the grade sheet. He
had changed her grade from F to B.  I asked him, how come?

B.  Did you get any kind of explanation?

A.  He said, I talked to her, and I felt sure she would have gotten an A on the
final, if she had taken it, so I changed her grade. He said it with a straight
face.

B.  I wonder if he thought you believed him.

A.  I don't think he even cared.

B.  Let me tell you my favorite plagiarism story. I was handed a paper which
began, "Moreover...."  Student just took a couple of paragraphs out of the
middle of a chapter. Didn't even bother to change the first word.

A.  There's also the story of the student who handed in a paper with the bill
from the ghost writer still in it.

B.  Here's one I heard from Don Baker.  He was teaching in  Mississippi,
early in his career. Freshman English. He receives identical papers from two
students in the same class. He gives an A to one and an F to the other. This
would be in the 1950s sometime. The F student comes into his office.  He says,
"Uh, uh, Mr. Baker.  I have a friend in the class. I sometimes study with him.
He, uh, uh, handed in a paper, kind of, uh, you know, similar to mine."  Baker
says, "and." The kid says, well, he got a much better grade than I did."  Baker
says, or at least he swears he says, "Oh, but I like him. And I don't like you."

Source: 2009/12/zebra

Title: The Chosen Zebra
Date: December 09, 2009

Ordinarily, I'm skeptical when supernatural images magically appear on everyday
objects. To me, such manifestations are perfectly explicable run-of-the-mill
instances of pareidolia.  [Pareidolia:  the tendency, inherent in the human
brain, to discover patterns (e.g. faces) in random markings.]  No matter how
intently I peer and squint, I simply cannot find the blessed virgin and her
child in the Ritz cracker. Nor in the stump of that felled yew in Donegal nor
in the water stain on the Samoan wall nor on the broken storm window in Jesup,
Georgia and certainly not in the miraculous bird dropping on the rear view
mirror of a pickup in Bryant, Texas. Not even in the revered and legendary 1978
Mexican tortilla. I am also willing to confess that although I haven't seen it
with my own eyes, I remain unpersuaded by the internationally-celebrated image
of Jesus in the partially-eaten toasted cheese sandwich that is reported to
have sold on Ebay for $28,000 and is now framed and publicly exhibited in the
Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino of Hollywood, Florida, where it amuses the
agnostics and wows the credulous.

In my conception, if the Ancient of Days had wanted to impress an image of his
very own filius unigenitus or of JC's tender and mild mom on breadstick or
bagel, cornbread or challah, he would have the made the representation clear
and distinct -- certainly not subject to dispute or interpretation or doubt or
skepticism. That's the way the Big Guy in the sky should operate when he's at
the top of his omnipotent game.

Which brings me to the illustration above, where, when you point and click, you
will encounter in sharp detail a  complete and perfect menorah incontrovertibly
etched, this Hanukkah season, on the port side of a zebra. No ifs, ands, buts,
or pareidolia.

Why a zebra, a creature not mentioned in the Holy Book?  Well, once again, the
L-rd moves in mysterious ways. If He chooses a zebra, who are We to question his
mighty decision?

Moreover, there's absolutely no question but that His menorah on a zebra beats
His Jesus on a toasted cheese sandwich all to heck.

Just sayin'.

Unless perhaps the Lord of Hosts uses photoshop?

Source: 2009/12/the-golden-age-of-sex-ed

Title: The Golden Age of Sex Ed
Date: December 17, 2009

I've been reading the novels of Edith Wharton. It's been one heck of a thrilling
experience. The Age of Innocence is a world-class masterpiece, as subtle a
novel as any that I've read in years, and The Buccaneers, which Wharton left
uncompleted at her death, is almost as good (fortunately, she left behind a
plot summary so we know how it was to conclude. Edith, couldn't you have hung
on for just a few more weeks?!) In addition, I was dazzled by The Reef and
The Children. Also a couple of volumes of short stories. I'm now reading the
very intriguing Glimpses of the Moon. And all the while, I'm wondering how I
could have passed over all this great stuff in my first seventy years and still
considered myself a serious reader. Wharton wrote forty books and I think that
until this month I had only read The House of Mirth, which, it turns out, is her
most notorious but not her finest work. But I'll give H of M another chance --
when I come to with new perspective.

Edith Wharton and her great contemporary Henry James are often bracketed  --
both of them upper-class New Yorkers and writers of "psychological" fiction.
I suppose there's some justice to the comparison, but I prefer to think of
Wharton's works as a culmination and also a critique of the great Victorian
novelistic tradition. One (of many reasons) is that nineteenth-century fictions
often revolve around the keeping of secrets. In the archetype, Mr. A loves Miss
B, and Miss B loves Mr. A, but some sort of social constraint forbids them
to acknowledge or to speak their love until 450 pages have elapsed. Wharton
repeatedly brings these conventions out into the open in order to rip them to
shreds. She scrutinizes and satirizes the imprisoning systems of manners (as
well as conventions of fiction) that the earlier era left unchallenged.  She
punctures taboos.

The secret that underlay all of those punishing proprieties was, in one form or
another, sex: sexual needs, sexual passions, sexual gratification. The godawful
messiness of it all.

When the twenty-three year old Edith Wharton was about to be married, she was
ignorant and terrified of sex (and this despite the fact that she was then
known, and I don't [and couldn't] make this up, as "Pussy" Jones ["Jones" as in
'keeping up with the Joneses', "Pussy" an affectionate diminutive certainly not
employed in its modern street-corner signification]). Like many another young
lady, she turned to her mother (in her case, Lucretia Rhinelander Jones, the
'best-dressed woman in New York') for advice.  The outcome was catastrophic.
So here it comes, sex ed in Victorian America, recollected in anything but
tranquility:

A few days before my marriage, I was seized with such a dread of the whole dark
mystery, that I summoned up courage to appeal to my mother, & begged her, with
a heart beating to suffocation, to tell me "what being married was like."  Her
handsome face at once took on the look of icy disapproval which I most dreaded.
"I never heard such a ridiculous question!" she said impatiently; & I felt at
once how vulgar she thought me.

But in my extremity of need I persisted.  "I'm afraid, Mamma---  I want to
know what will happen to me!"

The coldness of her expression deepened to disgust. She was silent for a
dreadful moment, then she said with an effort: "You've seen enough pictures and
statues in your life. Haven't you noticed that men are -- made differently from
women?"

"Yes," I faltered blankly.

"Well, then  ---?"

I was silent, from sheer inability to follow, & she brought out sharply: "Then
for heaven's sake don't ask me any more silly questions. You can't be as stupid
as you pretend."

The dreadful moment was over, & the only result was that I had been convicted of
stupidity for not knowing what I had been expressly forbidden to ask about, or
even to think of."

Poor dear Edith, our hearts go out to you and to all the maidens of the last
era. Her "heart beating to suffocation," her pathetic ignorant (not stupid, but
ignorant) inquiry, and the imperious mother hiding her embarrassment behind
an affectation of anger. O my!  Along with the ridiculous idea that furtive
(I'm sure) glances at "pictures and statues" could convey any bird-and-bee
information of value. Edith's derelict mom punted when she should have pulled
her goalie. She missed the "teachable moment." But then again, how do we know
what mamma Lucretia knew about sex. Perhaps she had nothing to offer. Perhaps
she was one of those Victorian ladies who was taught to lie back and think of
England (or, in her case, to think of Washington Square).

Pussy Jones's marriage to Teddy Wharton was a miserable failure. Some of Edith's
friends suspected that it was what used to be called a "mariage blanc" --
a marriage without sex. After twenty-eight years and, I'm glad to report,
a couple of fervent affairs, Edith divorced Teddy, by that time alcoholic,
manic- depressive, and institutionalized. Among her manuscripts Edith left an
unfinished pornographic fragment, Beatrice Palmato (which I have not yet read
but which is supposed to involve, double-eek!!!, father-daughter incest).

Edith Wharton's passage from unnaturally prolonged innocence to sexual
sophistication or perhaps even to sexual derangement summarizes, in little, a
big hunk of American social history. In the course of her lifetime, she had to
cope with revolutionary changes, and those changes provide the background for
some extraordinary and sometimes painful works of fiction.

So I will read on.

[Biographical details are from Hermione Lee, Edith Wharton (New York: Knopf,
2007).

Source: 2009/12/the-entirety-of-my-career-as-a-nude-model

Title: The Entirety of My Career as a Nude Model
Date: December 19, 2009

A friend of mine was teaching a course in life drawing and was having trouble
finding models. He asked me if I'd be willing to donate an hour. Hey, it was
the drug-crazed 1960s (or perhaps early 70s) and I had long since put modesty
behind. So I agreed.

It was odd to be naked  among a roomful of the clothed. I was more sensitive
to drafts than I would have guessed. It was difficult to remain motionless,
especially with all the houseflies a-lighting on the sensitive areas. It was
peculiar and a little flattering to have so many pairs of eyes fixed upon me.
However, my clearest memory is the student, a young woman, who at the end of the
hour, asked the teacher, "Next week, could you try to find someone with a more
interesting body?"

December 20.  I now realize that, bodywise, I have become more interesting over
the last forty years -- if interesting means lumpy, wrinkled, and asymmetrical.

Source: 2009/12/silliest-word-

Title: The Silliest Word in the Entire English Language, Bar None
Date: December 23, 2009

To decide upon the language's silliest word, many would steep themselves into
the gallimaufry that features such sesquipedalian monstrosities as mollycoddle,
liripoop, and kinnikinnick, but in my view such words are no more than flagrant
tomfoolery. (In point of fact, almost every word seems silly, if you just say
it over and over again, especially spoon, swivel, and sluice [just in the s's
alone]). A more promising category in which to delve is among those words that
ought, from their sound, mean something entirely other than they do, as for
example turdiform, titmouse, cacoethes, antimacassar and crepuscular. Some
words are silly because it is inherently ridiculous that their combination of
consonants and vowels should mean anything at all: usufruct, zeugma, ginkgo and
glebe fall into that unlovely grouping.

As a child, I thought that the silliest word in the English language was
"pumpernickel," but now I can make more mature judgments. I therefore announce
that the second most ridiculous word in English -- the penultimate -- is
"indubitably."  "Indubitably" is composed of a series of staccato syllables
that can only be spoken by a duchess, or a dandy wearing a tuxedo and a
monocle  -- or perhaps even a lorgnette. I have never heard anyone utter the
word "indubitably" with a straight face. It's a word that is intrinsically
litotic.

And now, after decades of pondering, I proclaim that the grand champion silliest
word in the English, and of this there can be no shadow of doubt, no possible
probable shadow of doubt, is: ointment.

The evidence?  Well, first of all, there's that wayward "oint." Except for
"oil" and oil-related words (oiler, oily), there are very few English words
that begin with "oi" --and for good reason. "Oi" lacks the dignity of more
imposing vowels. It's an unstable gliding sound, hard to fix in the mouth,
almost thriphthongic.  Moreover, "oint" comes perilously close to "oink" and
therefore reeks of the piggery. To couple "oint" with "ment" is to augment the
awkwardness. Most words that end in "ment" make obvious sense: battlement,
pavement, amazement, advancement. If the "ment" in ointment is such a suffix,
what, pray tell, is an "oint"?  And then there's that foolish near-congruence
of the first and second components of the word --its perfect and quintessential
spondeehood -- exaggerated by slant rhyme and the awkwardness of "nt"/"nt."
Altogether, "ointment" is indubitably absurd.

Etymology offers no solace. The silly thing came to us through Old French
"oignement" from late Latin "unguimentum" and from classical Latin
"unguentum."  "Ointment" may ultimately derive from an ancient root for butter.
Just as might be suspected, that first ludicrous "t" is an accident, having been
smuggled in, by analogy, from "anoint."

When Jean Lundegaard bites Gaear Grimsrud on the hand, he grunts, famously,
"Unguent, I need unguent." One hesitates to suggest an improvements to classic
dialogue, but, tell the truth, wouldn't the scene have been even funnier and
more memorable if Gaear had muttered, "Ointment, I need ointment?"  Especially
if the tip of his tongue had landed plosively on both of the lingual-palatal
stops?

Source: 2009/12/his-meanest-garment

Title: "His Meanest Garment."
Date: December 28, 2009

I was all alone for a week or so.

I'm not what you would call a spiffy dresser, even on the best of days, and
perhaps, solitary, I was even less attentive than usual to my presentation.
It is possible that I had neglected to comb my hair and it is also possible
that I hadn't shaved for a few days. I do know for sure that I was wearing my
favorite, familiar blue sweatshirt, the one with the hood, which is perhaps
fifteen years old and a trifle faded. It may even have had a stain or two on its
sagging front -- perhaps jam or spaghetti sauce or something equally tasty. The
veteran sweatshirt may also have been slightly frayed at the sleeves -- but it
is, or was, in my opinion, a very wearable garment.

In any case, one morning last week I took a walk over to Breadworks, my
favorite establishment for day-old muffins. I set down my notebook, which is, I
admit, slightly chewed, on a vacant table, noting that the next table over was
occupied, but at that moment only by a plate of eggs and a cup of coffee, the
customer no doubt hunting up more food or making a quick trip to the bathroom.
I dug into a stack of used newspapers, came up with yesterday's Camera and sat
down to read.

And then my putative neighbor, the young woman who must have previously claimed
the next table, returned. She took a long look at me. I smiled slightly, as one
does in such situations.  She quickly gathered her plate and coffee and moved
to a vacant table three over from me.

Oh my gosh! I know exactly what she was thinking. "Homeless." "Loathsome."

How awful it must be to be regularly and unapologetically shunned!

My daughters have been visiting this week. I hadn't even mentioned this
incident, but they independently took one look at my well-worn-in stained
garment and quite spontaneously trotted off to Army-Navy store just off the
Pearl Street Mall and came home with a brand new Carhart sweatshirt, which after
a few years of use will become a new favorite. The old blue friend-of-long-
standing is in the rag bag.

I can now I enter any coffee shop in our fair city and proudly rejoin the
respectable citizenry. Or should I say the fastidious citizenry?