

================================================================================Source: 2012/01/nugget-watching

Title: Nugget-Watching
Date: January 02, 2012

This year's Nuggets are now at 3-2 and each game has been worth watching.
Because there are no superstars, there's a different plot every game. The ball
moves and doesn't stop as when, in the old day, it came into the hands of
Carmelo, or, even worse, The Answer. Everyone plays defense; everyone runs,
almost everyone gets into the game. Arron Affalo is the key, I think, because
he sets the example of constant effort. As soon as he gets into better shape,
and his three starts to fall, he'll be even better. Lawson is fearless and
swift as an arrow and he's become adept at pocket-picking. Andre Miller is a
player to identify with: he can't run, can't jump, has no range, has no weight-
room/steroid muscles and his mid-range is more of a leaner than a jumper, but
he's smart, resourceful, tricky, and throws a better alley-oop than anyone in
the league. He's the kind of steadyEddie you want to be in there for the last
five minutes. Al Harrington, who was injured and out of shape last year, has
come back strong and is now a classic sixth-man-scorer-off-the-bench-instant-
offense-go-to-guy. The Birdman is as erratic as all get out but he remembers
to swat a couple away every game. Unfortunately, he's mutilated his body to
the point that any person of aesthetic sensibility must fast-forward through
his foul shots. The furriners give the team great balance (and because they're
untattooed, provide a welcome relief for the eyes.) Gallinari, the Italian,
shows great promise, especially when he goes to the rim with two-handed
authority. When Nene, from Brazil, plays up to his ability, he's sensational,
and the more time he gets at PF the happier he'll be, which is why it's crucial
that Timofey Mozgov, the massive Russian center. learns to move his feet and
avoid the fouls. Mozgov will improve as the season progresses. Rudy Fernandez,
the lone Spaniard, plays good man D., but won't make a real contribution until
the outside shots start to fall. And then there's the half-Greek 7-footer, Kosta
Koufos, who plays with great enthusiasm.

Not to mention Kenneth Faried, college rebounding sensation, who's chomping at
the bit, waiting for one of the regulars to go down.

Other reasons to watch the Nugs: no J. R. Smith (a most talented nutcase),
no Kenyon Martin (effective on D but always borderline thuggish, and with
the ugliest no-spin set shot ever); no Carmelo playing matador. Addition by
subtraction.

It's a short long season, ths year. Stay healthy, guys.

Source: 2012/01/quiz

Title: Quiz
Date: January 03, 2012

What is a currawong? a gonolek, a boubou, a tchagra, a brubru?  a sitella,
a minivet? a drongo? a common koel?  Do you think that I've invented these
words?  Heck no. Each one is absolutely genuine and furthermore, far beyond
my powers of invention. And from the same large family come the zitting
cisticola, the bulbul, the cacique, the oropedola, the po'o-uli, and the 'o'u.
Not to mention the rhabdornis, the oxpecker. the rockjumper, the babbler, the
treecreeper, the tapaculo, the cotinga, the manakin, the pitta, the assity, the
yellow rifleman, and the logrunner.

You've probably figured it out by now. They're all passerines.

These great and new-to-me words come from The Bird (New York, 2008), a
whimsical, idiosyncratic survey, by the appropriately--named ornithologist Colin
Tudge. "What's that on that branch over there? Is it a grinning tudge?"

Source: 2012/01/bird-bigbird-and-little-dr-m

Title: Bird, Bigbird, and Little
Date: January 05, 2012

One high noon, many years ago, when I was myself barely fledged, and was an
undergraduate at a "large Eastern university,"  I spotted three well-known
members of the humanities faculty on the hunt for lunch. They were Ephim
Fogel, David Grossvogel, and Don Kleine. An unforgettable assemblage!  Fogel,
Grossvogel and Kleine, I thought -- sounds like the name of a law firm invented
by Tom Pynchon.

I had not reflected on this  -- to me  -- amusing incident until this week,
when I was reading the bird book that I mentioned in a previous post. There I
discovered that the largest known bird was the recently extinct elephant bird,
a distant Madagascan cousin of the ostrich, which stood 10 feet tall and tipped
the scale at 880 pounds. Its eggs were 3 feet in circumference and would have
provided three chicken-size egg omelets for about 55 people. I also learned that
the smallest bird is the bee hummingbird which the calipers says is two inches
long and which weighs .06 of an ounce. Its egg is the size of a pea, which means
than it would take a small flock of hummingbirds many days to make me a decent
breakfast.

Here's a bee hummingbird:

And here's an imaginative reconstruction of the elephant bird, a grossvogel if
there ever was one.

They are not drawn to scale.

Source: 2012/01/cym

Title: Cymbeline at the Barrow Street Theatre
Date: January 19, 2012

I have a sour relationship with "the stage" -- and especially with staged
Shakespeare plays. The theatre and I just don't get along. I think it's because
my expectations are too grand. When I go to the theatre, I want to be ravished,
but more often I'm bored, or worse than bored, embarrassed. I long to laugh, to
cry, to be transported --but instead, I find myself to be entirely too conscious
of the efforts and the contrivances of directors and designers and actors.
Moreover, how am I supposed to achieve ecstasy when the guy in the next seat is
snuffling and fidgeting and making inappropriate sounds at the wrong moments.
And besides, I probably know more about the Shakespeare play that I'm watching
than my comrades in the audience and I have opinions about what the play is
supposed to mean and how it should be performed, and so I become intolerant
and over-critical. And when one is busy criticizing, and one misses one's
inexplicably-deleted favorite lines, one has strayed from the path that leads to
rapture. When I sit still and concentrate on the book, I can achieve moments of
private transcendence. When I'm at the theatre, the theatre gets in my way.

Despite all, I went to see ("hear," Elizabethans would say) Cymbeline at the
Barrrow Street Theatre and, I joyfully confess, had a good time. Cymbeline isn't
performed much and I had never seen it done (except for the pedestrian BBC-TV
version, which doesn't count). I was in doubt whether such a long, complex,
plot-heavy play could be performed. But the young Barrow Street people were
earnest and enthusiastic and pretty and well-rehearsed. Their Cymbeline was
swiftly-paced and offered some delightful moments. I was genuinely impressed.

But I was not satisfied. I was not transported.

Was it a problem with the delivery, or was it the fault of the listeners, that
when Imogen learns that her husband/lover Posthumus Leonatus is at Milford
Haven, and cries out, "O for a horse with wings," the audience laughed. Oh,
please, audience, don't laugh, and please, actors, don't play it for laughs.
Imogen's imaginative expression is designed to capture her frustrated yearning
for the mate from whom she has been forcibly separated and to express all the
sexual longing of vibrant youth. She's head over heels in love and she's not
making a joke of it.  A "horse with wings" is not a piece of grotesquerie, as
the audience and the actors seemed to assume -- it's simply the fastest means of
transport that anyone could imagine until 200 years after Cymbeline was written,
when engineers started to play with the idea of a steam-driven engine. I so much
wanted  last night's Imogen to express, with that line, the kind of emotion
that brings me to tears in my study. But alas.

And similarly, when Imogen and Posthumus are reconciled at last, and they
embrace (an act that the  the audience has been anticipating for hours),
Posthumus is given the most poetically resonant line in the play. "Hang there,"
he says, "like fruit, my soul,/ Til the tree die." The line, compact of images,
is just outside our easy comprehension, but we know at a minimum that trees take
a very long time to die and that Posthumus and Imogen are now linked into one
soul and that Imogen is like "fruit" in the sense of sweetness and juiciness and
fertility -- indeed the ramifying plot has found its way to fruition. And so has
the chain of imagery that began in the first moments of the play, when Imogen
told us that her father, "like the tyrannous breathing of the north/ Shakes
all our buds from growing." It took five acts, but those blighted buds finally
ripened. I'm sorry to say that in the Barrow Street version, this touchstone
of poetry was not emphasized but swallowed; if you weren't waiting for the
line, you would have missed it entirely. Another moment of potential ecstasy
surrendered.

But in all honesty, I must admit that if the players had paused to underline
the sentence, I would probably be complaining that they treated the poetry too
"poetically" and too portentously. Shakespeare is hard to play, and I'm hard to
please.

But I'm not principally concerned that the Barrow boys and girls misread or
neglected a line here or there. I'm concerned about their big compromise.

While enjoying the first four acts, I could not help but wonder how six
performers on a rudimentary stage were going to deal with the theophany in the
fifth act, when Jupiter himself descends from above on the back of an eagle
and tells the audience not to worry, that everything is going to work out just
fine. The scene is the most important in the play and it's what distinguishes
Cymbeline from Shakespeare's earlier and easier and more-easily-performed
comedies. But the theophany is hard, and hard to explain, and also, I'm sure,
expensive. In my view, Barrow Street should have pulled the goalie and thrown a
hail Mary downfield; lay it all out there. But instead, they took an intentional
pass. O my gosh! they took a razor to the entire business. No Jupiter, no
eagle, no wondrous, mystical, symbolic appearance of Posthumus's lost family,
no soothsayer, no riddle, and therefore, I'm sorry to say, no enchantment and
no miracle. No miracle, no Cymbeline, at least no Cymbeline as it is known and
loved by such as I.

Here's what I think happens in Cymbeline. For four and a half acts, human
beings make a mess of things. The king is blinded by uxoriousness, the queen
is a machiavellia, Posthumus is vain, Cloten is simply stupid. The characters
tie themselves into plot knots and everyone is deceived in part or in whole
(although Shakespeare witholds nothing from the audience). Cymbeline thinks his
sons are lost, Posthumus thinks Imogen is dead, Lucius Brutus thinks Imogen is
a boy, Imogen thinks that Posthumus has been beheaded, and so on. Everyone is
wrong; no one knows the whole truth.

And then comes the miracle. Jupiter descends, and 20, or 21, or 22 (depending on
who's counting) mistakings are unravelled in five amazing, astounding minutes.
Cymbeline is a tragedy for four and half acts and a comedy at the end. And
should be played so. Take away Jupiter and take away the miracle. A play about
human folly and divine intervention becomes nothing more than Twelfth Night or
As You Like It. which is not a bad thing to be, but not what Shakespeare was
doing in 1610. It's like scissoring Marina's magical virginity out of Pericles,
or Hermione's rebirth out of The Winter's Tale, or Prospero's magic out of The
Tempest. It's not right. It undervalues a most thrilling, most remarkable piece
of writing. Even those of us who don't believe in miracles want to believe in
Shakespeare's miracles.

But -- the Barrow Street guys and gals inspired me to re-read Cymbeline, and,
all alone, just me and my Kindle, I once again indulged my ecstasy. So thank
you.

Source: 2012/01/more-absolutely-real-captured-in-the-wild-dialog

Title: More Absolutely Real Captured-in-the-Wild Dialog
Date: January 20, 2012

Dr. M. (at the spacious Metropolitan Museum of Art in NYC, to a guard);  "Can
you tell me how to get to the new American Wing."

Guard:  "You go straight ahead, through the main courtyard, through two more
doors, when you hit Egypt, you take a left."

Source: 2012/02/seed-news

Title: Winter Garden News
Date: February 04, 2012

Next summer's vegetable seeds have arrived in the mail. Hard choices; the
gardening will is infinite and the execution confined; which is to say that
there just isn't enough room to grow all the varieties we'd want. But in
addition to the old reliables, we try to make room for some exotics and
antiques. This year:   two kinds of heirloom tomatoes. Rose (an Amish
favorite), and Black Giant. Pasillo Bajio (an intense black hot pepper, for
the pepper- lovers in the family). Ma-Zu Purple Chinese Eggplant, supposedly
a favorite of Taiwanese gardeners. Black Beauty Zucchini. Suyo Long Cucumbers
("very mild and sweet"). Romanesco Italia Broccoli ("spiralling apple-green
heads"). Ching Chong Bok Choy, an early, cold-weather kind. Russian Red (some
call it Ragged Jack) kale. Two kinds of beets: Albino, a Dutch variety, and
Crapaudine, unfortunately named, but supposedly the oldest beet still in
cultivation. And also carrots, so easy to grow in our rich sandy soil, both a
new variety (Cosmic Purple) and an old one (Jaune Obtuse du Doubs, a French
carrot which dates to 1894).

It's going to be a good summer. We're in the midst of a January snowstorm right
now, but I can imagine myself tilling in a load of manure, raking up, and
setting out the stakes and twine. It's going to be a good summer.

Source: 2012/02/uncle-max

Title: My Mysterious Uncle Max
Date: February 11, 2012

Who knows what crimes or dark deeds my black-sheep Uncle Max had committed that
made made him such a pariah in our o-so-respectable family, but they must have
been something awful. Although he was my father's older brother, his name was
never mentioned except with embarrassment or distaste.

Inasmuch as I'm now the "patriarch," it's time to get the family stuff on the
record for the benefit of the kids, the grandkids, and the extended mishpucha.
So here's all I know about my mysterious uncle. Spoiler alert: it doesn't add up
to villainy.

Max was the oldest of the four (Sol, Mollie, and Mannie succeeded him). He would
have been born about 1895, just about the time the family escaped the Ukraine
for the Lower East Side. He studied at Albany State Teachers College for a
while, but I don't think he earned a degree. He lived in Paris during the 1920s
and perhaps 1930s. He was invited to but did not attend my parents' wedding. He
was divorced (a source of immeasurable shame in those years). My mother said,
"Uncle Max is very selfish." There was something shady about the way he made his
living, but I don't know the details, except that, for a while, he ghost-wrote
doctoral dissertations. He lived with a woman to whom he wasn't married. He died
of a heart attack during the 1950s.

I met him three times. Once, he came to a family gathering, My father wouldn't
speak to him. Another time he paid a weekday afternoon call to our East 9 Street
home. I found him in the kitchen talking with my mother: "This is your Uncle
Max." And then, when I was thirteen, he called and asked if he could take me to
the finals of the NCAA basketball tournament at Madison Square Garden. After
a lot of discussion and negotiation, I was allowed to meet him at the arena.
Max was a small man, hard of hearing, and very ordinary.  He tried hard to be
congenial. He told me that he had taken "Robert" as a middle name. Frankly, he
seemed no more menacing or odd than any other of my uncle-ry or than other men
of his generation. What else do I remember of that evening?  During the game,
an errant pass hit off a player's head and bounced into the basket.

I never saw Max again.

And yet my father once confessed to me that he told Max that "if he ever did
that again, I'd kill him." My father, mildest of men, threatened someone with
violent death?  Because he did what?  Dad wouldn't say.

Here's a spooky story, and I'm going to tell it exactly the way it happened, no
embroidery or exaggeration. On the night of my father's funeral, my brothers
and I and our wives gathered around the formica kitchen table in the old house.
Uncle Max's name came up. I said, "I know the name of the woman who he lived
with." "What is it?"  "It's Sarah Clyne, spelled with a C and a Y." There was
a Manhattan telephone book (five inches thick and at least two thousand pages).
I picked up the book and it fell open. I put my finger on a name. The name was
Sarah Clyne. "I said, did you see what happened?  I just opened the book at
random and my finger fell on the name Sarah Clyne, Max's lady. It seems like a
sign that I should call her."

But I didn't.

Here's the only picture of Max of which I have knowledge. He's with "little
grandma." The picture is taken in front of 334 Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.

Source: 2012/02/mannahatta

Title: Mannahatta
Date: February 13, 2012

Eric Sanderson's Mannahatta (New York: Abrams, 2009) reconstructs Manhattan as
it would have appeared to Henry Hudson when he sailed the Half-Moon into the
harbor in 1609. The glory of the book lies in its illustrations.  Here's a
conjectural reconstruction of old Manhattan island:

And here's a clever juxtaposition of ancient and modern:

In 1609, the island of Manhattan was home to between 400 and 1000 Lenape
Indians. They lived on fish, shellfish (leaving behind extensive middens), deer
and other wildlife, on fruits and berries. They practiced some small-scale
farming of corn, squash, and beans. Sanderson estimates that the Lenape had
lived on Manhattan for 10,000 years, or 400 generations.

Why so few people? The land was fertile, the seas abundant, the weather
not particularly harsh. While the Lenape sat still in Manhattan, advanced
civilizations were created by the Mayans, the Aztecs and the Incas. Along the
banks of the Mississippi, the city of Cahokia rose and fell. And yet the Lenape
never domesticated a single animal beside the dog and left behind no pottery,
weaving, or metals. They remained stuck in the paleolithic. Why, I wonder.
Perhaps things were too good.

On the other hand, the Lenape lived in harmony with the island for a very
long time. What are the odds that our present civilization, which has totally
transformed Manhattan in 400 short years, or just 16 generations, will last one
tenth as long?

February 24:  Still curious about the want of population growth or
technological development among the Lenape, I read C. A. Weslager's The Delaware
Indians, A History (1972) (Lenapes were called by their Anglo name, Delaware,
for many years). Wenslager does not suggest that the Lenape ever achieved
larger populations. Nor does he point to any archeological evidence of cultural
achievement. Still, I'm mildly suspicious that there may be more to the story. 
We know that Verrazzano contacted the Lenapes 90 years before Hudson sailed into
the harbor, and no one knows what diseases he might have introduced.

Source: 2012/02/lin

Title: Why We Love Sports
Date: February 14, 2012

I have to admit that I'm thoroughly taken with the Jeremy Lin story. It's so
wonderfully, ridiculously improbable. Asian-American guy, Harvard!! economics
grad, plays OK with the Erie Bayhawks and the Reno Bighorns but is released by
two not-so-strong NBA teams. A last-resort number 4 point guard on the Knicks,
sleeping on a couch in his brother's apartment, he comes off the bench to lead
the worst team in the league to five straight wins, drops 38 on Kobe and the
Lakers, etc. etc. Tyson Chandler, grumpy all season long, is now smiling. It's
not just Frank Merriwell; it's everyone's secret dream. And a morality play to
boot-- keep trying, persevere, trust your own abilities, take advantage of the
opportunities. An inspiration and a message in the same package.

It can't last. JLin can't keep on averaging 27/8. The Knicks will eventually
lose (though let's hope not tonight against shakey Toronto). One of those top
point-guard defenders, such as Avery Bradley, is going to eat him alive one of
these days. But he's the real deal and if he stays healthy, remains coachable,
works on his three and on his left hand, he could have a great, historic career.

Meanwhile, it's absolutely fascinating. Ama're returns tonight; that should be
easy. The test will come when Carmelo's groin heals. Can Lin and Anthony work
and play well together? I'll be watching.

And congratulations to Tommie Amaker, Lin's Harvard coach; he's got to be one
heck of a proud guy.

Another person who's mighty happy: David Stern, who's been struggling to get a
toehold for the NBA in the world's largest untapped market.

Source: 2012/02/repubs

Title: Idiot or Hypocrite? Your Choice.
Date: February 14, 2012

Today it's Santorum, who has staked out positions to the right of the Pope,
where there isn't all that much room. Yesterday it was Gingrich. Before that,
in their turn, Perry, Cain, Bachmann.  Each month brings a new anti-Romney and
just as inevitably, his/her decline.

The extremists who control the Republican party want a candidate who is
strictly, or extremely, or "severely" conservative and who can still appear sane
enough to be elected.

But it can't be done.  It's a hunt that's doomed to come up empty.

The "base," whether fundamentalist or libertarian or drown-the-government-in-
the-bathtub, has established a series of tests which make it impossible for
their candidate to be both sane and sincere. There can be no such animal.

The candidate must reject evolution and profess to believe in some variety of
creationism.

He must believe, or profess to believe, that global warming is a hoax --
a conspiracy theory devised by geologists and meteorologists and climate
historians. The candidate must be profoundly anti-science and anti-rational.

He must believe in some variety of "trickle-down economics," even though several
rounds of tax cuts have benefited the rich at the expense of everyone else. (It
hasn't been trickle down, it's been gush up.) He must believe that any attempt
to remedy the situation is "class warfare." And he must also believe that it's
no problem that the richer are getting out-of-control richer and the poor are
becoming poorer and more numerous.

He must believe that the mortgage crisis and the recession was caused by quasi-
government entities like Fannie and Freddie and not by the speculations and
peculations of de-regulated banks and brokers.

He must believe that the solution to the problem of illegal immigration is to
build a larger, taller wall, even though for every wall there's a ladder and
that there's not a leaf of lettuce that would be harvested or a roof patched in
all of America without undocumented labor.

He must believe that gay people are gay by choice and aren't entitled to equal
status under the law. How do they know? The bible tells them so.

They must profess to believe that the invasion of Iraq, the worst foreign policy
blunder in our history, was a good idea.

And they must believe that Barack Obama fronts a socialist-secular conspiracy,
other members of which are the press, the universities, and the "elite," who
want more than anything else to take away their guns.

Does this sorry bunch of Republican candidates believe all this nonsense, or do
they pander to the base? Are they idiots or are they liars?  Fools or knaves?
We report, you decide.

Source: 2012/02/good-old-days

Title: Good Old Days
Date: February 15, 2012

As a boy, I naturally assumed that Riis Park was named for Harold (Peewee).
Later, I learned that Jacob Riis was a well-known reformer whose 1890 book, How
the Other Half Lives, a chronicle of life in New York's slums, shocked  Gilded
Age complacency. Nowadays, Riis is known more for his pioneering photography
than for his writing.  Here are three of his images:

The young lady on the left is known to history simply as "Katie." When Riis
asked her what she did, she replied, "I scrubs." She was a laundress. She was
nine years old.

I've now read a adulatory life of Jacob Riis by Tom Buk-Swienty. I learned that
one of the worst New York slums, Mulberry Bend, had a population density of
2,047 per acre. Fifty per cent of Mulberry Bend's children died before their
fifth birthday. Every year, about 100 Manhattan infants were found dead in the
streets. In addition, another 500 children were abandoned by their parents. I
also learned that in 1883, when Cornelius Vanderbilt moved into his new chateau
on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 52nd Street, he threw a housewarming ball for
1200 guests. "$155,730 was spent on costumes alone."

Source: 2012/02/remembering

Title: Remembering
Date: February 23, 2012

Remembering, in a melancholy mood early this winter morning, some of the friends
and relations who left the room far too early: Arthur Oberg, Bernice Kliman, Bob
Nero, Bob Pois, Curtis Barnes, David Gaillard, David Novarr, Ed Nolan, Eleanor
Gottlieb, Eugene Pearlman, Gary Stahl, George Chodorow, Herb Eldridge, Honi
Haber, Howard Smokler, Ila Warner, Jane Comstock, Jonathon "Skip" Chase, Myrna
Mikelberg Brown, Nancy Hill, Phyllis Eva Goss Murray, Peter Dutch, Peter Tasch,
Renate Wood, Rob McIntosh, Rubin Rabinovitz, Sarah Obermeier, Shirley Johnston,
Stephen Evans, Virgil Grillo. And now Lee Coffee.

Source: 2012/02/on-sneezing-

Title: De Sternuente, or, Of Sneezing
Date: February 24, 2012

I enjoy fighting off a sneeze. It takes practice and concentration. When the
sneeze urge emerges, without warning, the battle is joined. On the side of
the sneeze -- dust or some other foreign particles passing through the nasal
hairs, reaching  the nasal mucosa, releasing a flood of histamines which
irritate the nerve cells and signal the brain to stimulate the trigeminal
network and activate the pharyngeal and tracheal muscles, producing a noisy,
100-mile-an- hour blast of microbes and snot. On the side of restraint --
nothing but enormous personal discipline and the desire not to surrender to
animal nature. There are some, who are less committed to mind-over-body, who
employ the fingertips to pinch the end of the nose, or, alternatively, who press
a knuckle against the philtrum, the infranasal depression which Shakespeare,
curiously, called "the valley" -- but frankly, when it comes to resisting
sternutation, digital success is only half a loaf. It's far more rewarding to
think one's way to a rare victory in the lifelong sneezomachia. Not to sneeze is
a triumph of the will.

Which is not to assert that a good sneeze gives no pleasure, if a person would
give oneself over to it. It's simply that the sneeze, especially one of the
window-rattling variety, is entirely anarchic and inartistic, which might be
why there is so slight a sneeze literature. Although hard to believe, it's a
fact that Puck is the only character in all of Shakespeare's plays who deigns
to mention the sneeze, but he weakens its disruptive force by employing the
archaism "neeze." The best-known literary sneeze (or, at least, the only one
that now comes to mind) occurs in Pope's Rape of the Lock, when Belinda,
ravished by Sir Plume's "glittering forfex," throws snuff in the baron's nose.
Immediately "with starting tears each eye o'erflows,/ And the high dome re-
echoes to his nose."

Snuff artificially stimulates sneezing, which may or may not be be why Michael,
Tsar of all the Russians, proposed amputating the noses of snuffers. Michael's
contemporary, Pope Urban VIII, merely threatened excommunication. Some say that
the practice of saying "God bless you" to sneezers originated with Pope Gregory
the Great, and has to do with the superstition that the soul leaves the sneezing
body, perhaps nasally.

Why is it that no one ever says "God bless you" to farters, who are as much in
need of divine intervention as sneezers. Society demands that farting, though
shameful (and belching, though comic), should be controlled; sneezing is, except
for the most determined among us, uncontrollable.

Source: 2012/02/amnesia-on-film-spellbound

Title: Amnesia on Film: Spellbound (1945)
Date: February 25, 2012

In Alfred Hitchcock's Spellbound (1945), man suffers traumatic shock, man loses
memory, man relives experience and regains memory. It's garden-variety Hollywood
amnesia, hortus hollywoodiensis. The amnesia is neither credible nor possible,
but it doesn't matter, because it's the world of film, where the most malleable
of mental afflictions takes whatever form is convenient for the writer or
director or the presiding mogul.

John Ballantine, played by handsome young Gregory Peck is the amnesiac and the
questions the movie poses are, when will he recover his memory, how much help
he will require from luscious psychoanalyst Ingrid Bergman, and how many times
he can he whine "I can't remember" and still get the girl. Bergman has a more
complex problem: how to be a smart and also a real woman (always a problem in
Hitchcock's wonderful world of misogyny). She makes use of that old dodge, a
pair of glasses; when they're off, she's feminine, but when she dons them,
she's intelligent. When did Hollywood decided that eyeglasses were a symbol for
brains?

But if she has brains, why is she attracted to a man who doesn't know who he is
but is convinced that he might be a murderer. It's as though the film itself
doesn't take amnesia seriously and treats it as a plot-device rather than the
distressing disorder that it would be to an actual sufferer.

It's a silly but engaging movie, perhaps too much of an advertisement for
psychoanalysis -- which it endorses without a shred of skepticism. I suspect
that the psychoanalytic themes, which haven't fared at all well these seventy
years, will eventually doom the movie to oblivion.

There are some tense echt-Hitchcock moments when it appears that the amnesiac
might be dangerous, but Peck and Bergman are just too pretty to be killer and
victim.

Source: 2012/02/aspirin-legs

Title: Fun with Aspirin
Date: February 28, 2012

I like to think that I have a sense of humor, but I just don't get this one-
liner by Rick Santorum's Daddy Warbucks, Foster Friess. "And this contraceptive
thing, my gosh, it's so--it's such--inexpensive, you know, back in my days, they
used Bayer Aspirin for contraception. The gals put it between their knees and it
wasn't that costly." So what's funny here? If the "gals" keep an aspirin between
their knees, they can't have sex and therefore can't get pregnant? Is that it?
Is that The Joke?

First of all, let's all chip in to send FF a copy of the Kama Sutra (or even
an elementary how to do it manual), where he can find some exotic and some
extremely obvious positions in which women can get pregnant and still keep their
knees together.

But why aspirin? Why Bayer aspirin? What do I not understand? Why an aspirin
between the knees rather than, say, a bible?  Or a book by Newt Gingrich? Or a
copy of the The Joy of Sex.

Foster Friess says all this aspirin fun took place "back in my day." I would
like to say that FF is a year younger than I, and that I a) never heard the joke
(if it's a joke) back then, and b) never heard tell of a single woman who used
knee-aspirin as a contraceptive.

I did some internet research on the aspirin-contraceptive connection and
discovered that there's a story going around in high schools that taking three
aspirin and drinking a Coke before intercourse will prevent conception. Advice
to young people: do not bank on it.

Will the Santorum administration, immediately upon taking office in 2013, ban
aspirin?

Source: 2012/03/ulysses

Title: Youth and Age -- Tennyson's Ulysses
Date: March 09, 2012

It wasn't until I reached college that discovered poetry. My comic-book
super- hero and baseball-infused brain was until then, poetry-wise, an almost
complete tabula rasa. I say "almost" because at eight or nine eight years
old I had memorized two great classics of American literature: "Casey at the
Bat" and also the poem by Grantland Rice about Tinkers, Evers, and Chance. In
additon, I knew the ubiquitous stercoraceous distich the first line of which
is "Here I sit, broken-hearted" and a related gnomic verse that begins, "No
matter how much you wiggle and dance." Then in 1956 I left Flatbush for
higher education and took a course in English Literature. The rest, as they
say, is history. It was sonnets and love poems of any kind, and rich luscious
liquid poems by Marlowe and Keats and Hopkins that entranced me. The more
intellectual poems were too taxing for my immature head. Lycidas, which
I now know to be the best poem in the language, was utterly impenetrable
for at least a decade, although I admit that I immediately responded to its
music: "With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves."

One of my teachers sagely observed that certain poets and certain poems were
for youth, some for maturity, and some for old age. "You may no longer like
then what you like now." Which has come to pass. And as an example of poetry
for the latter years, he adduced Tennyson's "Ulysses." "This poem may not mean
much to you now, but it will some day, if you live long enough." I remember
that I was much taken with the touchstone line "Far on the ringing plains of
windy Troy" but I thought that "Ulysses" was far too much about a really old
guy trying to cheer himself up and I did not see it holding a place in any
future I could envision.

Well, folks, I've now arrived at the so-called golden years, or, more properly,
the endgame, or extra innings (which in some sports is called sudden death) and
guess what? "Ulysses" has returned, front and center, exactly as was predicted
50+ years ago. It's right on target.

Tennyson's Ulysses is Homer's adventurer a generation older, kinging it in
Ithaca, but bored, unchallenged, and unstimulated. "It little profits that an
idle king,/ By this still hearth, among these barren crags,/ Matched with an
aged wife, I mete and dole/ Unequal laws unto a savage race,/ That hoard and
sleep, and feed,/ And know not me."

To put it vulgarly, Ulysses plans to bust out of the old folks home. He's
been a warrior, a hero, and a roving explorer. He "cannot rest from
travel." He needs to search "beyond the utmost bound of human
thought." He leaves Penelope, and he leaves the government of Ithaca to his
bureaucratically-minded  son Telemachus. The last lines of the poem, the
leave-taking, are most stirring:

Come, my friends

"Tis not too late to seek a newer world.

Push off, and sitting well in order smite

The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths

Of all the western stars, until I die.

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Though much is taken, much abides,

And though we are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are;

One equal temper of heroic hearts

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will

To strive to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Yes, I know -- the diction is a little antiquated and artificial, the urge to
get away a trifle too vehement. But nevertheless I'm moved by the resilience,
the perserverance. Though tear-inducing, the poem is anything but lachrymose.
And it's accepting: "that which we are, we are."

It's lately become the fashion to interpret "Ulysses" as a poem about
capitalism and imperialism. In this reading, Ulysses is just another white male,
off to conquer and colonialize The Alien Other. Or to see it as a poem about
male priviliege: he's a bad husband, abandoning the family. Or to conceive
the poem as a structure of ironies, in which Ulysses doesn't realize that he
undermines his own suppositions. There's a tad of truth in these arguments, as
there always is, because Tennyson was caught up in a Victorian striving that he
didn't fully or consciously assimilate. But frankly, I feel sorry for readers
who can't hear the verve and excitement in Ulysses's expansive view of things.

Moreover, it turns out that Tennyson was absolutely correct to proclaim
that there is a time in life when "not to yield" is an act of daily heroism.

Source: 2012/03/libraries-in-my-life

Title: Libraries in My Life
Date: March 16, 2012

I can't remember a time when I wasn't at home in a library. Although very much
a schoolyard urchin, passionate about baseball, trading cards and punchball (or
any kind of game played with a spaldeen), I rarely failed my weekly trip to the
storefront Avenue J branch of the BPL, where there were cases upon half-height
cases of juvenile and later "young adult" books. I read like a hungry larva,
without direction or discrimination. A few years later, when I reached Erasmus
Hall, my after-school employment was to shelve books at 75 cents an hour at
the BPL branch at McDonald Avenue (accumulating the $900 which paid my full
first- year tuition at Cornell). I not only mastered the Dewey Decimal System
but also absorbed everything that the library had to offer in the 612.6 area
of knowledge. At college, I was dazzled by McGraw, my first real library. In
my senior year, I was granted a stack pass, and therefore was able to waste
many hours not only in aimless browsing, but also lolling in long by-passed and
superseded libraries-within-the-library. I doubt that those most pleasant out-
of-the-way nineteenth-century nooks and corners survived modernization, more's
the pity. Later, in Cambridge, it was first Widener (where genuine incunabula
sat unprotected on the shelves), then Houghton, my first experience with rare
books, which, I discovered, are to be savored not only with the eyes, but with
the fingertips and the nose. Thence to Colorado, where, without the resources
of a major library, I dutifully read STC books on microfilm -- which made me
queasy, or on microfiche -- which produced genuine nausea. In 1976-77, I spent
one day a week at the British Library, studying sometimes in the old circular
reading room, where on downpour days buckets were distributed around the room
to deal with the leaks, and at other times in the North Library, where I read
big hunks of the perpetually exciting Thomason Tracts. In the early 80s, I
was able to enjoy the Huntington in San Marino, where the highlight of the
day was lunchtime among the exotic cacti and succulents. Later, at the Folger
Shakespeare Library in Washington, I found not only an unequalled trove of books
and mss., but also camaraderie with similarly-obsessed specialists. There was
always someone who could answer the obscurest of questions, and there were even
a few times when I was able to return the favor. At a cafeteria lunch, once, I
asked (faux-naively) "what do we do with the orts?" and everyone at the table
knew exactly what I meant -- orts the word that Shakespeare used in Troilus and
Cressida to refer to the uneaten portions of a meal.

Now I've come full circle and the Boulder Public is my three-times-a-week
destination. Not great holdings, but through the miracle of an efficient
interlibrary loan system, and supplemented by googlebooks and other electronic
resources, I can find enough to satisfy my unsteady, dilettante brain.

Source: 2012/03/downton-abbey

Title: Seventeen Hours of Downton Abbey
Date: March 18, 2012

I've now sometimes zoomed but sometimes plodded through seventeen hours of
Downton Abbey. The series is lovely to look at but also at various times
lugubrious, false, and shamelessly gimmicky -- but apparently I'm easily
seduced. Let me confess: I fell for it, mostly, but always against my better
judgment. Let's face it, the primitive parts of my brain simply overwhelmed
my higher critical faculties. I laughed and cried, even when I knew that I was
being cheated and manipulated.

My favorite parts: Mr. Pamuk and his Nelson Rockefeller departure ("he came,
and went)," which took me totally by surprise, as did Anna's and Lady Grantham's
resourceful disposal of the corpse. Lady Sybil as a nurse, in part because
she was doing useful work for the first time in her pampered life, and in
part because she looked so fetching in the uniform. My favorite performers --
Maggie Smith, reprising her role in Gosford Park (a much superior great house
fiction), and Mr Carson's eyebrows, perpetually raised in shock at modern
shenanigans.

The series is pure, undiluted soap. It is also, as they used to say
in Variety, a "costumer." Query -- would I have spent seventeen hours
watching a television program set in a mansion in Dubuque, Iowa, in 2012 in
which a soldier returns paralyzed from the wars and miraculously regains his
mobility, where terrible culinary disasters occur because the cook almost goes
blind, where granny shows her goodwill by losing a flower show, in which the
family is traumatized when a daughter runs off with the chauffeur, or where a
presumably innocent servant is sentenced to death for the murder of his wayward
wife. I don't think so. I would have said, "cornball soap opera" and clicked
back to the NBA. Or to the advertisements for zirconite jewelry. And yet I went
on. And on. And continued on even after Downton Abbey not only jumped the shark
but vaulted the great white whale, Moby Dick himself, when it introduced into
the plot a bout of supposed amnesia. Amnesia! Is there anything soapier?

Or perhaps my reluctant fascination proves that the traditional formulas
retain their power. Here's a formula of comedy: "artificial difficulties
overcome." In Downton Abbey, Lady Mary and Matthew are destined for one
another, and every viewer knows it, even as steaming piles of artificial
difficulties are strewn and heaped in their path. Shakespeare could slice
through the impediments in two hours traffic on the stage, but here it's
seventeen anguished hours until heir and heiress finally figure it out. And
here's another formula of comedy: always bring it to conclusion with a feast
and a dance. They did, and, sucker that I am, I was elated. Even though I saw
the scam coming a mile down the o-so- picturesque road

Source: 2012/03/foody

Title: Wrapped in Caul Fat?  Don't Tell Me!
Date: March 19, 2012

Our peaceful town, not long ago provincial and off-the-track, has now become
molto trendy. Only a generation ago, we were bland, undistinguished, white-
bread; and now we're America's happiest city, America's slimmest city, America's
healthiest city, and, just recently, America's foodiest city.

I'm not the slimmest, nor the happiest, nor the healthiest, so It's embarrassing
for me to live where I fall so far below the standard. When I'm melancholy, I
feel as though I'm a traitor to the common good. And I confess that never even
heard the word "foody" until I read that we were now "foodiest."

I don't usually frequent the expensive new restaurants -- they're too exotic
for my mac-and-cheese palate. But I was taken to one of our fanciest new places
recently and listened in at a conversation between patrons and waiter at the
next table. I transcribe it exactly as it occurred. Honest to Pete.

Patron A:  "I think I'll start with the julienned watermelon radish. Is that
served with tzitziki?"-

Waiter:  "Just a dollop."

Patron B:  "I'll have the hedgehog mushrooms with panko crumbs. Are your
bulgogi sliders marinated or grilled?"

Waiter:  "Marinated, then lightly grilled. Then dusted with sudachi zest."

Patron: A:  "I think I'll also have the clear gel of agar and turnip puree with
chestnut crumbs. Are your chestnut crumbs domestic or foreign?"

Waiter:  "I believe they're Italian."

Patron B:  "I see that you have coconut tofu cream. Do you serve that
separately, or with the grapefruit curd marscapone?"

Waiter:  "I believe that the chef likes to combine it with the date marmalade
and harissa."

Patron A:  "For a main dish, I'll have the lamb en crepinette. To Patron B
(aside whispering):  "Roasted in caul fat."

Patron B (aside, annoyed):  "I know that. (To the waiter):  I think I'll go
with the squid ink and hot sesame oil soup."

Waiter:  "Excellent choice, madam."

Patron B:  "And then the braised rabbit with lobster knuckles and pil-pil dill.
Is your pil-pil wild or domestic?'

Waiter:  "Wild, certainly."

Patron B:  "And along with that, I'd like a side of pickled ramps and fermented
garlic, with a poached duck egg."

Patron A: "Waiter, may I change my mind. I think I'd prefer the singed octopus
in almond puree. Or maybe the snails with liquified parsley, or just something
simple, like sea urchin served over discs of scallop with a hamachi and farro
salad."

Patron B: "I think I'll change my order as well. I think I'll go with the
espelettes in pistachio yogurt sauce. Or the veal sweetbreads with sheepmilk
dumplings. Or the okroshka with quail eggs."

The conversation went on like this for ever and ever, and I began to feel myself
out of place, so I left and went up to Marie's in North Boulder and ordered
a hamburger en bun with raw oignon and an old favorite of mine, pomme frites
francaises avec sauce de tomate. It was mighty satisfying.

Source: 2012/03/look-at-me

Title: "Look at Me."
Date: March 28, 2012

On our pleasant, prosperous downtown mall, we have entertainers and buskers
of many stripes --everyone  from fire-eaters, magicians, and left-behind 50s
folkie guitarists to Zip Code Man. Some are excellent (the occasional string
quartet or visiting bluegrass band) and some are horrible (the bam-bam-bam
drummers and the pathetic didgedoorists.

We also have a contortionist, whom I personally find difficult to watch.

To me, the contortionist is not so much an entertainer as he is an allegory of
the human condition. He's what they used to call in earlier centuries an emblem.

While other performers try to attract an audience by subtlety and guile, our
contortionist merely shouts, "Look at me. Everybody, look at me" -- which I
take as a metaphor or icon or emblem. When he calls out, "Look at me," he's
simply doing what the rest of us want to do but don't have the courage to do:
call attention to ourselves, ask for praise. We're all saying, "Look at me,"
but, becaused we're civilized and mannerly beings, we strive to do so by being
indirect or ironic or clever.  Not the contortionist. He's honest about himself
and about the true, elemental state of mankind. He shouts, "Look at me" -- and
then he ties himself into knots.

Source: 2012/03/why-are-dog-owners-such-scofflaws

Title: Why are Dog Owners Such Scofflaws?
Date: March 30, 2012

Why are dog owners such horrid scofflaws?  According to our local police-lady,
there are fifty-three signs distributed around the downtown mall that either
say, in clear language, No Pets, or else picture a dog bisected with a diagonal
line. But it's impossible to take a walk without encountering two or three or
half a dozen people obliviously or defiantly parading Rover or Spot.

I think it's reasonable to assume that the owners can read, or if "No Pets" is
too difficult to construe, that they could interpret the icons. It's possible
that they're just unobservant, and don't notice the signs, but I suspect not.
The signs are hard to miss.

I suspect that the dog people just assume that they're above the law. They love
their pooch, love its barking, love its scat, love the way it playfully lunges
at small children, and they can't imagine that anyone in the world would take
exception to their prerogative.

It's the same on the mountain trails. Just because the sign says, All Dogs Must
Be On Leash, doesn't mean that the law applies to Me.

I once said to a dog owner who was walking his big dogs off-leash, "You know
that you're breaking the law." He barked at me: "Get a life." Another time a
bulldog attacked me on the street, and I was warding him off with my briefcase
when the owner called him back. I said, "Dogs are supposed to be on leash." He
said, "What are you, the dog warden?" A friend was knocked off her bicycle by
a large, aggressive dog. The owner, who should have knelt on ground glass in
apology, said only, "He doesn't like bicycles."

And many other such stories, but you get my point.

Source: 2012/04/book-report-the-art-of-fielding

Title: Book Report:  Chad Harbach's The Art of Fielding
Date: April 05, 2012

I'm sure that I once before read a book called The Art of Fielding, perhaps
in the 1960s, but it wasn't a baseball novel; it was a old-fashioned critical
monograph about Henry Fielding, the author of Shamela, Joseph Andrews, Tom
Jones, Amelia, and Jonathan Wild. (For what it's worth, Chad Harbach, who
contributed this year's The Art of Fielding, though a skillful plotter, doesn't
have the range or the release or the depth to play in Henry F's league.)

I generally stay away from big-selling first novels. I prefer to let them
marinate for a decade or two, check out their staying power, before I make an
eight-hour commitment (not counting naps) to a 400-pager. It's an economy of my
own: there are too many great old things that I haven't gotten around to yet.
But I must say that Harbach's Fielding, highly recommended by friends, kept me
engaged right down to the last sentence. Plot, plot, plot, is the formula, and
there were enough surprises and twists in the story to keep even a skeptic like
myself turning pages enthusiastically. It's a hybrid novel, a genre-crosser,
with baseball books and academic novels (and a touch of Death in Venice) in its
bloodline.

What's best, beside the surprises in the plotting? The characters, most of
whom defy or challenge stereotypes, what a blessing. What's worst? The style:
not a memorable sentence or turn of phrase in the entire bland (ninth-grade
vocabulary, straight-ahead syntax) book. Most disappointing: the killing off
of an important character just when his situation becomes interesting and
troubling. Harbach, in my opinion, punts just  when he should have pulled the
goalie and swung for the fences.

Source: 2012/04/amnesia-on-film-somewhere-in-the-night-1946

Title: Amnesia on Film: Somewhere in the Night (1946)
Date: April 06, 2012

Somewhere in the Night is an early Joseph Mankiewicz film noir with amnesia at
its center. George Taylor, an injured ex-Marine played monochromatically by John
Hodiak, returns from the South Pacific not knowing who he is are what he was
--  except that he has a clue that he was on the shady side of the law. There's
an involuted, convoluted and confusing plot that pushes all the noirish buttons:
a chanteuse with a heart of gold and also a dame who's nothing but trouble, a
missing briefcase stuffed with 2 million bucks, a funny farm where a witness
to murder is imprisoned, a cynical police lieutenant, and even a polysyllabic
European gangster who derives from both Sidney Greenstreet and Peter Lorre.
Everything is recycled, and so is the amnesia. George Taylor might  just as
well have been a returning veteran with a perfect memory, or been a gumshoe,
or a shamus and the film would have been just as good (or just as bad). It's
surprising that when the money is recovered and the villains are punished,
George gets the girl but, contrary to precedent, doesn't recover his memory. The
film simply forgets his affliction and leaves him hanging. Perhaps it's romantic
-- after all, if you win the love of the lady, what does memory matter?  Or
perhaps the amnesia is so trivial, so perfunctory, so much a gimmick, that it
can be shunted aside.

Although not a good flim, it's partially redeemed by Richard Conte's turn as a
smarmy nightclub owner, Sheldon Leonard's two minutes as a dumb cuckold, and
Harry Morgan's thirty seconds as a bath attendant. Those guys are genuine pros.

More on movie amnesia: Spellbound, Random Harvest, Shattered, Blind Horizon
The Bourne Identity The Crooked Way

Source: 2012/04/what-lola-remembered-from-last-summer

Title: What Lola Remembered from Last Summer
Date: April 07, 2012

It was a long, luxurious summer, with gardens and apple cider and swimming and
berry-picking and walks in the woods and cousins and all sorts of games.

All much enjoyed by Lola, who is now approaching two and a half years old.

"So, Lola, what do your remember about last summer in Vermont?"

Lola, after a pensive moment: "Sheep and horses poop on the grass."

Source: 2012/04/where-sonia-slept

Title: Where Sonia Slept
Date: April 15, 2012

In 1904, at the age of 20, my grandmother Sonia Chafetz Uzilewski (later Green)
disembarked at Ellis Island. Because of her age, and because she lived within
an immigrant community, she never acquired much English, and as a result my
conversations with her were strictly utilitarian. I was curious about the old
country (White Russia, now Belarus) but she spoke little about it and what she
did say was difficult for me to construe. Two pieces of information about her
childhood have stayed with me: first, that in the old country, they brought the
cow into the house in the winter "to keep warm" and secondly, that, as a girl,
she "slept over the fireplace."

I was puzzled. All I could imagine was a house like my own pleasant childhood
home, but with a cow on the carpet and a young lady perched precariously on the
narrow mantle over the fireplace (if we had had a fireplace, which we didn't).
Frankly, I couldn't make much sense out of her story.

It wasn't until I happened to find myself in benighted Lithuania in 2003 that
I figured out the cow-in-the-living-room puzzle. I visited one of those large
open-air museums which are not uncommon in eastern Europe, in which traditional
peasant dwellings, along with churches, mills, foundries, etc. have been 
rescued and sprinkled around a landscape. At such sites, a very common form of
low-end dwelling consists of a barn or animal shelter on the dirt ground floor,
with a wooden second floor for human habitation erected just above. I believe
that when grandma said that they brought the cow into the house, she meant that
they stabled the cow down below, and that some of the heat from the animal
disseminated into the living quarters -- as would, incidentally, some of its
pungent effluvia.

So one problem was solved, but the mantle-sleeping remained a mystery. However,
just this past week the New Yorker featured an essay on traditional Russian
cooking in which there was a paragraph on a long-ago-and-far-away kind of stove.
Here's the pertinent section.

"A traditional Russian kitchen starts with a pech, a huge brick oven with many
winding vents designed to retain the heat from a wood fire. A pech was once
the centerpiece of traditional peasant homes; it took up about a quarter of
the available living space. It heated and ventilated the house, it dried food;
children and the elderly slept on ledges built into it."

"Children and the elderly slept on ledges built into it." Mystery solved!

Sonia told me that she slept over the fire, which I interpreted as a fireplace.
But I was wrong. She slept over the stove. For all I know, she might even have
used the world pech, which I couldn't possibly have translated or understood.

Now I know, that like other children at the very bottom of the nineteenth-
century Russian social ladder, she slept on a ledge built into a pech, with the
cow lowing just a few feet below her.

Need I mention once again how glad I am that she decided to pull up stakes and
head for new world.

More on Sonia Green: here.

Source: 2012/04/la-traviata-updated

Title: La Traviata "Updated"
Date: April 16, 2012

I prefer to hear rather than to see grand opera. The cd and the radio are my
preferred media. Stay at home, sit in a comfortable chair, listen carefully, be
ravished.

When you go to the opera, you re-discover that the plot is all silliness, the
characters incomprehensible, and the intermissions interminable.

Nevertheless, there I was, yesterday, at the Met's HD screening of Verdi's
La Traviata, the most melodic and romantic of operas. The orchestra and the
singing were, as expected, glorious. But the staging was all strained novelty
and misguided cleverness.

Can there be an opera less in need of cross-dressing and a gay subtext that La
Traviata?  Why would anyone want to clothe both the male and female choristers
in severe, gray, men's business suits?  If the story is all about boy-girl
romance and sexual intensity and sexual pleasure, why not encourage the men
and gaily-dressed women to dance and flirt and try to get together after the
downright way of generation?

Opera, when I take the trouble to see it, should be as pleasing to my eye as it
is rewarding to my ear.

But this time, officers of the Metropolitan Opera, I was forced to shut my eyes,
and just listen. It was just like staying at home, except that the chair was
less comfortable.

Addendum:  today I read an interview in the April 26 NYRB with the tenor Jonas
Kaufmann. Here's an excerpt:

"You see, the conductor believes that the audience is only coming to hear
the orchestra and is not interested in the story, the sets, the singers. The
director believes it's an all visual thing. So there is this constant fight over
what each person believes is the most  important part. I've seen semi-staged or
concert performances of operas that were more thrilling than staged ones. Why?
Because it's better to have nothing than to have something so disturbing that it
distracts you from enjoying the music and that doesn't allow the music to create
its magic."

Exactly my point.

Source: 2012/04/amnesia-on-film-clean-slate-1994

Title: Amnesia on Film: Clean Slate (1994)
Date: April 17, 2012

I imagine that the "pitch" went something like this:

"Ok, we have the star, Dana Carvey, who's hot right now. He's a funny man. He's
going to play a detective who watches The Maltese Falcon on the tv and thinks
he's Humphrey Bogart. And there's a coin that's worth seven million dollars and
a bunch of guys are after it. But here's the gimmick. Carvey has amnesia and he
doesn't know that he has the coin. And then the real kicker -- not only does he
have amnesia, but he has a kind of amnesia that starts over every time he goes
to sleep, so he doesn't even know what he did yesterday.. Ain't that terrific?"

Well, it must have been terrific, because someone decided to put some money into
the film, and someone managed to persuade James Earl Jones and Michael Gambon to
take supporting roles in this bird-brained turkey.

Did anyone say, "Does amnesia work that way? Is there a kind of amnesia that
begins again every morning."

If they did, I know what the answer would have been. "Who cares? This is not
real amnesia, it's movie amnesia"  --which is, once again, the most malleable
of maladies.

So here's a new genre, the amnesiac-gumshoe farce. A small, unpromising genre.

It's an unfunny movie that hovers between D (for dumb) minus and F (phony). I
doubt anyone's ever heard of it, except for hardcore amnesia fans. And even they
were disappointed.

Source: 2012/04/bringing-ourselves-up-to-date-on-the-subject-of-abkhazian-consonants

Title: Bringing Ourselves Up to Date on the Subject of Abkhazian Consonants
Date: April 20, 2012

Abkhazian has fifty-eight consonants. By contrast, English, a language which
is not consonant-poor, has twenty-three: the ones for which there are the
alphabetic letters such as b, d, f, etc. plus sh, ch, dz, ng, the occasional
trilled r, and the two sounds that are indicated by th (voiced in 'soothe' and
unvoiced in 'sooth'). Twenty-three consonants can make an infinite number of
words; fifty-eight consonants are more than a mouthful. How can the human speech
apparatus produce so many distinguishable sounds?  "By utilizing all points of
articulation from the lips back to the larynx," says an Abhakazian linguist, and
"by associating with plain consonants such secondary features as labialization,
palatalisation, and pharyngalisation." More simply, everywhere that tongue,
lips, teeth, palate, or throat can either stop the flow of air or allow air to
pass through must be put into play. Moreover, If I understand correctly, a sound
made by vibrating, for instance, the area of the uvular might occur in both
labialized (i.e. rounded lips) and unlabialized variants.

I'm guessing that Abkhazian would be formidably difficult to understand,
especially for those who are acquainted only with Indo-European languages.

Abkhazian is one of the indigenous North West Caucasian languages, distantly
related to Circassian and the now extinct Ubykh. It may be descended from
Hattic, which may have been spoken in the empire of the Hittites. There are
something like a million Abkhazian speakers, half in Abkhazia itself, a country
that borders the Black Sea to the northwest of Georgia, and half in Turkey and
other locations in the Abkhazian diaspora. Written language came only in the
mid-nineteenth century to the wild Caucasus. Abkhazians have been described as
20% Muslim, 80% Christian, and 100% pagan, their religion "a peculiar mosaic of
fragments of religious beliefs" in which "Christian ceremonies, Muslim rites,
and pagan observances are so closely interwoven that it seems impossible to
separate them."

Though the Abkhazian consonant system is daunting, it's a relief to learn that
the language uses only one vowel - ah - and also that both the extinct Ubykh and
a still existing dialect of Abkhazian named Bzyp (pronunciation??) employed "a
minimum of eighty consonants." Is eighty the record?

Source: 2012/04/book-report-some-hours-by-edward-st-aubyn

Title: Book Report:  "Some Hours" by Edward St. Aubyn
Date: April 25, 2012

I've now read the first three of the quintet of the much-praised Patrick Melrose
novels by Edward St. Aubyn, and that's all I'm going to read. It's been a long
time since I've encountered anything so nasty.  Is there a word for a place in
which every single individual is evil, snobbish, vindictive, petty, and cruel.
Kakatopia, perhaps. In St. Aubyn's world, Iago would have been an innocent. True
enough that he was jealous, obsessed, manipulative and murderous, but I doubt
that even Iago would have anally penetrated his five-year-old son.

And moreover: if I were a handsome, rich young woman (or a plain poor one) and
my date asked me to get down on all fours and eat some squashed figs off the
patio floor without benefit of fork or knife, I would run away screaming, slam
the door, and let a few years lapse before resuming social activity. So, I hope,
would everywoman. In the world of St. Aubyn's fiction, reader, she marries him,
and the couple live miserably ever after.

The dilemma that's posed by these novels is that in addition to being richly
kakatopic, they're also amusing, clever, and arch, with dialogue that might have
been written by a jaded Oscar Wilde. So I laughed -- but whenever I laughed I
felt dirty and complicit.

So no more St. Aubyn for me. These novels transcend satire and transmute into
ugly spewing. Not for me, thanks.

Source: 2012/05/an-omitted-event-

Title: A Suppressed Event
Date: May 03, 2012

I've been reading about the early colonization of New York city, a subject that
I've not approached since my days in elementary school in the 1950s, where, in
retrospect, it seemed that we went over the ground quite regularly -- Henry
Hudson, the purchase of Manhattan Island, New Amsterdam, Peter Stuyvesant, and
the English acquisition of the Dutch colonies. As we learned it, it was a sunny
story, untroubled and inevitable -- a path leading from pleasant but primitive
beginnings to its inevitable culmination in the Greatest City in the Greatest
Country on earth. There were large helpings of nationalism and triumphalism --
attitudes that I've come to loathe -- along with the insistence that America was
chosen among all the nations for peace and tolerance.

It appears, however, that there are events recounted in Russell Shorto's The
Island at the Center of the World (New York, 2004) that, if they had been
mentioned, might have diluted our tadpole triumphalism. Kieft's War, for
example, was never discussed.

Willem Kieft was one of the Dutch governors of the new colony, and he was a
pioneer in genocidal racism. A small group of indians had camped at Corlaer's
Hook (now the Lower East Side) and a larger group had settled near what is
now Jersey City in New Jersey. The Indians (Wickquassgeck and Tappan) sought
sanctuary from the Dutch against the Mohawks, to whom they had fallen behind in
their tribute payments. Kieft, for reasons of his own, launched an unprovoked
attack. According to a contemporary chronicler, "infants were torn from their
mother's breasts, and hacked to pieces in the presence of their parents, and the
pieces thrown into the fire and in the water, and other sucklings, being bound
to small boards, were cut, stuck,and pierced and miserably massacred in a manner
to move a heart of stone. Some were thrown into the river, and when the fathers
and mothers endeavored to save them, the soldiers would not let them come on
land but made both parents and children drown.... Some came to our people in the
country with their hands, some with their legs cut off, and some holding their
entrails in their arms....  After this exploit, the soldiers were were rewarded
for their service, and Director Kieft thanked them."

Such atrocities (there were many others) were omitted from the P. S. 217
curriculum.

When I read these stories, I feel as though I was tricked. I'm indignant and
angry.

It's all part of a grand deception in which every child is indoctrinated with
the idea that his own group is wiser, kinder, and better than the others.

If our great country were truly superior, we would have shown it by telling the
truth, the whole truth, not a purged and sanitized half-truth.

Source: 2012/05/reposted-the-sculpin-slimy-or-mottled

Title: Reposted:  The Sculpin, Slimy or Mottled?
Date: May 08, 2012

Knowing little of the finny tribe, I borrowed the Bradford Public Library's
copy of Langdon's introductory Fishes of Vermont (2006). It's an excellent,
informative, helpful guide. With Langdon's help, I can now declare that it's
undeniably the brown bullhead, a species of catfish, that has been multiplying
in our pond. The bullhead, a villainous omnivore, is one of the causes of the
steep decline of our population of frogs. The big, plug-ugly, bebarbelled brute
gobbles frog-egg globules.

Readers of this blague will not be astonished to learn that Dr. M .has fallen
deeply in love with fish names. Take the brown bullhead, for example. It's
also known by such evocative and lunatic denominations as the horned pout, the
mudcat, and the minister. Minister?  To whom, or under what circumstances,
would a brown bullhead minister?

My favorite Vermont fish, nomenclature-wise, is the slimy sculpin, also
performing under such titles as the blob, the chucklehead, the rock cusk, the
stargazer, and the cockatouch. The slimy sculpin should not be confused with its
near cousin, the mottled sculpin -- which can also be addressed as the slowfish
or gudgeon.

Many of the common Vermont fishes have lost their colorful historic names. The
bowfin was once called the John A. Gindle, the stonecat was the doogler, the
lake trout was the togue or longue, the burbot was variously ling or lawyer
(lawyer? minister? why not accountant? or dentist?), the quillback was the
buffalo, and the gar was the needlenose. On the other hand, the blandly-named
pond perch of olden days is trending in the reverse direction: it's now called
the pumpkinseed -- a name which seems curiously vegetarian for a predatory
denizen of the deep.

If I had known that there was a fish called the cisco (known on jolly days as
the tollibee and on prosaic days as the sand herring), I would long ago have
promoted Galen Cisco to my all-time-great Baseball-Fish Team, adding him to such
piscine luminaries as Catfish Hunter, Dizzy Trout, Chico Salmon, Sid Bream,
Bobby Sturgeon, Art "Red" Herring, and Shad Roe.

No Sculpins in MLB that I can recall, but In a more poetic universe, "Slimy"
Sculpin would have been a spitball pitcher, or perhaps even a team owner.

Source: 2012/05/senior-bowl

Title: Senior Bowl
Date: May 08, 2012

I was talking on the telephone with a fan of the Washington Nationals and for
some reason neither of us could recall the name of the lanky, scraggly-bearded
shaggy-haired high-salaried power-hitting right fielder who once played for the
Phillies and had a hard time last season but seemed to be starting out well this
year, and whose grandfather played shortstop for the Pirates fifty year or so
years ago.

Inasmuch as I once had near-perfect recall of such trivia, I was frustrated by
the failure of memory. But I decided that this time I wasn't going to google
the Nationals' roster but instead was going to force myself to cough up that
name, no matter how many polysaccharides had clogged my synaptic pathways. I
set my search memory program on full blast, and after about 45 minutes, while
I was scrubbing the sink, out popped the moniker. I called the Washington fan
and whispered into the telephone, triumphantly, these three syllables: Jay Son
Werth.

How does the human brain do that? You can't bring up a word or phrase, and then,
an hour or a day later, there it is! Tiny chemical processes or electrical
impulses chase from synapse to synapse until they just happen to happen upon
the neuron or neurons where "Jayson Werth" is stored? Really? Hard to fathom.
However it's accomplished, it's superbly miraculous.

But o-so-slow compared to the instant recall of my golden olden days.

So now I have this idea for a TV game show, modeled after College Quiz Bowl,
but called Senior Bowl. The format: when a question is asked, competitors start
the clock, which can run for, let's say, a couple of days. And also start the
videotape machine. Competitors go about their business and the first person with
the correct answer wins the round. When the tape is carefully and dramatically
edited, it's perfect reality TV for oldsters.

Announcer: "Congratulations to prizewinner Vivian de St. Vrain, who was able to
correctly identify the singer of "Duke of Earl" in only 17 hours, 12 minutes,
and 43 seconds!"

A major breakthrough in golden-years tv.

And by the way, I can now proclaim to all the waiting world that the name of
Jayson Werth's shortstop grandfather is -- "Ducky" Schofield.

Source: 2012/05/lord-of-the-flies-again

Title: Lord of the Flies;  a 1950s Allegory
Date: May 10, 2012

In my daughter's basement I found a dried-up, stained, pages-hanging-out
1959 paperback edition of William Golding's Lord of the Flies. On the cover:
"Copyright 1954." "Over 4,450,000 copies in print." "Sixty-second impression."
"Now Available For Students And Teachers: the Casebook Edition containing the
full text of the novel, critical essays, notes, and bibliography." Lord of
the Flies leaped into public prominence in the mid-1950s and quickly became a
classroom staple. A quick googling found half a dozen websites designed to help
high school students generate reports on the novel's "symbolism," etc.

I didn't like Lord of the Flies when I read it back then and it's become less
likable-- and less worthy of respect-- over the last half-century. It's a
variation on Robinson Crusoe, except that this time a score of boys land (how?
and not a one of them injured!!) on an uninhabited island in the Pacific. They
very quickly degenerate into savages, murder two of their own number, and are
hunting down the last boy who possesses a modicum of civility when a naval
officer (nauta ex machina?) arrives to take command. Lord of the Flies is a
dyspeptic, dystopian novel; it's also, according to the websites, a story of the
contest between civilization and barbarism and, -- guess what? -- it's barbarism
by a country mile.

Robinson Crusoe himself was no perfect model of psychological health, but
Defoe's story has been admired for centuries (it's the most reprinted novel in
history) at least in part because it asserts that a resourceful human being
can triumph over a bad situation. Crusoe reads his Bible, keeps a calendar and
a diary, domesticates sheep, develops a working agricultural system, learns
pottery, carpentry and other crafts, and builds himself both a summer and a
winter domicile. Lord of the Flies, on the contrary, is entirely pessimistic
about human capabilities: its flat, bookless, unskilled characters devolve
rapidly into war-painted, violent tribesmen. Robinson Crusoe embodied Age of
Reason optimism; Lord of the Flies is a post-Nazi novel in which there is no
culture, government is nothing more than incipient dictatorship, and religion
equals cruel scapegoating.

Why was it imagined that Lord of the Flies had something of value to say about
about human nature?  It's a sure thing that if Golding had written a novel
in which an isolated group of people behave like reborn Crusoes and work
cooperatively to tame the forest and create a communal utopia, he would have
been derided as a simpleton. No room in the Cold War inn or on the best-seller
lists or in high school curricula for optimism!

Golding arranges it so that the descent into barbarism appears to be not
circumstantial but inevitable. He banishes from his island women and therefore
any need for reciprocity in social institutions. (Violence without heterosexual
sex--just what's needed in the high school classroom!). Moreover, the boys
who land on the island are not a representative set of human beings: they're
English public school children who've already internalized poisonous notions of
hierarchy, hazing, power and class. When, at the outset, they choose a chief,
they're really selecting a head boy for whom lesser creatures will "fag." Of the
island's inhabitants, the only one with more brain than earwax is the physically
repulsive Piggy, while the only boy whose instincts are democratic is slow,
tongue-tied, and indecisive. Meanwhile, Jack, to whom Golding grants leadership
abilities, is a slick soulless demagogue. The author may appear to be impartial,
but in fact he's stacked the deck so that the emergence of proto-fascism appears
"natural." Golding, both a student and a teacher in English public schools,
seems to think that adolescents of his own circle somehow represent common
humanity. His analysis of culture is therefore as shallow as a parking-lot
puddle. And because it's so shallow, the novel is a treasure-trove for the
kind of teaching where the identification of "symbols" substitutes for genuine
thought, or emotion, or aesthetic revelation. It's a convenient opportunity
-- a casebook -- for the kind of bad reading that has damaged generations of
students.

Golding's island abounds not in intelligence but in absurdities. Is it credible
that three or four pre-adolescent boys armed only with sharpened sticks could
a) confront a wild boar and b) actually bring down a mature sow, and that the
sow would lie still, or allow herself to be held to the ground while one of
the boys repeatedly stabs and eventually kills the animal with a penknife, and
c) that the same boys, using no other tools than the single penknife, could
quickly skin, butcher and behead the sow, and then d) cut and drive into the
ground a post stout enough on which to mount that head?  Or e) that a few boys
could dislodge and push a rock that is "as big as a tank." Or that f) there
could exist an uninhabited Pacific atoll so small that a group of boys could
systematically search every inch of it like beaters on a hunt, but yet so large
that, without experiencing much in the way of rain, it could have streams and
pools of fresh water and, in addition, g) an inexhaustible supply of wild pigs
(indigenous? feral?). If Lord of the Flies is an allegory, then perhaps such
howlers don't matter. Yet even an allegory should not cause a reader to guffaw
at inappropriate moments.

Source: 2012/05/vegetable-love

Title: Vegetable Love
Date: May 12, 2012

As a rule, I'm as fickle as the legendary varying flag, but just now I have made
a firm unwavering commitment. My absolutely most favorite line of poetry -- are
you ready now, readers -- is (drumroll)l: "If you really want my peaches, gotta
shake my tree."

Is that poetry or what? It's teasingly inexplicit yet at the same time very,
very suggestive.

I first encountered the line in a mid-1950s doo-wopper by The Clovers (later
famous for "Love Potion Number Nine") called "Lovey Dovey."

Well, you're the cutest thing that I did ever seeI really love your peaches,
want to shake your tree. Lovey dovey, lovey dovey all the timeLovey dovey, I
can't get you out of my mind.

The line's subversive sexuality penetrated even our twin-bed, Eisenhower-era,
Ozzie-and-Harriet world.

Peaches/trees has a complicated history. Wikipedia tracks it to a song composed
by Irving Berlin in May 1914: “If you don't want my peaches/ You'd better stop
shaking my tree,” but I'd be willing to bet the orchard that Irving did not
invent but borrowed the line, probably from something bluesy. Berlin's peaches
warn us off, but Bessie Smith's 1923 peaches are both active and abundant: "If
you don't like my peaches then let my orchard be." Bessie was the kind of gal
whose peaches would be given away by the basketful. Blind Lemon Jefferson's 1929
peaches, on the other hand, are proprietary: ("you swore nobody’d pick your
fruit but me/ I found three kid men shaking down your peaches free"). Ah yes, we
must all be faithful to just a single source of fruit.

I'd wager that the peaches have appeared in fifty or a hundred songs in the last
century.

The line floats from song to song, but wherever it settles, it's always
suggestive of sexual desires and needs. Even when peaches are forbidden fruit,
they're also ripe and luscious oozers of juice. Shake that tree properly and
they fall into right into your mouth.

Andrew Marvell would have loved "If you really want my peaches, gotta shake my
tree."  Here's his witty mid-seventeenth century version of the trope. It's in
a stanza from his best poem, "The Garden."

What wondrous life is this I lead! Ripe apples drop about my head;The luscious
clusters of the vine Upon my mouth do crush their wine;The nectarine and curious
peach Into my hands themselves do reach;Stumbling on melons as I pass, Insnared
with flowers, I fall on grass.

Marvell's garden is not for strolling and smelling. It's a garden in which
the fruits attack the "speaker" in an active, science-fictiony way. No
nibbling here. Instead, "The luscious clusters of the vine,/Upon my mouth do
crush their wine." "Luscious clusters... crush" is one sensous mouth-filling
phrase. And those fine fruits, "the nectarine and curious (curious =s unusual,
not investigative) peach" require no shaking whatsoever. These fruits are
animatronic.

Marvell's "Garden" is as good a version of pomological love as Irving Berlin's
-- without even taking into account the brilliant and accomplished iambic
tetrameter couplets.

Source: 2012/05/amnesia-on-film-cowboys-and-aliens-2011

Title: Amnesia on Film: Cowboys & Aliens (2011)
Date: May 14, 2012

I imagine that the writers of Cowboys and Aliens had a grand old time inserting
into their screenplay as many as possible of both Westerns and sci-fi/horror
cliches. They did very well: there's a loner cowboy with cigarillo and fists of
steel, a domineering cattleman and his feckless son, a timid barkeep, a posse on
horseback tracking abducted relatives a la The Searchers, a band of Chiricuara
Apaches fighting for their own survival, innocent distressed maidens, etc.,
etc., and at the end, a hero riding off into the sunset. On the other side of
the ledger, computer graphic aliens resembling the velociraptors in Jurassic
Park (except for the slimy green blood) attacking us poor mortals, multiple
abductions, and o my gosh even a little boy hiding from a creepy creature in a
crevice in the rock, and then our intrepid James Bond-y macho hero sneaking into
the spaceship to free the captives and dynamite the mother ship, my o my what a
bounty.

And to these cliches, the unsatisfied writers added a bonus -- a dollop of movie
amnesia. Why not? Jake Lonergan awakes in the desert not knowing who he is,
why he is wounded, and without a clue as to why he has a futuristic bracelet
soldered to his wrist. Like most movie amnesiacs, he remains fully functional
and unimpaired. He's not the least bit agitated by his loss of memory. But then
comes a truly embarrassing, semi-racist moment. The Indians, who as everyone
knows are noble and in touch with the human soul in a way that we products of
western civilization can never be, treat his amnesia with a frothy brew (perhaps
mescaline, but who can tell?). Memory spontaneously returns; Jake remembers that
he escaped from the mother ship, knows where it has been parked, and also knows
about the secret entrance. And so to work.

Later on, the released abductees are all amnesiac, but they're cured instantly
(the movie is long enough) without Apache influence.

So now we can add alien abduction to the long list of precipitants of movie
amnesia.

This film could have been a gas except that its makers forgot about the comedy
that's inherent in the title and in the conception. Too bad. As it stands, it's
a solemn, noisy, elaborate, expensive, flimsy chimera.

At one point in the quest, the posse comes across an enormous structure that
looks like a paddle-wheeler right there in the middle of the desert. "There's no
river within five hundred miles that can handle that thing." But they continue
along, the boat is never mentioned again and plays no part in the story --
thereby proving that even screenwriters can suffer disabling bouts of amnesia.

Source: 2012/05/tumb

Title: A Tumbrilism Revival
Date: May 15, 2012

When rich people betray that they don't have the least clue how ordinary people
live, they might coin a "tumbrilism." The perfect tumbrilism is callous,
contemptuous, supercilious, insulting, and grotesquely ignorant.

The word "tumbrilism" seems to derive from tumbril, the cart that carried
victims to the guillotine during the French Revolution. The mother of all
tumbrilisms is Queen Marie Antoinette, who when told that the peasants had no
bread, is supposed to have replied, "qu'ils mangent de la brioche," usually
translated as  "let them eat cake." This classic trumbrilism derives from
Rousseau and was not assigned to Marie until a couple of generations after she
took her tumble.

Here are two good Congressional tumbrilisms: a) Fred Heinemann (R-North
Carolina): "When I see someone who is making anywhere from $300,000 to $750,000
a year, that's middle class." b) Congressman John Fleming (R, Louisiana): "The
amount that I have to reinvest in my business and feed my family is more like
$600,000 ... and so by the time I feed my family, I have maybe $400,000 left
over." And a gubernatorial tumbrilism: Paul LePage (R, Maine): "Maine's welfare
program is cannibalizing the rest of state government. To all you able-bodied
people out there: "Get off the couch and get yourself a job.'"

Here's a classic tumbrilism from the world of sports, courtesy of Jose Canseco,
who once had a ball bounce off his shoulder and into the stands for a home
run: "You know my life, this financial thing, is a very complicated issue.
Obviously, when you make all that money, people think, 'OK, let's assume it is
$35 million.' People have to understand that $35 million, you're paying the
government 41 percent. That leaves you with about $17 or $18 million, not even.
Then you're taking care of your whole family."

But the modern master of the tumbrilism is Mitt Romney, who, when asked about
his worth, replied, "It’s between $150 and about $200 some-odd million
dollars, I think that’s what the estimates are.”

Other priceless Romney tumbrilisms:

“I’m not concerned about the very poor. We have a safety net there."

"This feels good, being back in Michigan. You know, the trees are the right
height. The streets are just right. I like the fact that most of the cars I see
are Detroit-made automobiles. I drive a Mustang and a Chevy pick-up truck. Ann
drives a couple of Cadillacs, actually."

"I like being able to fire people who provide services to me."

"Even if you have a child 2 years of age, you need to go to work. And people
said, 'Well that's heartless.' And I said, 'No, no, I'm willing to spend more
giving day care to allow those parents to go back to work. It'll cost the state
more providing that daycare, but I want the individuals to have the dignity of
work.'"

Unlike the dubious provenance of "let them eat cake," these tumbrilisms, though
astonishingly naive and self-satisfied, are pure and genuine. Their Mittness is
well-witnessed.

Source: 2012/05/metamorphosis

Title: Starfish Metamorphosis
Date: May 22, 2012

I've been reading about the peculiar metamorphosis of the starfish, Luidia
sarsi, which eats shellfish and dwells in the muddy sediment of seashores from
Norway to the Mediterranean. Its diaphanous larvae are bilaterally symmetrical;
the adult form, with its five arms, is radially symmetrical, a most irregular
circumstance. Moreover, the adult emerges from the larva in a different way than
the butterfly from the caterpillar, where the structure dissolves and reforms.
The starfish develops from a cluster of cells lining the internal cavity of the
larva.""Here it grows and matures, an alien existence independent of the larval
body structures, axis, bilateral symmetry, and form, imbued with a complete
disregard for every embodiment of its larval stage."  Eventually, the starfish
emerges, and, most oddly, the larva continues on its way "swimming the pelagic
waters and grazing on its vegetarian diet of algae". Essentially, the starfish
develops from what might be called stem cells that are carried within the larva.
It's all very alien, or perhaps even Alien.

The theory presented in Frank Ryan's The Mysteries of Metamorphosis (White
River Junction, 2011) is that at one time the larva and the starfish were two
different creatures (from two different phyla). Somewhere in the dark backward
and abyss of time, sperm from the one creature encountered an egg of the other
(both creatures eject enormous amounts of reproductive material into the sea)
and cross-phyletic cross-fertilization occurred and the resultant chimera
prospered.

Biologists resist the hypothesis because of the challenge it poses to the
standard view of the evolutionary branching of life. I'm in no position to judge
the theory's truth or falsity, but I'm attracted to the idea because it makes
life forms so much more complex and unpredictable, and because it overturns
conventional thinking.

Source: 2012/05/life-boon-or-thorn

Title: Life:  Boon or Thorn?
Date: May 26, 2012

The most widely-known as well as the most notorious poem of the second half of
the twentieth century is Philip Larkin's "This Be the Verse."  For those of
you who don't know the poem by heart, here it is in its brief and startling
entirety.

They fuck you up, your mum and dad.

They may not mean to, but they do.

They fill you with the faults they had

And add some extra, just for you.

But they were fucked up in the turn

By fools in old style hats and coats,

Who half the time were soppy-stern,

And half at one another's throats.

Man adds on misery to man.

It deepens like a coastal shelf.

Get out as early as you can,

And don't have any kids yourself.

Pessimistic?  Jaded?  Angry?  Yes, I think it's fair to call it so. And let's
also add, unsubtle with a vengeance.

Larkin is hyperbolically illogical. It can't be true that every generation is
more deranged than the one that preceded it. When were the good times? A few
generations ago? In the Dark Ages? In antiquity?  No, in Larkin's view, it's
been all downhill, all the time. No doubt those early primates were already
fucking up their kids when they came down from the trees and started to walk
upright on the savannah. "There's only one piece of roasted rhinoceros left. You
take it. I don't mind being hungry."

Despite its dyspepsia and illogicality, "This Be the Verse" is a curiously
lovable poem. Whenever I've heard it read or recited, audiences react not
with horror but with amusement. The poem's misanthropy is so absolute and its
language so blunt that it can't help but provoke tittering.

The laughter arises because the poem doesn't earn its pessimism. It's too fluent
and too easy -- unlike, say, King Lear, where the sublunary world is rank with
incest, betrayal, and murder. After three thousand lines and five full horrific
acts, Shakespeare earns the standing to conclude that life is miserable and that
"humanity must perforce/ Prey on itself, like monsters of the deep." So it is
in Oedipus, where the events lend credibility to the difficult apercu that it's
best not to be born at all, next best to die very young.

While Shakespeare and Sophocles are philosophically serious, Larkin is merely
flip. There's a monumental disproportion between his gloom and the light-verse
vessel in which his gloom is contained. And so arises the off-kilter comedy.

It's a whiny poem. "Poor poor pitiful me. I had a difficult mommy."

If "This Be the Verse" is in fact the most popular poem of the last fifty years,
it supersedes Robert Frost's "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." What a
remarkable devolution! While Frost endures, Larkin abhors.

I doubt whether Larkin had "Stopping by Woods" in mind, but he certainly glosses
Robert Louis Stevenson's "Requiem" -- the poem from which he drew his title.
Stevenson's performance is charming, gentle, self-effacing, and modest.

Under the wide and starry sky,

Dig the grave and let me lie.

Glad did I live and gladly die.

And laid me down with a will.

This be the verse you grave for me:

Here he lies where he longed to be.

Home is the sailor, home from the sea,

And the hunter home from the hill.

Stevenson praises the adventurous life lived well and brought to completion.
Death may end it all but it also closes the circle. There is no completion, no
circles in Larkin, where natural processes are crudely truncated: "don't have
any kids yourself."

"This Be the Verse" is a hilarious and wonderful piece of joking, but its
victimology is unsettling. It's tempting to claim that it satirizes its own
pessimism, but, I'm sorry to say, it does not. Larkin loves to wallow in his own
gloom.

Here's another Victorian variation on the thema Larkiniana.

Is life a thorn?

Then count it not a whit.

Man is well done with it.

As soon as he's born,

He should all means assay

To put the plague away.

Pessimistic, yes. But Colonel Fairfax, even-handed, also entertains the
possibility that life might be a boon (which, as we all know, is true at least
some of the time).

Source: 2012/05/three-advantages-to-old-age

Title: Three Advantages to Old Age
Date: May 31, 2012

1.  No longer possible to die tragically young, with promise unfulfilled. Well, actually, promise can still be unfulfilled, but not because of early death.

2.  No longer any need to fuss with contraceptives.

3.  Read an entire magazine article while urinating.

Source: 2012/06/predators-and-prey

Title: Predators and Prey
Date: June 25, 2012

I was almost asleep but semi-conscious and I heard a noise outside. It could
have been the wind knocking over a chair, but it might also have been a raccoon,
a skunk, or a groundhog. Or even a coyote, a beast that we hear but almost
never encounter. Whatever it was, I was immediately electrified, the "flight or
fight" response fully engaged. Ready to go hand to hand with a groundhog or any
other rodent. But then I thought, hey, I'm an apex predator. Why I am being so
skittish, so fearful? I'm not a prey animal. I can hold my own with anything out
there.

The first hand axes date from about 2.5 million years ago. (A hand axe is
nothing more than a piece of flint or other stone, knapped into a point on one
side, adapted for cutting or throwing). The first spearpoint appears 250,000
years ago. Spears for throwing, or lances for poking are a major breakthrough
for hunting or self defense.

I wonder why it took 2.25 million years for one of my hominid ancestors to think
to mount an axe on a shaft of wood. How hard could it have been? Eventually
the bow and arrow appears in the archeological record, but not until 25,000
years ago. The pace was picking up. My point, however, is that for a couple
of millions of years, my forebears were not predators. They  were prey,
hiding from the European lion (50% larger than the modern African lion), from
the giant hyenas, from the cave bear, from big old snakes, and other extinct
mega- predators. Cowering on the savannah, clutching a hand axe, for millions
of years. It hardwires the brain.

No wonder that a noise in the night makes me fearful. Two million years as
prey doesn't disappear from the DNA just because we've recently eliminated or
neutralized all the major predators.

I think that human beings haven't realized that they are predators and are
almost entirely shaped by the prey experience. As a result, we're afraid of
animals; we're afraid of our shadows; we're afraid of noises in the night. We're
afraid of each other.I doubt that we'll ever grow up and learn to comport
ourselves confidently but not aggressively. As a species, we're just plain
scared. We should be lions, not chickens.

Source: 2012/06/more-about-lolas-use-of-language

Title: More About Lola's Use of Language
Date: June 30, 2012

At two-and-a-half, Lola has become very precise. Grandpa: "That's a nice white
sweater you're wearing." Lola: "It's a jacket." Grandpa: "You're tired. Why
don't you put your head down on the bed." Lola: "It's not a bed; it's a pad."
Grandpa: "It's a nice blue pad." Lola: "It's green."

All this precision is coupled to idiosyncratic pronunciations. Ketchup, for
example, is "kep-tuck."

Source: 2012/09/precision-in-language

Title: Precision in Language
Date: September 09, 2012

Grandma (affectionately):  "You're a silly duckling."

Lola (age 2+):  "I'm not a duckling.  I'm a people."

Source: 2012/09/unorthodox

Title: Does Religion Rot the Brain?
Date: September 11, 2012

Unaware that I was choosing a splashy and controversial best-seller, I selected
from the library's new book shelf something called Unorthodox (New York, 2012),
by one Deborah Feldman, and a sadder, more dispiriting book I have rarely read.

Ms. Feldman had the misfortune to be raised in the Satmar branch of the Hasidic
movement -- a sect that, at least as she describes it, is unhappy, puritanical,
finicky, repressive, ferociously anti-rational, patriarchal, and bossy. Boys
study Talmud but girls are not educated past a high school -- what would be
the point, when, as Deborah's grandfather once told her, "girls belong in the
kitchen?" Feldman's memoir is not just dreary, it's ostentatiously lurid. Its
subtitle is "the scandalous rejection of my Hasidic roots" -- and the attention-
mongering scandals that she recounts are mostly sexual in nature.

There is a old story that John Ruskin collapsed in a heap when he discovered,
on his wedding night, that his bride had pubic hair. Feldman out-Victorians
the great Victorian, claiming that she did not know that she had a vagina, an
entrance, an opening, "down there." Is such ignorance possible in this age? 
And then she explores her sexual failings, mostly her vaginismus-induced post-
honeymoon extended virginity -- which she blames on her Satmar upbringing
(although want of curiosity might also be a factor).

Feldman's memoir has upset the Hasidic community and there is at least one
website devoted entirely to attacking its veracity. And in fact the memoir does
contain the commonplace omissions and elisions of autobiography --  none of
which seem to invalidate the whole. However, the defenders of the sect miss the
point (as does Ms. Feldman).

The Satmar movement isn't reprehensible because it dishonors brains and women
and especially women's brains. It's reprehensible because it is erected
on a lie. "We learn in school that God sent Hitler to punish the Jews for
enlightening themselves. He came to clean us up, eliminate all the assimilated
Jews...."  What an absurd and odious doctrine! Are we expected to entertain
the hypothesis that six million Jews died for eating lobster?  "The first and
greatest Satmar rebbe said that if we became model Jews, just like in the olden
days, then something like the Holocaust wouldn't happen again, because God would
be pleased with us." So Hitler and the Nazis and the SS and the camps are a) the
fault of the Jews themselves, and b) God can be placated if all Jewish women
wear thick stockings and wigs and cover themselves from collarbone to wrist and
knee.  It's a brainless argument, and one that, if you think about it for a few
seconds, gives the victory to Hitler. Plus, it's an argument that creates a god
who is even crueler and more idiotic than usual.

Indoctrinated with this criminal bullshit, the survivors of the Shoah and their
descendants voluntarily re-ghettoize themselves and, of their own foolish
accord, imprison themselves into a new dark age of their own invention.

Here's what I learned from this book. Satmar is a check-your-brains-at-the-door
cult that controls 130,000 adherents who manifest all the symptoms of obsessive
compulsive disorder. It's "bad things will happen to me if I step on a crack on
the sidewalk" raised several painful orders of magnitude.

Ms. Feldman may have escaped the cult but she's still in the dark. She's left
Satmar behind because she couldn't read the books she wanted to read or wear the
clothes she wanted to wear and she couldn't locate her own vagina. But it's not
her vagina that readers should worry about;  it's her brain.

Source: 2012/09/amnesia-on-film-unknown-2011

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Unknown (2011)
Date: September 21, 2012

Here's a case of double amnesia, in which a second case of the disease is
overlain over the first (as usual, once the amnesia genie is activated,
screenwriters cry havoc and let slip the dogs of anything goes).

Our hero, played by a tired Liam Neeson, awakes from a coma not remembering much
but thinking he's Dr. Martin Harris, a geneticist. He has no identification,
and no one knows him, even his young wife. Turns out, he's not Dr. Harris at
all, but a professional assassin who has somehow forgotten that his alias is
an alias. It takes an innocent new girlfriend and several car chases and
some highly-choreographed fist fights before he comes to his senses. Once he
realizes that he's a professional killer, however, he turns over a new leaf and
becomes a Good Guy. He thwarts the intended assassination and with solemn steps
and slow, begins a new moral life.

Here's the question that occurred to me:  a guy is a long-time, career
assassin. He has an accident and forgets that he was a murderer. Then little
by little he remembers. Is it probable that his personality would change and he
would be reborn to innocence and good citizenship, I only ask because that's
the red herring that Unknown's audience is asked to masticate? I myself don't
buy it.

Neeson asks, over and over, "Who am I?"  In serious works of literature (cf.
Lear's "Who is it that can tell me who I am'), such a question is tragic.  In
amnesia movies, "Who am I" is not tragic but merely mcguffinic.

Source: 2012/09/beautiful-women

Title: Goddesses Excellently Bright
Date: September 26, 2012

At the Perfect Pear, our local eatery, dinner was less than ambrosial,
but halfway through the mashed potatoes, the room was suddenly illuminated
by an astonishingly beautiful young woman who arrived (drums, and trumpets,
and more trumpets) with bland boyfriend in tow. She was lambent and glowing
-- so lovely that I felt the urge to get up and whisper in her ear that her
brilliance had refreshed and cheered my entire day.

Of course I did no such thing.  I'm not that kind of guy.

Later, I fell into a reverie and brought to mind the very few magnificently
beautiful women whom I had encountered in my life. Now I don't mean women who
are merely or very attractive, of whom there are, thankfully, many; nor women
upon whom one's youthful self has lavished an intense passing crush. I mean
women who are goddess-beautiful. Women around whose brows flames flicker, and
who, when they walk, do not touch their feet to the ground. Here they are:

In Ithaca, Margaret C., a sylph or naiad. In Cambridge, the young Aphrodite
who sprawled so fetchingly in Widener's periodical room, unconscious of the
attention she garnered. At the pottery, Mariel ----- ("Ariel with an M,"she
said), a psychologist, who, though already greying, was a perfect Juno.
Students: in New York, Ms. ----- Pavony, who glowed for almost an entire silent
semester, right up to the precise moment that she contributed to the discussion
in the squeaky voice and accent of a 1930s M-G-M telephone operator. In Denver,
Ms. {exotic first name] Samuels, who, I'm happy to say, remained silent on the
rare days she deigned to come to class. A Hindu fertility goddess, yes -- but
perhaps also a daughter of Zion. On the airplane: the radiant Denver actress,
who confided to me that her best part "so far" was a Midol commercial. On the
bus: the young lady with the electric green eyes. At the Folger: the luscious
student from France, as lovely as a young woman can possibly be, who said to me,
"Can I ask you a question about Shakespeare? Why do some of the lines stop in
the middle of the page and some go right to the margin?" Oh, would that she had
not asked!

And while I mused over my small handful of goddesses excellently bright, I
remembered that on two separate occasions, forty or fifty years ago, an older
gentleman had approached Mrs. Dr. Metablog to say, in these or equivalent words,
"thank you for being so beautiful."

At the time, I was taken aback, but now, in my pre-dotage, I fully comprehend.

(It stands to reason that I must also have encountered young men of great
beauty, but, try as I will, I can't bring any to mind.)

Source: 2012/09/welwitschia

Title: Tweeblaarkanniedood, or Khurob, or Nyanka, or Anyango, or Whatever You Want to Call It.
Date: September 29, 2012

I read with enthusiasm Richard Fortey's Horseshoe Crabs and Velvet Worms (New
York, 2012), a pop biology book which describes various plants and animals that
originated millenia ago and that survive outwardly unchanged to the present
day. It's a great subject and might have been a great book if Fortey had been
less anecdotal and more informative, and if he not just blathered into the
tape recorder but had paid attention to organization and prose style.

Ever since my summers at Makamah in the 1940s, I've had an affection for
horseshoe crabs. They were abundant then, although scary and definitely not-to-
be-stepped-on, and although I can't say for sure, I wouldn't be surprised to
find that they are very rare now, especially in populated areas like the Sound.
I would not have known that horseshoe crabs date from the pre-hemoglobin
era and that their blood (or blood-equivalent) is based not on iron but on
copper. I did not know anything about velvet worms or the various ancient
slimes with which Fortey is so taken, but I am well-acquainted with horsetails,
which, however primitive they may be, continue to thrive rather wonderfully
around our West Bradford pond.

Of all Fortey's species, my favorite is unquestionably the welwitschia, or,
as it is sometimes called, the tweeblaarkanniedood, or khurob, or nyanka, or
onyango -- a plant which is no less exotic than its various names.

It's the only plant in its order (although it can claim fossil relatives) and
it hangs on in Namibia and Angola. It's a very distant relative of pines and
spruces, having diverged in the late Permian. Welwitschia has an extremely odd
growth habit. It makes only two true leaves in its lifetime, but the leaves,
which might be imagined as very wide ribbons, grow constantly throughout the
long life of the plant. The leaves can be fifteen feet long;  the plant
can live for a thousand and some think even two thousand years.  Here's a
welwitschia: it's not a classically handsome plant, not a garden beauty.

Source: 2012/09/ryan

Title: Lyin' Ryan?  We Report, You Decide
Date: September 30, 2012

There's been so much noise about Governor Romney stonewalling calls to release
his tax returns and so much commentary about the one he did release, that the
anomalies in running-mate Paul Ryan's tax returns have been overlooked.

When Ryan made his 2011 taxes public, he had to "amend" what he and his lobbyist
wife had initially reported. It seems that he had "inadvertently" failed
to report $61,122 in income. Now sixty grand might be chicken feed for the
Governor, but it's a big hunk for the Representative. It raises his total income
to $323,416 and bumps up his taxes by $19,917. The sixty-thousand bucks comes
from an income-producing trust that he inherited from his wife's mother, a
successful Oklahoma attorney. Moreover, on June 6 of this year, Ryan amended two
years of financial disclosure reports that he filed with the clerk of the House
of Representatives which show that the trust produced income of between $100,001
and $1 million.

So Ryan "forgot" that he had inherited a small fortune from his
mother-in-law, and he "forgot" to report to the IRS just about 20% of his
income.  Fortunately, he remembered both of these facts when he began to come
under consideration for national office and knew that his finances would be
closely scrutinized.

Ryan is a supposedly a policy wonk, touted for his attention to detail. He's
an expert in taxation and expenditure -- or so we're told.  But he's not,
apparently, attentive to his own affairs.

He's also the person who claimed to have run a sub-five minute marathon and to
have climbed o-so-many of Colorado's mountains.

So, constant reader, here are your choices. Either Paul Ryan (a)
"inadvertently forgot" to include $60,000 worth of income on his 2011 taxes,
or (b) he's a untrustworthy, lying scumbag who suits the facts to the situation,
and who was hoping to get away without paying his fair share and only came
clean when it looked as though someone would notice.

We report;  you decide.

(I'm trying to think, if I were the recipient of a $60,000 a year inheritance,
which I'm not, whether I could possibly "forget" to report it as income. Nope,
can't imagine such a circumstance.)

Source: 2012/10/why-we-love-opera

Title: A Splendid Sentence
Date: October 16, 2012

All that is good and all that is bad about opera is summarized by the following
splendid sentence. It comes from a plot summary of Donizetti's L'Elisir
d'Amore. Prepare to savor.

"At the pre-wedding feast, Adina and Dulcamara entertain the guests with a
barcarole."

Is that genius, or what?

Here's the situation: the plot's a little thin and needs to be padded.
Barcaroles were big in the 1840s. By good fortune, Donizetti just happens to
have one in his drawer, or perhaps he has been thinking about gondoliers since
his last trip to Venice. So let's slip a barcarole in there.

Moreover, the barcarole is beautiful. Perfectly wonderful and enjoyable. It's
as lovely as the excuse for its performance is ridiculous.

That's why we love grand opera -- its inevitable and constant juxtaposition of
glorious and absurd.

Thanks, Metropolitan Opera in HD, for bringing it to our attention. Let's hope
for many more afternoons of such transcendent, splendid silliness.

Ah that in real life we could while away our empty hours with barcaroles.

Source: 2012/10/amnesia-on-film-mirage

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Mirage (1965)
Date: October 17, 2012

I was half-way through this neglected Cold War paranoia-mystery-Hitchcocky
black-and-white (and noir all over) amnesia movie when I realized that I was
watching a lineal ancestor of the Jason Bourne films. It's all there: the
trauma, the amnesia, the shadowy organization determined to eliminate the
amnesiac, the assassins, the hair-breadth 'scapes, the chases, the murky
plotting.

David Stillwell (note the encouraging onomastic pun in his surname) played by
the ever-upright Gregory Peck, has accidentally defenestrated his mentor and has
gone into what this film calls "unconscious amnesia." He's got to figure it all
out, which he does via Bourneian flashbacks, even while being pursued by a bunch
of very bad guys, who fortunately, are most amateurish with their pistols.

There's also a dollop of Bond in the mix: a nuclear secret, a threat to world
peace and in addition a possibly helpful, possibly dangerous former mistress.

And there's Walter Matthau as a shambling amateurish detective. Early Walter
Matthau -- taking a few first steps on the road to becoming the real Walter
Matthau.

It was a superior movie during the first mysterious hour, but as the mystery
unravelled, it turned into cliche and incoherence. Too bad, because the noir
atmosphere was splendidly realized and the shots of 1960s Manhattan a genuine
treat.

Mirage is a political movie, but it's hard to track its politics. Howard Fast,
who wrote the novel from which the screenplay is adapted, leaned far left while
the director, Edward Dmytryk, leaned right. The film teeter-totters.

Mirage was remade three years later as Jigsaw, in which an LSD overdose was
substituted for amnesia. Jigsaw doesn't seem to be available on Netflix, but
I'll look for it. "Unconscious amnesia" apparently mutated, during the hippie
years, into "drug amnesia." A new genre

Source: 2012/10/polygamy

Title: A Man and a Woman
Date: October 23, 2012

I find it utterly fascinating that Romney and Obama, who are so unlike in so
many ways and yet both to the best of our knowledge good "family men," are both
descended from polygamists.

Barack's great-grandfather Obama Opiyo had five wives and his grandfather,
Hussein Onyango, had at least four. Such was the Luo tradition. Barack's
father's bigamy was unlawful rather than traditional -- he left what used to be
called a "grass widow" behind when he escaped Kenya.

Both of Mitt's great-grandfathers, Miles Romney and Helaman Pratt were
polygamists. Miles had four wives and thirty children, Helaman had five
wive and who knows how many offspring. Both families fled the U. S. en masse
when a divine revelation and the enforcement of the Morrill Act ended polygamy
in 1890.

And yet preachers and politicians continue to proclaim that "marriage is between
one man and one woman, and always has been, since the time of Adam and Eve."

It ain't so. Nothing could be more ahistorical or more false. The biblical
patriarchs were all polygamists and King Solomon himself, a model of wisdom,
we are told, collected an astonishing, exhausting household of 300 wives and
700 concubines. Plural marriage was part of Jewish tradition way into the first
millennium. Another Abrahamic religion, Islam, is notably polygynous even as
it is furiously anti-polyandrous. Marriages over the world have taken every
shape imaginable, sometimes formally, sometimes informally. The idea that
marriage is  permanent and unchanging is a canard belied by the immediate and
symmetrical family histories of our two candidates.

Source: 2012/10/othello-otello

Title: Othello/ Otello
Date: October 30, 2012

I prefer my opera to be aural rather than visual. Opera is a form that
is made for listening, not watching -- at least in my view. The music,
Mozart or Verdi, is frequently transcendent and most satisfying. But on those
occasions when I venture to the opera house and I have to deal with the
cultic, cachectic audience and the grand-opera worshippers as well as the
ridiculous plots, the unhandsome singers, the interminable intermissions, the
staginess and artifice and the general all-around silliness -- as well as pay
through the nose for the privilege of doing so, well then, I'm not always a
happy fellow.

I know the sound of Verdi's Otello moderately well, having played the Placido
Domingo version often enough for the laser to have bored holes into the cd.
Moreover, as it happens, I'm moderately familiar with Shakespeare's play). But I
had never seen a performance of Otello until this past Saturday when we betook
ourselves and our bagels and our Granny Smiths to the Century Theatre to watch
the Metropolitan Opera's Live in HD performance. It was, frankly, glorious --
Renee Fleming in the electronic flesh, moving us to tears with the willow song
(along with Verdi's bonus, dubious Ave Maria).

She was superb; so were the orchestra, the costumes, the sets, even the
overacting, villainous Iago, who would have twirled his mustachios, if he had
had them, and the non-acting, expressionless Othello.

Our "guide," a robust, comfortable mezzo whose name I should know but didn't
catch, made the claim that Verdi's Otello improved upon Shakespeare's Othello.
A highly dubious claim, I think, but then, I don't know how to measure the
value of the grand "Othello music," that Shakespeareans so much admire, against
the cellos and the bassoons. Whether for better or worse, however, there's a
heck of a lot in Shakespeare's play that didn't make it across the centuries
and genres and into Verdi's opera. More than can be said in a paragraph or
a blaguepost.

For starters, Shakespeare created a multi-layered society, not just elaborate
sets. His city of Venice has a sense of itself as a successful, orderly,
civilized, and advanced community. Into this world strides Othello, not
only an outlander but an African and a erotic exotic. Although Venice needs
his soldiership, he's still a black man in a racist world who marries a
willful patrician lady who prefers him to  the "wealthy curled darlings of
the nation." It's an unlikely, perilous match: he's "declined into the vale
of years" while she's very very young. He's a soldier who's been around the
world; she's the secluded mistress of the house affairs. He's commanding;
she's naive.

Verdi must have loved Othello, although not necessarily for the right reasons.
How could a play that ends on a bed, with a climactic murder-suicide, not have
excited the instincts of the composer of Aida. Nothing more appropriate for
grand opera than Othello and Desdemona -- and yet o so simple a representation
compared with Shakespeare's rich figures and complex society.

Imagine a Merchant of Venice in which Shylock is not Jewish, or a King Lear in
which Lear is a troubled forty-something and you're well on your way to grasping
an Othello in which melanin is replaced with melodrama.

As a result, even when Verdi brought tears to my eyes, it was because I was
seeing through the opera to the play that lies beneath it.

And sometimes I was crying because I so desperately missed the beauties and the
profundity that Verdi had not seen fit to include.

Source: 2012/11/slavestates

Title: Where We Are, 2012
Date: November 08, 2012

The Republicans now draw most of their strength from the former "slave states."
Here's the evidence and the map:

In 2012, Republicans won only 55 electoral votes from the free states. Obama
carried 332.

I don't think it's coincidence or merely an association.  I think it's a cause.

In order to support slavery, a person has to deform and distort his brain; he
has to learn to make or accept arguments that are innocent of fact and logic and
fellow-feeling.  He has to damage his intelligence and ruin his morals, and,
apparently, he must pass the consequences on to his children and grand-children.

And so the sins of slavery continue to be visited upon us, yea even unto the
seventh generation.

Source: 2012/11/barkis

Title: Who's Laughing Now?
Date: November 09, 2012

Many years ago, when I was young and invulnerable, it was most amusing that Mr.
Barkis, the "willin'" carrier in David Copperfield, offered up his shillings
with such agony.

Barkis is bedridden with a cripplingly painful illness. He has a locked box of
coins, and although he has become "near," he has the generous impulse to give
David a guinea. However, to fetch the money costs him a martyrdom. "He endured
unheard-of agonies in crawling out of bed alone, and taking it from that unlucky
box....  We heard him uttering suppressed groans of the most dismal nature.
This procedure racked him in every joint."

Barkis's pain was, once upon a time, comic. Nowadays, alas, I can only imagine
that Barkis has ruptured a disc, and must endure a chronic, unameliorable,
incurable torture that will only end with his death.

And then there's the Fat Boy, in Pickwick Papers, who cannot prevent himself
from falling asleep. What's so funny about chronic fatigue or narcolepsy? At my
present advanced age, I tend to fall asleep every time I lie down with a book,
even if the book is a  wild extravagant wonderful novel by Charles Dickens.
Inopportune sleep by day is almost as unpleasant as insomnia or nightmares (or
insomnia plus nightmares) at night.

I think also of Mr F.'s demented Aunt, in Little Dorrit , who can no longer
follow the conversation, but "after regarding the company for ten minutes with
a malevolent gaze, delivered the following fearful remark:'When we lived at
Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers.'"'

Is her senility, or as we would now say, her Alzheimer's, so very amusing.

It were, but now it ain't no longer.

Dickens died young, at 58, so there is no way to know whether his sense of humor
would been softened by the ravages of disease and age.

Source: 2012/11/more-coffee-shop-conversation

Title: More Coffee-Shop Conversation
Date: November 10, 2012

Source: 2012/11/mommiesdaddies

Title: In Which 3-year-old Lola Describes the Structure and Functioning of the Contemporary American Family
Date: November 20, 2012

Source: 2012/11/butts

Title: A New Look at the Republican Anus
Date: November 24, 2012

What in the living heck did Republican elder Haley Barbour mean when, discussing
his party's recent electoral disasters, he announced that "we’ve got to give
our political organization a very serious proctology exam. We need to look
everywhere”?

I've got to guess that he "misspoke." Surely he didn't mean to claim that GOP
office-holders have their heads so far up their own asses that it's going to
take a  proctoscope to locate them?

Source: 2012/12/national-sword-association

Title: Guns in the Classroom?  Why Not Swords?
Date: December 05, 2012

The ancient Romans did not allow swords to be carried within the pomerium, the
sacred central precincts of their city.

They were able to maintain the prohibition because they did not have a National
Sword Associaion to argue that if swords are banned, only criminals with have
swords; or that swords don't kill, people kill; or that it's a violation of
personal liberty for free men to be forced to check their swords at the city
wall. Nor was there a fanatic Roman electorate ruthless enough to donate to the
campaigns of every soft-brained aedile, quaestor, praetor, or consul willing to
proclaim the sanctity of swordsmen's rights.

Is it the case that swords were also prohibited in the Roman classroom?  I
don't know -- but I suspect as much.

Here at the University of Colorado, in the infant millenium, guns may not be
carried into the sacred precincts of the football stadium. However, they're
sure-as-hell legal in classrooms, and have been ever since a State Supreme Court
ruling forced the U to allow students with Colorado concealed weapon permits to
carry their guns on campus -- even on days when exams and papers are returned to
students by an historically-unarmed faculty.

So what about swords? Why should guns be allowed in class and swords prohibited?
I don't mean the modern rapier, which is so long that their presence would
create, in every classroom, a noisy clatter and might even cause unwary students
to trip and fall. I'm thinking rather of the Roman short sword, the famous
gladius, which can easily be worn, in an unthreatening manner, under the toga or
ski jacket.

Rapier (noisy and prone to cause accidents):

Gladius (inoffensive):

In point of fact, why the pusillanimous resistance to gladii at football
games?  Fifty-thousand spectators, highly-partisan fans, gargantuan quantities
of illegal booze and dope, and short swords -- what could possibly go wrong?

Source: 2012/12/amnesia-on-film-i-love-you-again-1940

Title: Amnesia on Film:  I Love You Again (1940)
Date: December 09, 2012

The ol' amnesia gimmick plus "screwball" comedy plus W. S. Van Dyke plus Willam
Powell and Myrna Loy equals "I Love You Again" (1940).

Workaholic, unfun Larry Wilson gets conked on the head and wakes up as an
amusing grifter named George Cary. (Hollywood amnesia will do that to you,
apparently -- completely revise your personality.) But in his new and at the
same time prior state, Larry/Geoge has to come to terms with Larry's wife Kay,
who wants a divorce from the melancholy cheapskate half of the compound hero.
And yet It comes to pass that Kay  prefers the grifter.

Much forced hilarity ensues.

Once again, amnesia proves to be the most malleable of maladies. Bop on the
head, he's Larry; another boy, he's George. Amnesia is a gas, even to the pont
that Myrna Loy, unhappy with what she's got, picks up a vase to re-transform
William Powell into the way she wants him. Mechanical (not medical) amnesia
anticipates Danny Kaye in The Court Jester: a snap of the finger he's a
duellist; another snap and he's a clown.

Source: 2012/12/baseball1955-2012

Title: Baseball, 1955 and 2012
Date: December 13, 2012

In 1955, Duke Snider lived at 178 Marine Avenue (in Brooklyn's Bay Ridge). His
was the middle house in this picture.

Gil Hodges lived here, at 1120 32 Street. Two floors, 1400 square feet.

Harold "Pee Wee" Reese and family made their home in 970 square feet of 9714
Barwell Terrace. Carl Erskine's home, at 9318 Lafayette Walk, was even smaller,

just 910 square feet.

Sandy Amoros lived in Bed-Stuy, in this brownstone at 147 Bainbridge Street,
most likely on just one of the three floors. His was the leftmost building.

And here is Alex Rodriguez's 2012 house in Miami, Florida.  It's up for sale
for $38,000,000,

which is what 19,681 square foot waterfront properties go for nowadays. A
bargain, for all I know.

Source: 2012/12/footballconcussions

Title: Life after Football
Date: December 15, 2012

Every year, football becomes harder and harder to watch. When the quarterback
is blitzed and has his clock cleaned, or a receiver on a crossing pattern gets
his bell rung, I no longer think, brilliant play. Instead, I think, pain and
concussion.

Not a game goes by but that a lineman leaves the field of sport on a gurney, to
admiring huzzahs and applause from the comfortable spectators.

Have I become more timorous -- or more compassionate?  I still admire the skill
level of the players but I'm distressed because these gladiators have become
permanently injured for my amusement.

There's a Washington Post article about a lineman named Tre Johnson, who left
the game in 2003 after nine seasons in the NFL. Johnson, who earned two degrees
before he was drafted, is now a highly-regarded middle-school social studies
teacher at the private Landon School outside Washington. His is a post-career
success story.

The Post article offers some information about Johnson's present state of
health. He's forty-something years old and for three years has been walking
three miles, twice daily, in order to shed some weight.  More power to him,
he's now under 400 pounds and hoping to get back to his playing weight of 275.
He suffers from diabetes, high cholesterol and elevated blood pressure. He's
already endured nineteen surgeries (seven on his shoulders, seven on his knees,
an elbow, hands and Achilles’ tendon). "He can't sleep more than three hours
at a stretch. There’s not a morning he doesn’t wake up in pain, and it takes
a full hour to get moving in tolerable discomfort." Although when he played, no
one kept track of concussions, Johnson has some sort of brain injury, because he
can't tolerate bright or fluorescent lights. To what degree his banged-around
brain has been seriously disabled will not become clear for a few more years.

Tre Johnson is doing well, but what about other ex-players who are not quite so
healthy?

Source: 2012/12/more-on-sex-ed-in-victorian-england

Title: More on Sex Ed in Victorian England
Date: December 17, 2012

George Drysdale (1823-1904) wrote, anonymously, Physical, Sexual, and Natural
Religion (1854), a pioneering guide to contraception and sexual disease that was
condemned by the pious as "the Bible of the Brothel."

Drysdale arrived at his progressive ideas after an adolescence and young
manhood crippled by sexual ignorance and sexual panic. At the age of fifteen,
he "accidentally'' discovered masturbation and found that the practice offered
an 'easy mode of satisfying his passions, which had long been the source of
unrest and torment to his vivid imagination.' He masturbated, poor Victorian
fellow, two or three times a day and involuntarily endured occasional nighttime
'discharges'. He was overcome with guilt and even more so tortured by the fear
that, as he was instructed by prevailing doctrine, the 'loss' of semen would sap
his strength and inevitably lead him to madness. Hard to believe -- but such
notions were commonplace among our recent, ignorant ancestors.

It gets worse. He was so distressed by his uncontrollable onanism that on trip
to Hungary, he faked a suicide, leaving his clothes and identification beside a
river.

And worse still. While in Hungary, he underwent a series of procedures to deaden
and destroy the nerve endings of the penis "by inserting into the urethra a thin
metal rod coated in a caustic substance. He submitted to this procedure seven or
eight times." It didn't work -- at least in the sense that it didn't diminish
his passion for masturbation. I also suspect that it might have hurt.

It gets better, though. He resurrected himself and came back to his family after
he consulted a doctor who offered the breathtakingly brilliant prescription that
he "try coition." Intercourse with prostitutes, he discovered, quite cured his
urge to masturbate. Holy moley, what a revelation! What a fucking breakthrough!

Drysdale never married but in later life he lived for many years with a woman
named Susannah Spring.

Now, if you were writing a novel about a person who "dies" and returns to life
and you called his mistress or partner or whatever she was by the name Spring,
with its obvious overtones of rebirth, you would be justifiably accused of
moralism or allegorizing or heavy-handedness. Nevertheless, truth is truth to
the end of the chapter and Susannah Spring she was.

I hope George and Susannah were happy together. I hope they frequently and
joyously "tried coition." The poor boy deserved a few good years.

(I've pilfered the story of George Drysdale from Kate Summerscale's revelatory 
Mrs.Robinson's Disgrace [New York, 2012]).

Source: 2012/12/strigils

Title: Strigils
Date: December 19, 2012

I doubt that I know any more about strigils than your average man in the street.
I had read about them for years, of course, but I had never seen one with my own
eyes until yesterday, when I took myself down to the Pompeii exhibit in Denver.
There they were, kind of stuck away in the corner -- two bronze beauties.

Strigils were used for cleaning the body, ancient Roman style. Early loofahs.
The one posted below looks a lot like the one I saw yesterday -- a garden-
variety Denver/Pompeii specimen that was retrieved from under 20 feet of
Vesuvian ash:

Here's another strigil, this one a little more elaborate.

They're kind of formidable, aren't they?

If, two thousand years ago, you had been patrician enough to go to the thermae
for your ablutions, you would have left the calida piscina, the warm bath, and
hastened to the destrictarium, which was a room dedicated to strigiling. There
you would have applied a mixture of olive oil and pumice to your skin, and then
one of your slaves, who might be an aliptes, a masseur, or a simple balneator, a
bath attendant, would have strigiled you clean.

But why olive oil and pumice? Greasy and gritty. Why not soap?  Did the
ancients have soap?  Who invented soap?

Fortunately, there's a website devoted to these important questions. Its
forthright, unapologetic url is soaphistory.net.

The first traces of soap appeared among the Babylonians, some 5000 years ago.
The recipe: mix animal fat with wood ash and boil. So soaps were around, but --
mirabile dictu -- they weren't used for personal hygiene. They were used for
cleaning wool and cleaning pots; Pliny, who was there for the explosion of Mt.
Vesuvius, and knew all there was to know, records only that soap was used as a
hair pomade.

The world we have lost was a far dirtier place than we like to imagine. In point
of fact, our familiar cake soaps and their widespread use are an industrial
revolution-nineteenth century invention.

Considering the effectiveness and convenience of modern soaps, I'm not looking
for a strigil revival -- no Mr. Strigil at every streetcorner. Nevertheless,
there's not a brush or a washcloth in the modern world that can match the beauty
of the best of the ancient strigils. Here, for example, is an old Etruscan
strigil with a naked-girl handle (she herself brandishes a mini-strigil). It's
less useful than a cake of Ivory, but -- let's face it--  a heck of a lot more
glamorous.

Source: 2012/12/dowdgod-1

Title: Maureen Dowd's Theology for the New Millenium
Date: December 31, 2012

Fifty years ago I enjoyed arguing with people of religion about the existence
of god, but nowadays I find it to be a singularly unprofitable exercise. The
believers and the atheists are so entrenched in their positions hat no one ever
convinces anyone of anything. Moreover, the faithful are so damned touchy that
it's no fun to talk to them! They are easily offended, I think, because the
weaker their evidence and logic, the more intense their compensatory passion.

I give thanks that at this my moment in history and geography, the true
believers may be angry with me but they don't have the power to bludgeon me into
obedience. (In general, the less intelligible the religion, the greater its
reliance and economic and corporeal sanctions to compel allegiance.)

These philosophical musings are inspired by a New York Times article that has
received an ungodly amount of attention. Maureen Dowd, who has made a career out
of cracking wise at figures of authority, especially Clintons, has given over
her space this Christmas week to a column on theology (or, as it is sometimes
called, the Subject without an Object). She endorses the argument of a priest-
friend. He (the priest) makes an end run around the classic Problem of Evil --
which is, that inasmuch as the world is very obviously a thoroughfare of woe,
then an omniscient god must be either powerless or malicious. Here's Dowd's
priests's formulation: "If we believe, as we do, that God is all-powerful and
all-knowing, why doesn’t He use this knowledge and power for good in the face
of the evils that touch our lives?"

A very good question indeed and one that believers in a beneficent deity have
failed to resolve yea all these many centuries. Dowd's priest's answer (which is
loaded with a bunch of transparently obvious smuggled assumptions) is that "for
whatever reason, God has chosen to enter the world today through others, through
us....  We are human and mortal. We will suffer and die. But how we are with
one another in that suffering and dying makes all the difference as to whether
God’s presence is felt or not and whether we are comforted or not."

Let me try to understand this argument. This new twenty-first century god, the
"dowdgod" let us call him, has entirely disappeared. He doesn't actually do
anything at all. He's so hidden -- absconditus, in the traditional language of
theology  --  that he permits all kinds of suffering and instead chooses to
manifest himself merely as a comforting presence.

Is that the argument that Dowd thinks is worth a column of valuable newsprint?
Yes, so it seems to be. Astonishing.

Faith," the priest continues, "is lived in family and community, and God is
experienced in family and community. We need one another to be in God’s
presence...." (No god for the solitary, then.) "When my younger brother, Brian,
died suddenly at 44 years old, I was asking “Why?” and I experienced family
and friends as unconditional love in the flesh....  The many ways that people
reached out to me let me know that I was not alone. They really were the
presence of God to me. Suffering isolates us. Loving presence brings us back,
makes us belong." His animating idea: the love of friends is a manifestation of
the deity. Wow. How shallow, how trivial, how wrong!

No one would disagree with the notion that suffering isolates us and that
friends and family console us.  I can't argue with such a proposition. It's
plainly obvious. But what in the world does such an observation have to do
with the existence or the nature of a supernatural being? It's not evidence
for god, it's not proof of god; if anything, it's the contrary of a proof.
Human beings console us, not "god"; the god part, the theology part, is utterly
supererogatory and unnecessary. What Dowd's priest has done is to change the
word "compassion" into the word "god." But we know that compassion is not
supernatural; it's entirely and essentially natural.

So the dowdgod turns out to be no more than a feature of human nature that
"soothes broken hearts." But what does it mean to believe in, or worship, the
dowdgod. Not much.  All a person has to do is to notice that it helps to have
some folks around when you're in pain -- and then to re-label the good feelings
that emanate from friends as god. It's so very easy, so undeniable. And utterly
meaningless.

And what a nice old friendly god it engenders. Whatever happened to Augustine,
Calvin, Luther. Those tough old guys are turning over in their graves. The
dowdgod is a far cry from from Jehovah, from Allah, and certainly from the
demanding Jesus who came to bring not peace but a sword. Those were gods to
reckon with. But now, out with Jupiter Tonans, the thunderer, and in with
Jupiter Manus-tenens, the hand-holder. Or Jupiter Sussurans, the whisperer.

It hardly matters whether one believes or doesn't believe in a god so weak-kneed
and thin-blooded, so positively humane.

Maureen Dowd might say, if she were surrounded by compassionate friends "You
make me feel god." In the same situation, I might might say, "You make me feel
good." The difference is only one minuscule "o" vowel, which, honestly, is very
like a zero. And zero is all that this new theology offers.