

================================================================================Source: 2014/01/politiciansstereotyping

Title: Stereotyping One Particular Class of Fellow Citizens
Date: January 12, 2014

i've been following the Bridgegate scandal -- the vindictive sabotaging of
traffic entering the George Washington Bridge by Governor Christie's staff with
the connivance and wink-wink approval of the governor hmself. I'm appalled --
is this the kind of man to whom we should offer the bully pulpit?

I've even gone so far as to read the internet comments to columns in the
New York Times. While some people who take the trouble to contribute  have a
reasonable point to make, there's a refrain that distresses me, all the more
so because it's a sentiment that no one bothers to refute. Here are three
representative examples.

"Like most politicians, the man [i.e. Governor Christie]  is a classic
sociopath."

"Politicians have a truth gene missing in their DNA."

"All, and I mean all. politicians are dishonest, deceitful, untruthful and
corrupt."

It's a common enough sentiment. We've all heard it.

One of our local school board members once said this to me: "When did I become
untrustworthy, a liar?  When I was citizen with kids in the school, I was an
honest well-meaning citizen.  But as soon as I was elected to the school
board, something must have happened to me, because  I began to be accused of
all kinds of chicanery and corruption. I went from 'citizen' to 'politician.'"

Or, you could say it this way: the stereotype kicked in.

I've never held public office myself, but I've known many "politicians" pretty
damn well-- members of school boards, members of our city council, county
officials and commissioners, many members of our state legislature, a couple of
state office-holders and at least two of our representatives to Congress. 
And here's what I know:  they're honest and talented people who
sacrifice time and money to serve the public. They work very hard and they
absorb a tremendous amount of abuse for little reward.

Of course there are vile and corrupt politicians. But there are also very
many public-spirited statesmen who rise to the challenge of governing this
complicated nation of ours.

Let us be fair to our fellow citizens.  And let us purge these ridiculous
stereotypes.

Source: 2014/01/three-dreams-in-one-ten-minute-period-at-3-in-the-morning-eeek

Title: Three Dreams in One Ten-Minute Period at 3 in the Morning, Eeek!
Date: January 29, 2014

The first (the most ordinary, the least wild):  I'm sitting in a basketball
stadium watching a game  (it's close to the end of the first half) when a fire
drill is announced. Everyone, including me and my "date," a mysterious unknown
woman whom my dreamatorium has conveniently supplied, leaves their seats. I'm
now outside but I'm cold and I remember that I've left behind my denim jacket. I
return to my place in the now-deserted arena but no jacket. Then I'm outside
again. I locate my date and tell her about the missing denim. She serenely
rises from her squat to reveal that she's been sitting on the jacket.  I
wonder:  did she try to steal it?  2) The scene shifts abruptly. I'm now back
fifty years, in graduate school, and I've been informed that a new requirement
for the degree has been instituted. Each semester, every student will have
 to drink a 20 oz. paper cup of a pink liquid (looks like Pepto-Bismol but
is decidedly more mucilaginous and nasty).  3) All of a sudden i'm being
pursued by a huge scary rhinoceros with an ovesize horn. I run, of course,
terrified. Fortunately, I come upon a cottage size stack of carrots (large,
grated, carefully arranged). I'm able to climb the pile, rather gracefully I
think, but the rhino can't get any traction and I easily outdistance him. I was
scared for a while but the carrots saved my life. Then I woke up.

Are there any interpreters of dreams out there?  Clearly, Dr. M. needs your
help. (Do not bother using words like "nutso" or "loco," please.  Serious
interpretations only.)

Source: 2014/02/shakespeare-exploits-the-oxymoron

Title: A New Machiavel
Date: February 23, 2014

I tried the first three installments -- a netflix diskful of episodes  --
of House of Cards. I plan to watch a few more, but I'm deep into negative
enthusiasm, not at all sure that I'm going to continue. Cards certainly grabs
you, and it's startling and theatrical, but it's also far too cynical and
depraved for my rose-colored tastes. I just don't believe in it. I know that
it's all the rage to assume that politicians are horrid and power-obsessed
-- but every one of them, all the time, without a moment of relaxation or
redemption?  And so I'm skeptical of every character, every twist in the plot,
every nasty turn of phrase. And because I'm skeptical, I just can't, as they
say, "get into it." Or at least, not all the way in.  (Full disclosure: during
episode three I fell into a 'deep rest,' sometimes denominated a minor nap.)

The character who dominates House of Cards is Kevin Spacey's Frank Underbelly
-- I mean  Underwood --  who is fascinating but not credible. Or rather, he
is not designed to be credible, because he regularly violates the fourth wall
and converses intimately with viewers. Underwood is ruthless, implacable,
ambitious, vengeful, depraved, vicious, malignant, and amusing. He turns his
audience into his co-conspirators.

And where have we seen this curious concatenation of traits before?  Think
back, fit audience though few, to your college class in the History of
English Drama. There you encountered the vice and his crossbred friend, the
machiavel,who were ubiquitous in medieval drama. Shakespeare brought this
semi- supernatural hybrid to perfection two separate times -- once in the
person of Richard of Gloucester in Richard III and then again as Iago in
Othello.

Richard of Gloucester winks to his audience that he "can smile, and murder
whiles I smile,/And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart, /And wet my
cheeks with artificial tears,/ And frame my face to all occasions."  Now if
that isn't Frank Underhill to a T, first spotted killing a puppy and a few
scenes later baldly and straightfacedly lying to his President. Richard can "set
the murderous Machiavel to school" in order to gain a crown; our unFrank friend
Frank once wanted to be secretary of state, but now he just wants revenge.
Richard and Iago are capable not only of falsity but even of murder to get what
they want. Both of them kill their own wives. "I'll have her, but I wlll not
keep her long," says Richard of Queen Anne.

And therefore If I were to offer advice to Zoe Barnes, the reckless young
reporter for the Washington Herald, I would suggest that she steer mighty clear
of Frank Underwood. I would tell her to read Othello post-post-haste and take
careful note of what happens to Desdemona's lady-in-waiting Emilia. Hint: "Fie,
your knife upon a woman."

Zoe, please, please, get out of there while the going is good!

In Shakespeare's plays, Richard and Iago both overreach and come to
grief. Richard is left to die on the battlefield and Iago is subjected to the
rigors of Venetian justice ("Torture will ope his lips.") And that's what is
supposed to happen to machiavels.

I'm curious as to what will happen to Frank Underhill. By rights he should
be publicly humiliated and die a ghastly death. But inasmuch as we live in
an exceedingly cynical age, we can guess that Frank will only die when Kevin
Spacey is offered better work, or when ratings plunge, or when the series jumps
its inherent shark.

Source: 2014/02/new-careers-for-me-me-me

Title: New Careers for Me Me Me
Date: February 23, 2014

I've written before about occupations that are not for me.  Among them are tour
guide (because of my directional dyslexia), trapeze artist (i'm terrified of
heights), surgeon (frightened of gore), and dog groomer. I've also discussed
possible options for future employment, such as my plan to become a power
forward in the NBA. However, I'm now starting to think that, what with my back
acting up again, and the NBA plagued with salary cap problems and an influx of
7-foot tall Europeans, that professional basketball might not be a realistic
possibility.

But I have two new ideas. The first is to become a leader of a religious cult.
I think I have what it takes: charisma, creativity, and ruthlessness. I haven't
exactly come up with a theology yet, but if that Scientology guy could get away
with Thetans and the "clear," I feel that I could come up with something better.
I'm aiming for a system of belief in which participants deed over all their
worldly goods to their leader, i.e. me. And also I'd like a harem of willing
maidens. I admit that some recent cult leaders have given the profession a black
eye (David Koresh, Jim Jones, Charles Manson) but I have in mind something
milder, something paternal or even grandpaternal. Less Kool-Aid, more chocolate
milkshake.

A second idea: hedge-fund billionaire. I admit that I don't know much
about hedge-funds, but I plan to get started right away by reading
the Wikipedia article. How hard can it be? It's not as though they
manufacture something or invent anything. And then, after you collect
a couple of billions, you get to have "dark money," off-shore accounts, and
your very own Super-Pac. This is a career with no discernible downside.

Source: 2014/03/three-comments-on-books

Title: Three Perspicuous Comments on "Books."
Date: March 03, 2014

Charlie Dressen (manager, Brooklyn Dodgers,1951-53):  "You  know something?
I never read a book in my whole life.... I can read newspapers and magazines.
But I never read a book. You think I should?"

Jean Harlow (actress, on her birthday wishes): "Don't get me a book. I already
got a book."

Anatole Broyard (critic): "If it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely
at the mercy of sex."

Source: 2014/03/my-diamond-jubilee

Title: My Diamond Jubilee
Date: March 09, 2014

My 75th, my diamond jubilee, is coming up in a few days, and it's about time
that family and friends gave serious thought to the celebration.

When Queen Elizabeth II had her jubilee just two years ago, there was a
specially-commissioned anthem, a service for two thousand folks at St. Paul's,
an equestrian extravaganza (550 horses), a flotilla of schooners on the Thames,
and something that involved the lighting of 4000 beacons world-wide.

Frankly, a bit much. A little over-the-top, if you know what I mean. 
Although who can fail to admire  the hat.

Last year, I suggested that a good choice for my birthday might be an
Irish "starter" castle.  The year before that, I hinted at one or two ancient
sculptures.  But, disappointingly, there were no takers. Birthdays number 73
and 74 were left unacknowledged -- to the shame of my fans.

But here is an opportunity for redemption. Diamonds for the diamond jubilee. I
would greatly appreciate a pair -- a singleton is tacky -- of those big hunking
earrings that the professional athletes wear. They can be easily purchased, I
understand, in the $900,000 to $1,100,000 range, depending on size and color.

My only reluctance is that piercing the ears would violate the integrity of my
body.  Also, I'm afraid of the pain. So it's either pressure clips or ear-
piercing under general anesthesia.

I wouldn't want to drop so precious an ornament and then lose it forever when I
vacuum the rug.

Gosh, now I'm worried if I can afford the insurance.

Source: 2014/03/morpheus-sleep-lamb

Title: The Arms of Morpheus
Date: March 16, 2014

I'm not a good sleeper -- never have been. While I'm very accomplished at going
to sleep, I'm deficient at staying there for the full eight hours. By two
o'clock in the morning, I'm awake -- reading, watching a previously-recorded
basketball or baseball game, or, more often, lying there with the body dormant
but the mind in a frenzy about our doomed civilization and about whether my
newest skin thingy has already metastasized.

So I decided that it was time for divine intervention.

Surprisingly, there's no patron saint of sleep. The closest is St. Dymphna,
but she's more properly, at least according to her website, the saint of
"mental and nervous disorders." Insomnia a nervous disorder?  I don't think
so, but on the other hand, she works cheap. To light a seven-day votive candle
at her shrine in Massillon, Ohio costs only $3.00 -- so what the heck. And it
can be done online, via Paypal. it's a bargain; why not give it a try?

Then there's St. Vitus, the patron saint of oversleeping, also not exactly my
problem. But St. Vitus is a busy fellow, inasmuch as he's also the patron saint
of actors, comedians, dancers, and epileptics when he's not busy warding off
lightning strikes and fending off attacks by wild animals. He's kind of the go-
to saint for all manner of things, but as far as i can tell, simple insomnia is
not in his portfolio.

Inasmuch as I'm even-handed about religions, I think I'll try Hypnos. who is
billed as a genuine sleep god. Hypnos is the father of Morpheus (the god of
dreams), brother of Thanatos (yes, that Thanatos) and the son of Nyx (night) and
Erebus (the deity of darkness). Quite the family tree. In order to placate the
entire group a three-buck candle would be clearly insufficient, even insulting.
I figured better to go whole-hog and sacrifice a lamb. However, there are no
lambs in my condo unit, and I was, frankly, afraid of making a mess, so I
thought that  perhaps a lamb chop would do just as well. I mean, how would
Hypnos know. So I checked the freezer and would you know it not a lamb chop to
be found. However, I did manage to locate a couple of pork chops which I think
will serve just as well. Tonight, I will eat them in honor of Hypnos. By the
way, I make a nice sauce out of orange juice, soy sauce, and garam masala. I'm
hoping that honoring the deity will earn me a couple of good nights' sleeps.

And as a backup, I'll have 5 mg of ambien at hand.

Source: 2014/03/nba-royalty

Title: NBA Aristocrats
Date: March 27, 2014

There's Sir Charles Barkley, of course, leading the way, and all those Kings
(Bernard, the king of Kings, but also Albert, Stacy and a score more). Dozens
of Earls, including the diminutive Boykins, and my favorite, nomenclature-wise,
Acie Earl. Also Brevin and many other Knights. Nor can we forget Marques Johnson
or Marquis Teague. And Mel Counts, the 7' foot guard. Baron Davis, Walter Dukes,
Tayshaun Prince. Royal Ivey. Let's not forget Mike "The Czar" Fratello.

While the big dipper was only a chamberlain, there's a notable double-dipper: 
Earl Barron.

There must be many more. Help me, metablogians. Surely I've just scratched the
royal surface.

March 29:  I can't believe that I forgot King James, who may be better than
KD, but certainly less fun to watch.

Source: 2014/04/written-six-years-ago-but-as-true-now-as-then

Title: Written in 2007, but as True Now as Then
Date: April 03, 2014

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain? It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good.  What could possibly stand in his way? Once
he sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some peace of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that although he was a black-hearted knave,
at least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade
us that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart."  But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself. Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the entire
Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster. "Full
of scorpions [should be] his brain." At this moment of writing, Cheney is
guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count -- who
can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even the most
rudimentary of consciences, on it lays the heavy burden of 60,000 to 100,000
Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has
lived in such dishonor/That the gods detest [his] baseness."  But Antony took
the proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman
fashion," let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating
himself and the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter.  I know
that you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the
internet, perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your
purpose. Dick -- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in
history.  At this point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest
end."  You'll immediately feel better.  It's a no-brainer. Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation
to suicide.  You are, as usual, falsely optimistic. Cheney can't off himself
because a) he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-
knowledge and d) he can't point a shotgun.  You cite the precedents of Othello
and Anthony but they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant.  Cheney is
a slug. Moreover, Cheney can't be "great of heart" -- he has no heart of his
own --either a transplant or some mechanical contraption."

April 4, 2014  Why is this man still alive?  Allowed to give interviews?  Is
there no justice in our sublunary world?

Source: 2014/04/my-kind-of-amnesia

Title: My Kind of Amnesia
Date: April 14, 2014

In Breaking Bad, Walter White disappears for a few days when he is kidnapped
-- he escapes only by murdering his meth-addled drug dealer. In order to
cover his tracks and account to his family for the missing days, he feigns
amnesia. And he's persuasive, possibly because everyone has seen so many
amnesia movies. He's so persuasive, in fact, that the doctors think that the
amnesia might recur. In order to get himself released from the hospital, he
confesses to the state shrink that he was only pretending. "There was no 'fugue
state,'" he admits.  That's a kind of theatrical amnesia in which I can believe
-- phony from start to finish.

Source: 2014/05/fuffa-fluff

Title: Fuffa -- Fluff
Date: May 07, 2014

Fuffa is a "cosa inutile, ciarpame" [a useless thing, trash] according
to Federico Roncoroni in Sillabario della Memoria (Milano, 2010). 
It's a dialectical (probably Milanese) word not found in most Italian
dictionaries. Roncoroni tells us that his aunt Evelina called the tiny balls
of material that sometimes form on the surface of socks "fuffa."  She likened
them to "furuncoli" [pimples]. The etymology of fuffa is obscure. Roncoroni
proposes that it might be merely onomatopoeic, related to English fluff which
signifies, as he says, "lanugine o peluria" [fuzz or nap]. But fluff, fuzzy
stuff in English, derives from Latin vellus [fleece] or "villus" [hair].  It's
most commonly used as a verb ("to fluff a pillow'). In theatrical jargon, a
person can fluff or flub his lines. Fluff is also a horrid marshmallow-like
confection that appeared in my childhood (though it dates to the 1920) and put
me off sweets for years. As far as I can tell, the meaning "a light woman"
as in "a bit of fluff" is not present in the Italian "fuffa." I doubt whether
"fuffa" and "fluff" are linked, unless "fuffa" also descends from "vellus."

Source: 2014/06/rocks-out-rocks-in

Title: Rocks Out, Rocks In
Date: June 08, 2014

I'm late as usual getting in the vegetable garden. After many years of adding
manure and compost and leaves, the soil is soft and fluffy. But every year,
rocks and more rocks.  When I first started this garden in 1978, I was pulling
out boulders; then large stones, then small stones, now one-inch stones and
pebbles. Why do I continue to do so?

Because my father took the rocks out of his garden. I remember once, as a
small child, saying to him, "Dad, you'll never get all the rocks out of your
garden."  "True enough, he replied, "but I'll have fewer rocks"  From which
response I realized that he was not an idealist but a meliorist, as I am.
So every year, a new crop of rocks. I put the rocks on the driveway, in the
low spots where puddles accumulate after a rainstorm.  It's ridiculous, I
know;  we order seven cubic yards of crushed stone for the driveway every few
years, so a bucket of rocks makes very little difference.  But if feels good
to perform two useful services at once:  rocks out of the garden, rocks on the
road.

Source: 2014/06/occupations-not-for-me-updated-edition

Title: Occupations Not For Me, Updated Edition
Date: June 10, 2014

Here are some career paths that it's just as well I didn't tread. Opportunities
for failure and misery.

1. Taxi driver in a large city (especially a city that's not on a grid, such as Boston or London.  Even the DC-diagonals drive me nuts).  I've earlier written about my incapacitating directional disability, but I neglected to mention that I tend to get into a bit of a panic when I'm lost --  I start driving much too fast and far too waywardly. So, dear friends, imagine me a befuddled cabbie, sweating super-profusely, while the fares in back scream bloody murder when I take the exact wrong turn for the fourth consecutive time. It would be a freakin' nightmare. Related occupations that won't work: tour guide, wilderness guide, tracker.

2. Dog-groomer. I've hinted at my lack of affection for doggies before.  I just don't think I'd do a good job blow-drying Fido or brushing Fifi's teeth. (Incidentally, I'm joined in my prejudice against curs by gentle Will himself, whose references to canines are uniformly unfriendly: the superbly wicked sisters in King Lear, for example, are "dog-hearted daughters.")

3. Trapeze artist. I'm terrified of heights and I have absolutely no sense of rhythm.  Imagine me launching myself at just the right moment to catch my partner by the ankles. Related opportunity for ignominious disgrace: dance instructor.

4.  Surgeon. I'm far too squeamish to be poking around in someone's innards. Even channel surfing has become a dangerous pastime since we accidentally acquired the live surgery channel. Motto:  "all gore, all the time." I have to keep clicking that remote lest I accidentally pause at an open-heart moment.  The FCC should mandate a warning and a five-second delay:  "Caution: palpitating inner organs on view shortly." Related non-opportunity: veterinary surgeon.

5. Hostage. Chained to a bed somewhere in the 'stans wouldn't work for me. I must have my oatmeal every morning at 7 a.m., and I need to move my bowels shortly afterward. Moreover, if I don't eat lunch right on time, I get wicked headaches. Not to mention that I don't function well in rooms that are either too hot or too cold or not well ventilated, and I can't stand tobacco. On the whole, I'd be a mighty cranky hostage.

6. Monk. Poverty I could manage, I suppose. Chastity would be a struggle but with plain fare, isolation, and cold showers I might succeed (but why?). Obedience?  Never. Not a chance. Nope. Not for me.

Source: 2014/07/two-possibly-three-improvements-to-soccer

Title: Two (Possibly Three) Improvements to Soccer
Date: July 10, 2014

Netherlands-Argentina was exciting and rather beautiful until it went to
penalty kicks. What a foolish way to find a winner! It's as if, in basketball,
tie games led to a foul-shooting contest, or if, in baseball, instead of
extra innings they started hitting fungoes for distance. Soccer travesties
itself by resorting to penalty kicks. A better solution: play until someone
scores. Sudden death. I mean, sudden victory. I would hope the game (the
match) would end before midfielders start to collapse from exhaustion.

Brazil-Germany offers a second opportunity for improvement. Is it not time
to institute a mercy rule.  When there's a mismatch in junior high girls
softball and one team gets ahead by ten runs, the game is called off. It's over.
It should be the same in soccer. Team A, let us say, runs up a five goal lead
-- stop the game, everyone go home.  Why should a team (Brazil, for example)
suffer interminable humiliation.

And a bonus recommendation: no biting. Recidivist biters should be banned for
life.

Source: 2014/07/on-the-kindle-with-tertius-and-rosamund

Title: On the Kindle with Tertius and Rosamund
Date: July 11, 2014

I'm reading Middlemarch again. It's either my fourth or fifth time through the
best novel ever written in the English language. If you want to know about the
nineteenth century, start with George Eliot.

I had the oddest feelings fifty pages in. (Actually, "pages" is an anachronism
because I am reading on the kindle.)  Lydgate is flirting with beautiful,
empty- headed Rosamund Vincy.  I thought "this time let him be smart;  let him
not marry Rosamund."  I must have been in an unusally plastic frame of mind,
or in some sort of reading reverie. I know that novels are immutable, but I
was hoping against hope that Lydgate had learned something since the last time
I read the novel. Even though he made a fool of himself with that actress in
Paris. And then last night, just before I turned out the lights, Lydgate did
it again -- fell for the blonde curls and the glistening eye. He's learned
nothing, not a thing, in the last ten years. And now I have to live through
the saga as his crush turns into crushing disappointment and bitterness. Marry
in haste, repent at leisure. Poor Lydgate.

The kindle changes the input but doesns't do a thing for the outcome.

Source: 2014/09/at-the-old-west-bradford-cemetery

Title: At the Old West Bradford Cemetery
Date: September 04, 2014

The old West Bradford cemetery, which is carved out of our land, is peopled by
the Worthleys, Hacketts, Kidders, and Sleepers who first settled this part of
Vermont. Some were long lived, some passed through this thoroughfare of woe only
briefly. There are o-so-many of those sad stone lozenges at the foot of a grave
that represent infants who died too young to be christened.

Our most disturbing gravestone, in my opinion, is the the one for Stanley
Franklin Dwinell, M.D. born in 1920 and who died along with James Scott
Dwinell (age 7), Peter Dewey Dwinell (age 6), and Jonathan Dwinell (age 2) all
on the same day, December 11, 1952.  What a horror, I thought -- a man and his
three young sons all at once. A tragedy. But what sort?  A plane crash?  A
boating accident? House fire?  Perhaps even an infectious disease.

An internet search came up empty-handed, so I enquired of our longer-tenured
neighbors. And here's the local legend. "Oh yes, the vet," I was told (although
the tombstone distinctly says M. D., rather than D. V. M).  "He was driving
along Route 5 in Fairlee one winter morning and it was an icy road and foggy and
he went out of control and all four of them died instantly. His wife was at home
drinking a cup of coffee when she got the phone call. She left the coffee half-
finished on the kitchen table, left the house without a word, and was never seen
again. Didn't even take her clothes. Just disappeared."

It's a good story and it sounds like the plot of a short story by Alice Munro
-- but I don't believe it.  The same gravestone reveals that Constance S.
Dwinell, wife of Doctor Stanley Franklin Dwinnel, died January 25, 1985, at age
65.

I'm trying to imagine the remainder of poor Constance's life. It's hard to
construct a scenario that isn't completely dreadful. Most likely, Constance
returned, shattered, to the small town in New Hampshire, let us say, where she
must have been born. She moved back into her parents' house and took a job as a
town librarian, her life blighted by the tragedy. She never remarried.

But I prefer to imagine that she moved to Paris (she had majored in French at
Wellesley, I'm guessing,) and never told a soul about her first family. There
she was wooed and won by Baron Guy de Condorcet de Noialles but could never
conceive a child. It was a long happy marriage. After Guy died, crashing his
motorcycle on the Riviera, she returned to the States a rich woman, and lived
out her life in a Park Avenue apartment in New York. Friends and neighbors
who had no idea of her first life were shocked when they read the will which
specified that she be buried, along with Stanley and the children, right here in
West Bradford.

That's my story and I'm sticking with it though I would very much like to know
the truth.

November 14, 2015  Larry Coffin, president of the Bradford Historical Society,
writes:

I would like to correct your information on Dr. Stanley Dwinell.  He and his
three sons were killed in a collision with a train on a crossing in Newbury,
Vt as he was going to treat a patient at Woodsville (NH) Cottage Hospital. His
father Dr. Franklin Dwinell was in a car following.

Source: 2014/09/overheard-dialogue-lobster-shop-in-maine

Title: Overheard Dialogue -- Lobster Shop in Maine
Date: September 13, 2014

Lady of mature (c. 80) years old to man of equal age.

"So he took me out on his boat. It was very small. Didn't even have a
bathroom. I had to use the bait bucket."

Source: 2014/10/six-leggedness

Title: Six-Leggedness
Date: October 13, 2014

I read Planet of the Bugs (Chicago, 2014) by Scott Richard Shaw, a Wyoming
entomologist. It's a good book on a great topic -- the evolution of insects. In
the acknowledgements, Shaw thanks his editor for helping him to "shape a bulky
manuscript into a sleeker book," but I think I would have much preferred the
fatter unpublished version, which I imagine would have been heavier on curious,
fascinating and sometimes lurid detail. I think that Shaw's editor may have
misunderestimated his potential enthusiastic readership.

Shaw loves his insects and writes the evolution of life bug-centrically. Instead
of the conventional telling, where everything leads ineluctably to majestic
us, homines sapientes, Shaw inscribes the triumph of the six-legged kind. For
example, Shaw disparages our (I mean mankind's) walking and running. "Two-legged
bipedal locomotion is so unstable and difficult to master that it seems highly
improbable and almost pointless." He has a point there. A child takes a year to
learn to walk, and even after he does so, he staggers like a drunken sailor for
several months. No other creature on earth is so ungainly at the outset.

Moreover, Shaw adds, six-leggedness optimizes balance and stability and has the
potential for rapid motion. "Six legged form is sublime. Fifty million insect
species can't possibly be wrong."

If I understand it correctly, most insect species propel themselves by
alternately moving one of their two leg tripods -- and tripods are inherently
stable.  It's a great system.

Now that I've achieved the "golden years," I spend much too much time worrying
about that I'm about to crash to the ground and break a wrist or a hip -- all
too common afflictions among the two-legged kind.  No one has ever seen a
beetle trip, or an ant sprawl embarrassingly on the sidewalk.

Too bad we don't have six legs. Or even four (the other two having evolved
into arms). We'd be better off. We'd need two pairs of hips, of course,
and copulation would be more complicated, but it would be worth it. Speed,
stability, grace. Four legs would definitely be sublime.

On the other hand, I'm glad that we evolved an internal skeleton, which the
insects never did. I wouldn't want to bother with an exoskeleton or carapace.
It would be ungainly, troublesome. And probably accompanied by all sorts of
emotional displays. "Don't pay any attention to him. He's moulting."

Source: 2014/10/like-1

Title: Like
Date: October 14, 2014

Waiting for the train at the White River Junction railroad station, I met
a young lady, a graduate student at Dartmouth. We engaged in a brief
conversation. I asked about her ambition and plans. She said, "I want to be,
like, a college professor." Like yikes. Like double yikes.

Source: 2014/10/nobody-cares

Title: Nobody Cares
Date: October 22, 2014

There's a brief sentence in The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth that
continues to move me no matter how frequently I return to it. I's a passage
that resonates in my latter-day soul.

Falstaff and Doll Tearsheet (whose name, obviously, indicates her profession)
are old acquaintances and old rivals who are evermore at odds. "They never
meet but they fall to discord."  They seem to delight in exchanging insults.
To Doll, Falstaff is a "muddy conger," "a huge full hogshead," "a poor ape,"
and even, when she is more affectionate, "a whoreson little tidy Bartholemew
boar-pig".  Falstaff is equally abusive. But at one point in the play, there is
a magical moment when Shakespeare allows Doll to propose a truce.

"Come," she says, "I'll be friends with thee, Jack, thou art going to the wars,
and whether I shall ever see thee again or no there is nobody cares."

I think that what electrifies me is the last phrase, "there is nobody cares.
"  A less imaginative, less empathetic writer than Shakespeare would
have ended the sentence more predictably: he would have written, "nobody
knows" and would have therefore repeated the commonplace that the future is
unknowable. But Shakespeare raises the ante -- as he so often does. "Nobody
cares" is demotic shorthand for "nobody else but we two care"-- which I take
to suggest that Doll reflects not that the universe is dicey but rather that we
are each of us isolated and unimportant except as we are valued by our nearest
friends and the people with whom we have gone through life.

The sentence is nostalgic in the best sense. It is not sentimental;  Doll
does not romanticize hers or Falstaff's past. Instead she faces the aleatory
universe bravely. You are at risk, it could turn out badly, let's be friends
now, all that matters is the moment. The sentence is valedictory and at the
same time extremely warm.

Perhaps I'm projecting my own feelings onto Doll Tearsheet. I'm at the point
in my life in which I value (perhaps even treasure) the people whom I've
worked with, or argued with, liked or loved.  (I have even come to value some
whom I've not loved.) They're all part of the fabric of my life and they are
all disappearing, one by one -- going to the wars, we might say. And nobody
cares. Except us.

Source: 2014/10/why-mike-gave-up-religion

Title: Why Mike Gave Up Religion
Date: October 23, 2014

My friend Mike, who is pushing eighty very hard, told me this story. "In
the 1940s we lived in Sarasota, where the Red Sox held spring training. I
had had rheumatic fever and my mother over-reacted and kept me in bed for
years. Nevertheless, I was an altar boy and I also would get out of the
house whenever I could to watch the Red Sox play -- Johnny Pesky, Johnny Doerr,
Rudy York, Vern Stephens, Dom DiMaggio, and of course Ted Williams. One day
I talked to Ted Williams and asked him for an autograph. He said he would
bring me a signed picture. He did, but I wasn't at home. Ted Williams came
to my house and I wasn't there!!  My mother said, 'a very tall man came by
and gave me this for you. I told him you were at church.' I thought, how can I
trust a religion that would let me be at church rather than at home when Ted
Williams called. That's when I stopped believing."  It's a great story and
I've recorded it exactly as he told it.

Source: 2014/10/when-i-lost-respect-for-authority-another-episode

Title: When I Lost Respect for Authority (Another Episode)
Date: October 30, 2014

We were playing punchball on the PS 217 "big court." It must have been
during school hours because Mrs. McGowan (a fifth grade teacher) was
the umpire and the players included the entire population of the class,
not just the regulars. Michael Lurie, the least athletic student in the
grade, and perhaps in the entire borough, was told  to play third base,
and obviously unfamiliar with the game and with Billy Cox, stationed both
feet directly on the white- painted base. Someone hit (punched) the
spaldeen toward him and he froze, but the ball landed precisely in his
crotch, and lodged, and after a bit he found it there and held it up. We all
knew that the batter was out, but Mrs. McGowan, as ignorant as Michael Lurie,
shouted, "he caught it illegally" and awarded first base to the batter. I
remember that several of us protested, but Mrs. Mc Gowan was adamant. It
was a miscarriage of justice. A violation of the rules. The umpire was
incompetent. How could I ever trust authority again?

Source: 2014/11/superhero-perils

Title: Superhero Perils
Date: November 06, 2014

I awoke this morning from a semi-nightmare all in a dither about Superman's
x-ray vision. Inasmuch as the blue-haired one can see through dense objects
(except, if I remember correctly, lead) then it follows as night the day
that he cannot help seeing through his own eyelids. Superman must therefore
suffer from what the sleep consultants call "poor sleep hygiene." Unable
to keep the light out of his own eyes, he must therefore be subject to a
degree of insomnia. No wonder he's always powing someone in the jaw -- he's
just not getting enough sleep.

Has anyone else given thought to this important topic?

Source: 2014/11/creating-space

Title: "Creating Space"
Date: November 14, 2014

If you listen to the announcers of the NBA games, basketball players defy the
laws and logic of physics. They "create space."

One of the greatest space-creators was Shaquille O. Others merely imitate his
technique. His most characteristic play was to drive his massive left shoulder
into the chest of the defender, knocking him backwards a couple of feet. When
he had gained a sufficient advantage and had room to maneuver, he would flip
the ball (awkwardly) toward the basket. HIs defender would as likely as not be
charged with a foul while the pre-Newtonian announcers would celebrate him for
'creating space.' And a beautiful game would be transformed into a brutal game.

And why is LeBron James allowed to create space on his every drive to
the basket?  He's gifted enough that he doesn't need the advantage; but
nevertheless, he routinely pushes off with his off hand, often lodging his off-
elbow in the chest of the hapless defender.

I often watch LeBron create space on hdtv where I've precorded the game. I can
therefore watch the same play again and again. In doing so I stop time, or run
time backwards. He creates space, I stop time.

So two can play at defying Einstein.

Source: 2014/11/sleeping

Title: Another Myth Debunked
Date: November 15, 2014

One day, back in the 50s, our neighborhood softball team was hosting a team
from some exotic location, such as Bensonhurst, at the PS 217 schoolyard. I
think I must have been playing either shortstop or second base, because I had an
excellent view of the earthshaking event that I'm about to describe.

It was the case that our guys were often a little less well-outfitted than
the opposition because we didn't have enough baseball gloves for the whole
team and had to borrow them from the visitors. Jimmy Nolan was playing first
base and early in the game, possibly in the first inning, someone on the
other team hit a grounder to third and the third baseman made a good on-target
throw to first. But Jimmy, who happened to be wearing an official but I
suspect borrowed first baseman's glove with a big pocket, reached out for the
throw with his right hand (he was a southpaw) but let the ball miss the glove.
He then casually caught the ball with his bare left hand which dangled
nonchalantly at his knee. I was impressed, as was everyone, and I thought,
"that's the way to show these visitors how tough we are -- we don't even need
the gloves that we've borrowed." I was proud to be a PS 217 Misfit.

Sixty years later, last week in fact, at a reunion of PS 217 softball players,
I asked Spike Cohen if he remembered the play. He did, much to my surprise.
"Oh yes," he said, 'and I even remember who threw the ball. It was Marv Lasky,
and he had a cannon for an arm." So The Play became even more dramatic
and mythical. I thought, wow, I'm not the only one who remembers that
catch, which ought to go down in history as one of the great iconic moments in
PS 217 schoolyard athletics. And then, since Jimmy himself was present at the
reunion, I asked him if he recalled the Great Event. He said he did. So I
asked him,"Why did you do that? Why did you let the ball go under the glove?
 Why did you catch it with the wrong hand?"  And he answered, "I misjudged the
throw. It was a mistake."

I was deflated, nay crushed. For all these many years, I had been convinced
that Jimmy had made that play on purpose to make a statement. But now I know
that it was merely an accident. And so another myth comes to be de-mythologized
by revisionist historiography.

Next thing you know, they'll try to tell us Babe Ruth didn't point to the
right- field bleachers just before hitting that home run.

Source: 2014/11/disasters-consoling

Title: Joy of Extinctions
Date: November 19, 2014

I am inordinately fond of mass extinctions. I find them consoling.

The most recent mass extinction, the newly-famous Yucatan-comet-iridium K-T
boundary event of 66 million years ago is one of my personal favorites.
To recall: a comet six or seven miles in diameter, zooming along at 65,00
miles per hour and therefore generating a good bit of momentum, smacked
into what is now the Yucatan peninsula with the force of a heck of a
large number of hydrogen bombs. The impact produced a crater that was
initially an astonishing 65 miles across and 18 miles deep, triggered massive
earthquakes as well as tsunamis half a mile high, and briefly heated the
earth's atmosphere to hundreds of degrees. Within minutes, everything as far
as Illinois became wasteland. Because of the blanket of smoke and dust,
sunlight could not reach the earth, so temperatures plummeted, completely
disrupting the world-wide chlorophyll-based food chain. At the same time,
downpours of acid rain corrosive enough to dissolve rocks killed everything
they touched. A full 80% of the world's animal species disappeared -- along
with half of all land plants.

Although it must have been quite a show, it was not as thorough a disaster as
the Permian extinction (252 million years ago) which killed 95% of all living
species, but it is, rather, comparable in scope to the Ordovician extinction
(444 million years ago), the Devonian (375 million years ago) and the Triassic
(201 million years ago). It's no wonder that folks in the know estimate that
99.9% of all the species that have ever existed have disappeared.

The knowledge that there will inevitably be another extinction helps to put
our daily woes in perspective. How can I worry about whether the grout
should be "Desert Sand" or "Forest Gray" or whether my newest skin thingy is
benign or dangerous when our species and the cool green earth itself are
doomed. Judgment day is a-coming, whether in the form of another wayfaring
comet, or a series of explosive volanoes, or the release of the nitrogen and
carbon now sequestered in the permafrost, or some event entirely unpredictable.
Something is going to happen, as sure as shooting. Perhaps, some think, it's
already happening.

So that's one benefit of a mass extinction -- it helps you sleep well at
night. Why worry about trivialities?

And also: if it weren't for the extinctions, we wouldn't be here at all. If
the dinosaurs hadn't been killed by the comet they would most likely have
continued to dominate the planet, and the descendants of velociraptors and
mosasaurs and thunder-lizards sure as heck weren't going to leave a lot of
breathing room for the proto-primates.

Extinctions are one of the many improbable accidents that got us here jolly    .

Source: 2014/11/stilts

Title: Still Another Occupation Not For Me
Date: November 21, 2014

So far my list includes taxi-driver, trapeze artist, surgeon, dog-groomer,
monk, and hostage. Here's another.

Last week I had a room on the twelfth floor of a new downtown Brooklyn hotel.
From my window I could watch a new skyscraper being assembled. The basic I-beam
members were in place and concrete floors and ceilings had been poured. But
the structure lacked external walls!!  Where there will be walls sometime
it the future, preferably before the building is leased and inhabited, was
what looked to be an orange plastic mesh, perhaps reinforced with a thin
cable or two. From my vantage point, I could could see right through to the
interior of the building. There men on aluminum stilts were spreading on
the ceilings something that might have been plaster but was more likely some
sort of curing preparation for raw concrete. Let me make this clear: men
on stilts were plastering ceilings in rooms that had no exterior walls and
where a slip or trip would send them plummeting twelve stories to the hard
sidewalk. Frankly, I found it difficult to watch without vivid and horrible
imaginings flashing across my vulnerable brain. So without hesitation I can
add to the set of occupations in which I would fail ignomiously, stilt-walker
in high-rise construction. A terrifying way to make a living, especially for
people like me, pre-frightened by heights.

Source: 2014/12/what-is-a-tax-cart

Title: What is a Tax-Cart?
Date: December 06, 2014

What indeed?  In Trollope's Barchester Towers, when Mrs Quiverful discovers
that her husband, rector of Puddingdale, is not to become warden of Hiram's
Hospital, she sets out to Barchester to confront the bishop. Not a walker,
and not the owner of a horse or carriage of her own, she "begged that Farmer
Subsoil would take her thither in his tax-cart."  A tax-cart, as far as the
dictionary is concerned, is a "small spring-cart on which a tax is paid." So it
is properly a "taxed-cart."  A "spring-cart" is a "springed-cart" -- i.e a cart
with springs. But were taxes paid on all vehicles? If so, why should this one
kind of vehicle be called a "tax-cart?" But if not, why should this particular
kind of vehicle be singled out of taxation. Trollope does not illuminate.

And so to the other nineteenth-century horsedrawn vehicles (barouche, basket
carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche,
cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon,
curricle, cutter, daumont, dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly,
fourgon, four-wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty
car, jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau, patache, phaeton, pill-box, post-chaise,
rockaway, shandrydan, shay, sociable, spider-phaeton, spring-van, stanhope,
sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika, victoria,
vis-a-vis, wagonette, whitechapel, and wurt) now add "tax-cart."

Source: 2014/12/winter-love

Title: Winter Love
Date: December 08, 2014

My daughter's nephew-in-law, Zach Appelman, is a talented actor setting out on
what might very well turn out to be a terrific career. (His ascent would be
more rapid if he would take his aunt-in-law's father's advice and change his
stage name to Zach Barrymore or Zach Zellweger, but the young man has too much
integrity to comply with aged opportunistic wisdom).

Zach recently played Hamlet at the Hartford Stage in Connecticut (Hartford
Courant: "a career-propelling performance that at times takes your breath
away"). I spoke with Zach at the recent family Thanksgiving and he told me
that the director of this Hamlet, Darko Tresnjak, made an effort to emphasize
the play's comic passages. It was a good idea, I think, because Hamlet is
both in reading and performance an intermittently hilarious piece of dramatic
art. But, added Zach, sometimes the audience laughed at moments that he
did not anticipate. He cited an example in the so-called "bedroom scene,"
where Hamlet assails Gertrude for marrying Claudius. Hamlet's rebuke of his
mother is harsh and dislocating. About her marriage to Claudius, he says

You cannot call it love;  for at your age

The hectic in the blood is tame, it's humble

It waits upon the judgment.

These lines apparently caused quite a commotion among the seniors in the
audience. It is not hard to imagine why. Hamlet, for all his sparkling
intelligence, is callow. He has youth's ignorance about middle-age sexuality
-- as the silver-threads-among-the-gold demographic must certainly have
recognized. How could Hamlet (or perhaps even young Shakespeare, a mere thirty-
five when he wrote the play), know that desire and passion increase in middle-
age as impetuous adolescent oestrus and fumblings are superseded by mature
appreciation and achievement.

I doubt that Shakespeare meant Hamlet's lines to be funny -- there's no
room for humor in the rhapsody of words that the prince directs at his
mommy. Nevertheless, a modern sophisticated and wrinkle-deep-in-time audience
cannot help but titter at Hamlet's grotesque misjudgment.

These observations on sex in youth and age were still percolating in my
waiting- for-wisdom brain while I re-read, for, what?  the fourth or fifth
or sixth time, Anthony Trollope's excellent 1857 novel, Barchester Towers. My
attention was caught, this time through, by one of Trollope's digressions,
very pertinent to the topic of autumnal love, and which I now transcribe in
a slightly reduced version and which I think is well worthy intense study,
especially by my readers of certain late-hectic ages.

"It is, we believe, [says Trollope] common with young men of five and twenty to
look on their seniors -- on men of, say, double their own age -- as so many
stocks and stones -- stocks and stones, that is, in regard to feminine beauty."

(Let me interject that for "young men of five and twenty", think "Hamlet." And
when Trollope talks of "feminine beauty," let us recognize that the phrase
is a  euphemistic Victorian surrogate for issues of human desire and
sexuality that conventional taboos made it impossible for Trollope to address
forthrightly.)

"There never was a greater mistake [continues Trollope]. Men of fifty don't
dance mazurkas, being generally too fat and wheezy; nor do they sit for hours
together on river banks at their mistresses' feet, being somewhat afraid of
rheumatism. But for real true love, love at first sight, love to devotion, love
that robs a man of his sleep, love [and here Trollope begins to quote from the
famous passage in Love's Labor's Lost] 'that will gaze an eagle blind, love that
will hear the lowest sound when the suspicious head of theft is stopped, love
that is like a Hercules still climbing trees in the Hesperides, we believe that
this best age is from forty-five to seventy."

Forty-five to seventy, ladies and gentleman. Just the age of the
men and women in the Hartford playhouse who snickered at Hamlet
junior's incomprehension of his mother's passions.

And then Trollope brings his excursus to conclusion with a great sentence in
which he both disses and dismisses immature youthful ardor:

"Up to that age [i.e. forty-five] men are generally given to mere flirting."

As perhaps Hamlet flirts with Ophelia.

It's intriguing that Trollope recognizes that men of seventy summers may still
be ardent lovers and appreciators of the flesh. If he had been a little older
and more experienced, he would have increased his estimate to seventy-five,
perhaps even eighty. After all, eighty is the new seventy, is it not?  Or he
might even have acknowledged that it ain't over until it's over.

Trollope was only forty-two when he wrote Barchester Towers, so perhaps he knew
that he was only capable of mere flirtation with Rose Heseltine. But he was
67 when he proposed, in the nasty dystopia The Fixed Period, that 68 was the
age at which all men should be required to give up the ghost. The Fixed Period
is a novel which, at least to this septuagenarian, provokes not titters but
guffaws. Poor Anthony T. had become so terribly sour, so unlike the Trollope of
Barchester.

Source: 2014/12/more-nba-onomastics

Title: More NBA Onomastics
Date: December 10, 2014

A surprising number of current NBA players take the floor with their names
reversed: first name for surname, surname for first. The king of this
confusion is LeBron James, who in any sensible universe would be named James
LeBron. And then there's the budding star Nerlens Noel. Who can possibly
doubt that Nerlens Noel is a copy editor's error for Nerlens, Noel -- the
lost comma precipitating the embarrassing inversion? The very same error
seems to have produced Leonard Kawhi, Jack Jarrett, Howard Dwight, Irving
Kyrie, Arthur Darrell, Leonard Meyers and Anthony Carmelo. Then there's Cory
Joseph, the Spurs' talented backup point guard, about whom Edward Arlington
Robinson wrote the poem -- o wait no, that was Richard Cory -- or Cory Richard,
as he would have been known if he had preferred b-ball to banking.

And there are also two closely related onomastic anomalies: the "two
first name syndrome" featuring Chis Paul and Paul George (with help from
Joel Anthony), and the "two surname syndrome," where the Dallas Mavericks
teammates Tyson Chandler and Chandler Parsons have completely confounded prae
with cog. Or should their team now be updated to Mavericks Dallas?

Source: 2014/12/airline-seats

Title: Unfriendly Skies
Date: December 14, 2014

I bought a February airline ticket to The Big Easy. I bought it online, as
we all do nowadays (whatever happened to travel agents?) I figured that they
would try to squeeze a few dollars in extra charges out of me, but I  was
surprised that the airline had the balls to demand $25.00 for my one piece of
carry-on luggage (not checked -- carry on!). And then I was completely floored
to discover that Frontier now adds an extra charge for a seat. Yes, a seat! A
seat is an additional charge, even though an airplane is not like a subway,
where you can strap-hang. Nor can you sit outside, on the wing. A seat is not
a an option or, goodness gracious! a luxury. And yet Frontier now exacts a few
bucks for the privilege of sitting down.

Frontier, I can tell you, lacks any sense of irony.

"Would you like air with your seat. There will be a small extra charge for
breathing."

I know we're supposed to feel sorry for the struggling airlines, but that's
a myth, a canard. The airlines are not starving. thank you very much. The
International Air Transport Association, the airlines' trade group, estimates
that the industry's profits were $11 billion in 2013, will be $19.9 billion this
year and will rise to $25 billion next year. (Billion!, not million.)  Why so
much? Because fuel costs continue to drop. And also because we passengers have
become accustomed to being crammed into smaller and smaller spaces and have been
taught to pay extra for every glass of orange juice. And to enjoy the luxury of
a chair.

Hey, fellow passengers!  Remember when oil prices spiked a few years ago
and the airlines added "fuel surcharges"? Well, fuel is down. Raise your
hand if you think you're going to get a "fuel rebate." Let me count the
hands. Hmm. Not so many.

Where do you think the $25 billion in profits will go. I'll give you three
guesses. A) Increase the salaries of stewards, baggage handlers and other
airport workers?  B. Lower the cost of airline travel for passengers in the
economy (i.e. steerage) classes?  C. Improve amenities for first-class
travelers?

Shock!!  The correct answer is C. According to The New York Times, improvements
in service "have been directed at the airlines’ most lucrative passengers,
who are flying in business class or paying for full-fare coach seats. Delta Air
Lines, for instance, announced on Monday that it renamed its business section
Delta One, instead of BusinessFirst, and said it would glorify the seats with
brand-new quilted covers. American Airlines announced this week that it would
spend $2 billion to improve customer experience at the airport and inside its
planes. Part of that investment includes adding more lie-flat seats for business
class passengers.

For the rich: "lie-flat seats," and "quilted seat covers." And what is American
Airlines doing for the rest of us, the not-rich. "In the back of the plane, it
introduced a class of fares called Basic Economy, the cheapest fares. Passengers
with those tickets, though, will not be able to book their seats in advance and
will not be able to refund or change those tickets."

It's still another example of the way the good ol' USA is becoming more and
more a class-ridden society. Billions for the few, sub-minimum wage for the
many. I wonder why the airlines don't go whole hog and separate passengers
not by front and back of the plane, but by plane itself. Class I planes -- all
sleek and shiny with free champagne supper and lie-flat quilted seats, and Class
II planes -- no seats at all, just a few square feet on the corrugated metal
floor. For only a few extra dollars, you will be able to reserve your very own
couple of square feet. Do you think I'm imagining some sort of wild dystopian
future? I don't think so. The way things are going, it's an inevitability.

Source: 2014/12/manstand

Title: "Man" Is Now an Adjective and not a Good One.
Date: December 23, 2014

I believe that I first heard "man" used as an adjective in the phrase "man cave"
-- which is, I believe, a place where guys go to isolate themselves from their
wimmen and famly and where they watch boxing on the TV, drink a lot of beer, and
puke on the shag rug. But recently I learned about the "man stand." "To do the
man stand" is when the husband waits at the door of the dress shop clutching
a bundle of packages while the old ball and chain decides between the 10 and
the 12 and between the gray one and the green. Sometimes a manstander parks
his carcass in a designated "man chair." And now there's a new one: the "man
spread", which describes the way a crude young guy with below-the-waist pants
sits in the subway, legs akimbo, indifferent to the gentle ladies and to the
tired old geezers who need to relax far more than he does.

"Man boobs," which are nothing more than unsightly fat, are sometimes
abbreviated to "moobs."  "Manparts" requires no elucidation.

In each of these cases, "man" is not used affectionately or admiringly. "Man,"
as an adjective, is anything but "manly." "Man" is primitive and insensitive,
an adjective of derogation and denigration.

January 4:  My penpalessa, SF, writes that in England the phrase "man flu" has
now become popular. A "man flu" is merely a cold that men (such babies they
are!!) make a fuss about, but which a woman would ignore.

Source: 2014/12/prophecy2015

Title: The Return of the Prophet
Date: December 31, 2014

Vivian de St. Vrain, fully accredited prophet (Senior Fellow, American
Society of Prophecy), has retreated to the mountaintop and has
returned with predictions for 2015. Here they are:

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known American or possibly European athlete will be accused of
taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be accused of taking bribes;

5)  questions will be raised about the safety of America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2015.  Let's
see whether a senior but world-class professional prophet still has enough on
the ball (a crystal ball) to foretell the future one more time.