

================================================================================Source: 2024/01/another-brooklyn-memoirist-norman-podhoretz

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Norman Podhoretz
Date: January 03, 2024

To most readers of this blague, Norman Podhoretz is a nonentity, but for a
while there, he was a big deal in certain intellectual circles. His youthful
autobiography, Making It (1967), elicited howls of indignation. Nowadays, it's
impossible not to read Making It retrospectively, because it's undeniable
that the author, who began life as liberal or progressive, has metamorphosed,
over the years, into a monster. He is now a full bore Trumpian fascist. In
the Podhoretz universe, abortion is infanticide and homosexuality constitutes
a danger to the polity. Although the child of shtetl Jews, Podhoretz is now
stridently anti-immigrant. In 2010, he ridiculously proclaimed that "I would
rather have Sarah Palin sitting in the Oval Office than Barack Obama." He has
called the Trump presidency "a kind of miracle" and announced  that Trump is "a
vessel chosen by God to save us from the evil on the Left." Such a sentiment is
not just echo-chamber conservative twaddle: it's nutso insanity pure and simple.

How much of Podhoretz's wandering in the wilderness can be traced to his
Brownsville Brooklyn childhood and youth is hard to say?  Making It is a
most peculiar autobiography. It's beautifully written -- in the sense that
the arguments are finely deployed and the sentences are lucid, sometimes even
lyrical. But it's also clear that Podhoretz, from the start, was the kind of
obnoxious guy who delighted in provocation. It's not uncommon for Brooklynites
of his generation to wish to leave Brooklyn behind. Podhoretz is shameless about
his ambition: he had "a vulgar desire to rise above the class into which he was
born."

Most megalomaniacal autobiographers want to be liked. Not Podhoretz. He strives
to be disliked, even hated, and in this he succeeds. He had a fear of becoming
an "inauthentic WASP" but that's exactly what he became. The further to the
right he went, the further away from his mother's embarrassing Yiddish accent. A
sad life.

The character in literature who Podhoretz most resembles is Johnny Rocco in Key
Largo, who wants "more."

Podhoretz's "more" is similarly empty and was similarly dangerous.

Source: 2024/01/new-years-resolutions-2024

Title: New Year's Resolutions -- 2024
Date: January 05, 2024

It's that time of year once again -- time to get 2024 out of the starting gates
with force and vigor. I'm all into self-improvement, as everyone knows. So here
are my resolutions.

1). Sleep longer, and stay in bed later in the morning. No need to bounce out of
bed. It's warm and cozy in there. Breakfast will wait a few minutes longer. 
Related resolution: take more and better naps. Nothing more pleasurable than a
lie-down after a satisfying lunch.

2). Eat more ice cream. We are fortunate to live in an age of ice-cream
abundance and variety. I intend to take advantage of the circumstances.  And
by ice cream, I mean Ice cream: no ersatz concoctions of soy, whale-oil, kefir,
oatmilk, yoghurt, tofu, or coconut oil. Cream, as from a cow.

3)  Walk more slowly. What's the rush?  Why is everyone in such a gol-durn
hurry?

4)  Avoid responsibility. Let others do their share. At this point in life,
there's no shame in shirking.

I hope this program is not too ambitious. I wouldn't want to fail at it and
embarrass my friends and supporters. I'll do my best.

Source: 2024/01/alou

Title: Alou
Date: January 10, 2024

I read Felipe Alou's autobiography, My Baseball Journey (2018). It's not a
literary masterpiece, but nevertheless a solid book that "does the job."
It's particularly valuable for its story of the brutalities faced by a black
Dominican pioneer coming to segregated America in the early '50s. A good
reminder of a part of our ugly racial history that is so easy to forget or
ignore. In an afterword, Bruce Bochy calls Alou the "Jackie Robinson of South
America." My Baseball Journey is also a good reminder of the daily hardships
faced by the professional athlete. True enough that they're well paid, but also
true that they're subject to injuries and decay and insecurity and have to fight
for their job every day. There's no such thing as tenure in sports. Alou was
smart and resilient and proud and enjoyed a career that can be justly celebrated
-- but not all do.

Here's my favorite paragraph: "I missed playing when I retired. Every retired
ballplayer goes through the same things, the same thoughts and emotions. I still
miss playing. To this day, I have dreams that I'm still playing. Sometimes I
have nightmares where I"m late for a game or I've missed a team bus to the
ballpark." I understand this sentiment very well; like many of my peers, I still
dream that I'm either late for class or am standing in front of a large audience
and have absolutely no knowledge of the subject about which I'm required to
discourse for an hour.

One weakness of My Baseball Journey: though Alou managed through the steroid
years, and knew Barry Bonds and others, he gives the drug problem mighty short
shrift. His book turns a blind eye toward that painful period.

Source: 2024/01/words-of-my-life-joint

Title: Words of My Life -- "Joint"
Date: January 17, 2024

"Joint" is a word that in the course of my lifetime has engaged in some serious
shape-shifting. When I first encountered the word, joint (derived from the
Latin jungere, to join) was simply a place where two pieces of wood were glued
together or where one's bones were articulated to produce a wrist, elbow, or
knee. Mighty simple and uncomplicated, it would appear -- but even then "joint"
had begun to accumulate variants. Rick Blaine's sentence in Casablanca was an
early warning: "of all the gin joints in all the towns in the world, she has
to come into mine." A "joint" was apparently a nightclub or bar. "Gin joint"
suggests that  "Rick's Cafe Americain" was louche or sleazy, and perhaps
it was, what with all the crooked gambling going on and with the mysterious
"letters of transit" stuffed into Sam's piano. But why "joint"?  It seems
fanciful to suppose that a joint was a place where various people "joined"
together, but I can't think of a more persuasive etymology.

Another use of joint came to my attention in the late 1960's when I became
seriously interested in Jacobean oak furniture. Here's a handsome "joint stool":

A joint stool was the most ordinary kind of chair during the period when
Shakespeare was wielding his quill. Why "joint"?  Apparently because it was a
joined stool, and therefore of higher quality than one that was merely glued.
A joiner was a skilled craftsman before mass-produced nails and screws became
inexpensive and commonplace.

Shakespeare knew joint stools very well: "Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-
stool," says the Fool to a joint stool. Fool humors mad hallucinating Lear by
pretending that the joint stool is the king's daughter Goneril. Shakespeare, by
the by, played many a variation on "joint," employing or inventing  such terms
as "joint-servant," "joint-laborer," "joint-ring," "jointress," "unjointed,"
"injointed," "short-jointed," "conjointly," and "disjoint."

But even Shakespeare would not have imagined the transfigurations of the word in
these our latter days. Nowadays, a joint is a prison, though I don't know why
one would call it so when such colorful appellations as "hoosegow," "clink,"
"stir," "slammer," and "pokey" are all on the tips of our collective tongues.
Nor would he have imagined "joint" as a marijuana blunt or spliff. He wouldn't
have known but might have appreciated "joint" as a term for the male sexual
organ.

All of which makes it possible, theoretically, to say, "I was in a joint,
smoking a joint, figuring out how to exercise my joint."

As for me, I use the word "joint" everyday -- in the most useful phrase "joint
card."

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire, stopper.

Source: 2024/01/nora-prentiss

Title: Othello (1604), Nora Prentiss (1947), Date Night (2011)
Date: January 29, 2024

Many years ago, in what sometimes seems like an earlier life, I taught
Shakespeare courses to both young and "mature" students. When we reached
Othello, halfway through the semester, I would, of course, point out that the
play did not take the traditional form of tragedy-- of a great man or king gone
awry as in the case of Macbeth or Richard III. Othello instead introduced a
formula that was innovative for its time but which has become commonplace in
ours. Othello is a domestic drama in which a marriage falls all to pieces. I
liked to tell my captive audience, only slightly facetiously, that the whole
of life is divided into two parts: the comic, which begins with birth and ends
with marriage, and the tragic, which begins with marriage and proceeds to
death. A statement which is a kind of shorthand, simplified version of a cliche
of criticism. Like many such abbreviations, this formula contains a dollop of
truth. Othello in fact begins with a marriage -- or more accurately a defiant
elopement -- and comes to conclusion with Desdemona strangled in her bed and her
husband the Moor a suicide. It's the sole play of Shakespeare's that follows
the strict marriage-to-death path, although Romeo and Juliet is comic until
the secret wedding but becomes tragic afterwards, while the wondrous Winter's
Tale begins with Leontes and Hermione already married and pushes through some
desperate circumstances only to come to a miraculous comic climax with the
restoration of a woman presumed dead and a glorious second-generation wedding.
Both RJ and WT sometimes seem like two different and opposite kinds of plays
condensed into one -- and yet are all the more triumphant for being so.

These musings were precipitated by the film that we watched a couple of nights
ago -- Nora Prentiss (1947), which Wikipedia characterizes as a film noir, but
which is better thought of as two films in one -- a film that starts as an
instance of domestic drama or "bourgeois realism" or even soap opera and doesn't
become a murder mystery until two-thirds along the way. In a limited sense,
it's not unlike Shakespeare's hybrids, but alas does not successfully yoke or
blend its disparate plots. As a result, the last section of Nora Prentiss,
I'm sorry to say, becomes not intriguing but unbelievable and ludicrous. It's
an odd and interesting film, although not a good one, but it's worth watching
for aficionados of TCM not only for its manipulation of genre expectations but
also because it is one of a large group of films that are so very common and
ordinary in twentieth-century America where such enormous value is attached to
a happy and fulfilling marriage -- and to the disappointment that arises when
the marriage comes a-cropper. In Nora Prentiss, a midlife couple with a pair
of kids, who live in an orderly picket-fence house, ought to be living a happy
life, but, by golly, both husband and wife are discontented and bored. They
are afflicted with the whole package of suburban anxieties. It's Cheever-land
or Updyke-land: demanding children and divorcing friends, the stultifying
daily routine, the unsatisfying jobs, the dull obligatory social events, and
especially the lack of sexual excitement which is signified in these Code-
burdened movies by the gulf between the twin beds and the sterile head-to-toe
sleepwear and also by that pathetic chaste kiss before husband and wife turn
away from each other as they extinguish the cute matching bedside table lamps.
Gosh, it's a scenario that is familiar from dozens and perhaps scores of postwar
(and later) films.

Melodramatic Nora Prentiss follows the fortunes of steady-Eddie Dr. Richard
Talbot, enacted by Kent Smith, who meets nightclub chantoosie Nora, played by
Anne Sheridan. Flirtation turns into an affair, and the affair evolves into true
love or at least into genuine sexual passion. But all goes from bad to worse
when Talbot, instead of seeking a divorce from his stern unlovely wife, concocts
a dumb whopper of a plot that makes Friar Lawrence's harebrained sleeping-dram
waking-up-in-the-tomb plan seem brilliant in comparison. Talbot fakes his own
death and disappears -- causing the film to turn police-procedural. And then,
through a series of hard-to-credit mischances and gimmicks, Talbot finds himself
in his newly assumed fake guise indicted for murdering -- oh no yes indeed! --
his very own self. Nora Prentiss by this time has metamorphosed into a film that
by rights should be renamed City of Naked Death or Shadow of Evil Night. Even
so, the film might have been salvaged had not so much depended on the acting
skill of Kent Smith, who is perfectly fine in the first part of the film, but
incapable of managing the switch from reliable doc to nervous fugitive. It's
not entirely his fault: the role puts too much pressure on the actor. I doubt
whether such a transition could have been handled by Roscius or Burbage or
Garrick or Sir Laurence Olivier himself.

Here is a picture of Ann Sheridan and Kent Smith. Sheridan wisely holds on to
her hat; Smith's chapeau dominates the scene; very 1940s.

Source: 2024/02/another-brooklyn-memoirist-martin-h-levinson

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist: Martin H. Levinson
Date: February 02, 2024

Autobiographers from Brooklyn divide, on the whole, into two camps. There
are the discontented, who yearned from day one to get the hell out of the
neighborhood as quickly as possible; and then there are the nostalgics,
perpetually romanticizing those great days of spaldeens, stickball, and
chocolate egg creams. Martin Levinson's privately-published memoir Brooklyn
Boomer, Growing up in the Fifties (2011) is most decidedly of the latter group.
But what a thin and disappointing piece of work it is!!  Gosh, were we all
quite so shallow! Levinson's book displays no sense of life's complexities and
contradiction and ambiguities. Perhaps it's because he didn't or wouldn't read
-- no exciting trips to the Brooklyn Public Library in this sterile memoir. Nor
even to the movie palaces.

The best word for Brooklyn Boomer is, I'm sorry to say, superficial. Also
padded.

Also unoriginal.

Plus the account of public school "assemblies" is shamelessly cribbed from a
2006 entry on this very blog.

Source: 2024/02/words-new-to-me-once-again

Title: Words New to Me Once Again
Date: February 05, 2024

A dvandva compound is a formation in which two individual nouns are joined
to form a new word. Wik offers the example "singer-songwriter." I think that
"barber-surgeon" is therefore a dvandva, although I am confident that I am the
first person ever to denominate it as such. Anaptyxis is a term in linguistics
for the demotic insertion of a vowel between two consonants, as in filim for
film or realitor for realtor. A calque a word-for-word translation from one
language to another. Clausula is a term in ancient rhetoric for a consciously-
contrived rhythmic ending to a long sentence. If I've ever employed a clausula,
I am sure that it's been entirely fortuitous.

A suffete was a Carthaginian official or magistrate. A groma is a Roman
surveying instrument that had plumb lines hanging from four arms at right
angles. I do nor know how it was employed but it must have worked very well
because the Romans did some remarkable surveying. A gromatic text is therefore
a record of a survey. An ostracan is a fragment of ancient pottery onto which
writing has been scratched or incised. Since ostraca are durable they are a
primary source of archeological information. A cippus was a cylindrical stone
used as a gravestone by the Etruscans and as a boundary marker by Romans. Here's
a handsome old cippus.

Source: 2024/02/new-words-etruscan-related-new-words

Title: New Words of Etruscan Interest
Date: February 13, 2024

I have just finished reading Sybille Haynes comprehensive study, Etruscan
Civilization, A Cultural History (2000). It's not only a window into a
remarkable extinct world, but also a trove of exciting words new to me. And as
readers of this blague are well aware, vocabulary excites Dr. Metablog.

For example: a skyphos is a two-handled cup for drinking wine. Here's an
especially handsome one from the 5th century BCE.

It's decorated with a portrait of a hoplite, a Greek soldier.

Then there's the versatile word symplegma, which sounds suspiciously like a
noxious bodily discharge -- but isn't. If one searches for the word symplegma,
the first meaning that one encounters is a "genus of ascidian tunicates in the
family styelidae." What the heck are any kind of tunicates doing in a volume
on  Etruscan civilization? But on further investigation it emerges that
symplegma has a second and more pertinent definition. It's a word that is used
by art historians and archeologists for a depiction of sexual intercourse.
Honest to Pete, who would have guessed?  How the two symplegmata -- the
tunicate and the fornicate -- are related, is, I must say, quite a mystery.

Another word with two distinct significations is tibia. We all know that the
tibia is the bone that connects ankle and knee. I did not know that for students
of ancient world it also refers to a brooch or clasp.

Bucchero is the name of typical and common Etruscan ceramic distinguished by its
burnished black glaze. Here's a bucchero oinochoe (or jug for wine).

Speaking of jugs, there's also the aryballos, which is a "globular flask" used
to contain perfume or oil. Another kind of jug is the "canopic jar", which was
used by the ancient Egyptians to store a guy's (or gal's) inner organs during
the process of mummification. I have no idea how mummies were processed, nor
have I any desire to be enlightened.

A coroplast was, in antiquity, an artisan or sculptor who created terracotta
figurines. Here's a lovely example of such a one's work.

Nowadays, Coroplast, Inc. is the name of a large company that produces
corrugated plastic sheets used in packaging and signboards.

A felloe or felly is the outer rim of a wheel to which spokes are attached.
I imagine that this word is well known to bicyclists and wheelwrights, but
I had never encountered it. My chagrin, my apologies. An acroterion is an
architectural ornament mounted at the apex of corner of a building, a kind of
rooftop gargoyle. An anthemion or palmette is a design consisting of radiating
petals. Sometimes anthemia are carved into acroteria. If two anthemia are set
back to back they are said to be addorsed.

Source: 2024/02/what-we-read-in-the-1950s-the-magnificent-ambersons

Title: What We Read in the 1950s: The Magnificent Ambersons
Date: February 25, 2024

Although The Magnificent Ambersons was first published in 1918, it was still
admired and almost canonical in the 1950s when I was coming to awareness. It
was the sort of unchallenging social realism novel in the Sinclair Lewis or
John Marquand tradition that was then school-and-societyy approved. Did I read
it then? I can't say for certain. I can swear that I read Tarkington's Penrod
series which was specifically targeted to young people. I would have thought
that this week's reading of The Magnificent Ambersons was a return to familiar
territory, but it doesn't much matter because I didn't recognize a single word
of it. All was newer than new -- and disappointing to boot.

Tarkington's reputation, once sky-high (two Pulitzer prizes), has plummeted
since the 50s and I doubt that my grandchildren or their co-eval friends have
ever heard his name. Strange to say, the edition that was on the shelf at the
Boulder Public Library had all the marks of a high school text, with commentary,
footnotes, and sample questions designed to challenge those dedicated young
folks who were diligent enough to make it to the end. I suspect that students
and their teachers will find themselves repelled not only by the superbly
snobby, unattractive, and bratty central figure but also, and especially, by
the frequent and offensive use of the slur "darkies." Mighty off-putting, I'm
afraid.

The Tarkington mini-revival was precipitated by a viewing of Orson Welles' 1942
The Magnificent Ambersons - a film that deserves to be called "rivetting" -- but
rather for the cinematography than for the disturbing, perverse family drama
that it depicts. Welles thought it was his best work. Audiences will neither
be able to concur or disagree with his assessment because some forty minutes
of his completed film were cut and destroyed by a studio editor in order to
make the work more commercial and more palatable. Moreover, a happy ending was
sutured onto the film -- the original had been much "darker." Though how much
darker is hard to imagine, because even as it stands it's a gloomy story of
perverse values and gratuitous tragedy. In the edited and "improved" version,
George Minafer survives his automobile accident and reconciles with attractive
Lucy Morgan. In the novel and apparently in Welles' version, George dies of his
injuries. In both novel and film, George is a self-centered prig and frankly,
when the film came to conclusion, I myself would have been quite willing to
let him die. In no way had he earned the favors of such a self-respecting and
intelligent young lady as Lucy. Hadn't paid his dues, even though to make some
money he had taken up a dangerous work involving "nitro-glycerine." I do wonder
what might have been depicted in those purged Welles minutes because the film
follows the novel closely, almost slavishly.  What did Welles include that the
novel passes over, or more suggestively, what did Welles invent and add?

I think that one of the reasons that Booth Tarkington has sunk without much
trace is because of his exceedingly short-sighted and reactionary stance. The
Magnificent Ambersons is anti-modern, but not out of any deep ecological,
philosophical or psychological conviction. Tarkington idealizes the Indiana of
his childhood and doesn't much like change. People are moving into his town
(Indianopolis though he never uses the name) from Eastern Europe and they're
outworking and displacing the good old solid Americans -- those established
families with their shared values and small-town friendliness. These new
arrivals make money and build large ugly house and instead of horse-drawn
carriages they drive automobiles. The new auto industry is a particular bete
noir for Tarkington. The Ambersons lose their money investing in it and George
gets himself run over by a vehicle that was plunging down the street at 20 mile
an hour.  Autos bring speed and soot and social disruption.

At this moment, I do not feel a need to read any more novels by Booth
Tarkington.

Source: 2024/02/the-piacenza-liver

Title: The Piacenza Liver
Date: February 29, 2024

It's humiliating for me to confess that until a few weeks ago I had never heard
of the Piacenza Liver, which is a life-size bronze Etruscan replica of the liver
of a sheep, and unquestionably European civilization's most heralded metal
liver. How could I not have known?

The PL was unearthed in 1877 and dates from the first century BCE. Here's a
picture of this most important artifact:

It's shocking to me that the tourist-oriented website of the city of Piacenza
advertises its Duomo, a 12th century Romanesque church, its Passerini-Landi
Library, and the Palazzo Farnese, a 16th century great house, but offers not the
slightest mention of its foremost liver (which is housed in the palazzo). An
inexplicable omission.

Source: 2024/03/ball-games-i-played-in-the-1940s-and-1950s

Title: Ball Games I Played During the 1940s and 1950s.
Date: March 03, 2024

Basketball, volleyball, punchball, stickball, dodgeball, box ball, box baseball,
baseball, softball, stoop ball, touch football, handball, kickball, wall ball.
Ping-pong. Hit the penny. Never played tennis or tackle football. Never even
heard of soccer.

What have I forgotten?

Source: 2024/03/state-of-the-person

Title: State of the Person
Date: March 22, 2024

If there can be a "state of the union" address, and in Colorado a "state of the
state," why should we not have a "state of the person" -- specifically, the
state of this person, i.e. me. An annual report. Today seems like a good day for
it -- inasmuch as I have just now passed a weighty milestone, my 85th birthday.

On the whole, let me say, without bragging, that this particular person is in a
surprisingly good state.

My Brain: it's still working. I believe that I am as competent as ever at
analyzing problems and drawing conclusions and planning appropriate actions. Nor
have I lost a significant amount of language. There is even an occasional moment
in which I wow myself with a well chosen word or a smidgeon of wit. That's the
good news. The downside is that my recall system has definitely lost ground.
Noun loss, it's called. My memory for names has woefully declined, so much so
that it's become a considerable annoyance. I can recognize an acquaintance on
the street, or, say, actors in a film, or an athlete, but I cannot bring up a
name. I test myself when I watch NBA basketball on the TV.  A familiar player
appears on my screen: I know where he went to college and who he played for last
season and the strengths and weaknesses of his game, but by golly I can't recall
his name. I find this to be highly frustrating -- and perhaps a scary harbinger
of future debility. Sometimes the moniker bobs to the surface a day later,
making me aware that my storage system is still working. No question but that my
celebrated, prize-winning instant recall is a thing of the past. Also starting
to fail: short-term memory. Nowadays, when I read a long novel, by the time I
come to the conclusion I've forgotten details from the first chapters. A couple
of times now, when I've read a good new novel or a classic old one, I've turned
right around and gone through a second time. Trust me, this was not a habit of
my younger brain. I also find it difficult to acquire and retain new knowledge.
I spent four years studying Italian and made no more than a year's progress. I
had to complete the same lessons over and over again just to make it stick --
only to have the expression or the conjugation or whatever evaporate in a month.
I can't memorize poetry -- which I once did so effortlessly. So I've mostly
given up new areas of information -- although this last month I'm taking a crack
at learning Etruscan -- a challenge even though it's an extinct language with
only about 250 known words. No struggles with pronunciation, thank goodness!

My mood: generally positive and cheerful, except between 2 am and 4 am, when I
lie awake filled with real and imaginary dread. I experience sadness, of course,
but not depression. No need for anti-depressants or anti-psychotics, thank
goodness.v I'm optimistic, on the whole, still taking pleasure in small things,

My Body: still functioning although some routine tasks have become difficult.
Putting on socks and shoes, for example. I'm just not limber -- not even as
limber as I was at 75. When things fall to the floor in the morning I tend to
let them lie until later in the day when I'm slightly more supple. When I work
in the garden, I keep a long stick next to me so I have something to help me
arise. Sometimes I feel myself starting to shuffle, the way my father did in his
last years -- and then I make a determined effort to lift my feet. I have almost
all of my own teeth (a couple of fakes) and with the help of specs and hearing
aids my eyes and ears are valiantly continuing to do the job.

Your older body has accumulated some deficits: a touch of cancer, four kinds
of heart peculiarities, the threat of another TIA or UTI. But I do as I'm told
and take the pills that my various doctors recommend. I asked the fine serious
woman who serves as my cardiologist, "what is going to kill me?" She replied
that at my age, and given my state of health, the most likely causes were a) a
fall, and b) an infection. Consequently I've become mighty careful about where
I set my feet. I don't know what to do about infections except to be vigilant.
But it would be foolish not to recognize that at this age life is precarious and
that anything can happen at any time. I could keel over before I finish the next
sentence. One undeniable symptom of deterioration is that my stamina is much
diminished. Much more resting between tasks, many more naps.

The hardest part of the day continues to be the nighttime. I've aways been a bad
sleeper and I'm no better now. Lying awake can lead to alarmism: is that pain
in my knee a bruise or is it a blood clot that will go to my heart, or is it a
symptom of a metastatic cancer?  But alarmism is not as troubling now as it
was in days of yore -- no matter what happens now, they can't take the first 85
years from me. Frankly, I'm more worried about living too long than I am about
dying.

I'm always been troubled with nightmares and continue to be so. I envy those
who turn out the light at 11 and wake up at 7. It would be blissful to be one
of those elect. On most nights, instead of sleeping I roll and twirl like a
rotisserie chicken. It's wonderful that the Widder Malkinson is able to ignore
my tossing and turning.

Family: I'm most pleased about my family and family relations. Although I was
not a perfect father, I was a hard-working and serious one, and I think that my
children would acknowledge such. I love all three of my children more than they
can know -- or at least, more than they could know until they had children of
their own. I like all my kids and grandkids and on the whole they like me. I
believe that I grew closer to my kids during the years of A's long decline. I
have good conversations, or at least polite ones, with the older grandchildren
but the three younger ones treat me with no more interest or respect than if I
were an orange cone -- which is probably appropriate for their age; I certainly
did not engage with my grandparents or people of their generation when I was 9
or 11. I hope to live until the the young guys are in their twenties when they
might find it consequential to talk with their aged GP.

I've made an effort to keep in touch with cousins -- especially cousins on my
father's side. After all, I am by far the oldest member of my extended family --
the "patriarch," I like to say.

Love: here's a great success story. My relationship with the Widder has been
near-miraculous -- a ten-year honeymoon, although it may seem soppy to says so.
Of course in some ways it's easier to form a relationship at this age of little
responsibility -- no conflict over children, no careers, no declining parents,
no money worries, very few obligations. Both Lynn and I appreciate this much
simpler life. Her and my offspring have been generous with us -- a boon that we
do not take for granted. Moreover, it's common knowledge that people in a loving
situation live longer than singletons -- so we're both, in theory, keeping each
other alive.

Friends: very important to me at this stage of life. I work at keeping in touch.
But every month, it seems, some 50-year friendship comes to an end. The death
and diseases of my friends and family and former colleagues are the most painful
feature of this octogenarian life.

Intellectual life: I read a lot and write a bit, but I no longer read books
about books. I like writing this blog. At this point in my life, I read at least
9 non-fiction books for every novel. In addition, I've become fascinated by
the films of the 40s and 50s and watch as many as two or three a week. There's
something reassuring about the black-and-white cinematography, the ubiquitous
fedoras, the coast-to-coast trains, and even the ever-present curl of cigarette
smoke.

The world: quite a mess. A period of great reaction. There's a real danger of
losing our democracy. And losing our planet. But I'm cheered that there are so
many people of good will in the world and in my life.

When I was a young fellow peering at the calendar, I thought "the year 2000 is a
long way off. If I should live to the new millennium, I'll be 61 years old and
I'll have lived a long life."  Now I'm a quarter century beyond that marker,
still going strong. Who ever would have guessed?  My principal emotion at this
point: gratitude. Gosh I've been fortunate.

Source: 2024/03/two-astonishing-dreams-in-one-night

Title: Two Astonishing Dreams in One Single Night
Date: March 30, 2024

The first:  I dreamt that I received a phone call from my deceased older
brother's deceased first wife (who has, by the way, been dead for thirty or more
years). She says, very clearly, "______ is dead" (I leave out the name of the
person she mentioned because some people are squeamish or superstitious -- but a
person very much alive. I'm shocked. I say, "what happened."  There's no answer
at the other end although I hear the sounds of paper rustling. I ask again and
once more there is  no response. Then I say, "did he do himself in." There
is quiet at the other end of the line. End of dream. I take the non-answer as
agreement -- yes, it was suicide  After a while, I wake up, less troubled than
puzzled. How peculiar -- how different from my usual "lost-in-the big-city" or
"can't-find-the-classroom" fantasy.

Later in the night, I dream that it's time for me to write a novel (remarkable
in itself because I am a most unimaginative, uncreative person and not a
writer of fiction). In the dream, I compose the first paragraph of a novel. I
can't remember my exact words, but basically I set the scene in an old, tired,
tumble- down country tavern where a couple of nondescript folks are sitting and
drinking. It's all very fuscous, grey, washed out. (In retrospect, it seems as
though I've plagiarized Thomas Hardy.)  But I complete the paragraph with this
remarkable sentence: "A brindle cat supplied the color." A wonderful detail,
even if I do say so myself. But here's an oddity. Even though my well-informed
dreamatorium found and deployed the word "brindle," my conscious self is not
familiar with the word. What a revelation!!

I wake out of the dream and, immensely curious, immediately google the word
"brindle" which turns out to mean something like tortoiseshell -- a standard
very familiar domestic cat color. My daytime self is therefore dazzled by the
pertinent vocabulary of my nighttime self.

I am also impressed by the use of the word "supply" -- a brindle cat supplied
the color" --where my more pedestrian daytime self might have said, "there was a
brindle cat."

Once again, I find that although I'm a moderately dull kind of guy during the
day, my unconscious or dream life is imaginative and daring. How can this
happen?

Moreover, I wonder what would my life have been like if I had been granted
easy access to the creative side of my brain? Is it possible that I would have
written many a sentence as accomplished as "a brindle cat supplied the color."

[Addendum April 24

Just a few minutes ago I woke out of the usual troubled sleep.  I must
have been dreaming, but I can't recall a single detail except that the name
"Karlheinz Stockhausen" came vividly to me. I even said the name out loud
(there's a witness). But why in the living blazes would Karlheinz Stockhausen
be in my mind, or unconscious mind, or dream life?  I am aware that KS was a
composer of electronic music; that is to say, I've heard his name. But I'm not
interested in electronic music and as far as I know I've never heard a single
note of any of his compositions. He's not a figure to whom I've given a moment
of conscious thought. And yet there he was in my mind and in my mouth. Without
the slightest inkling of context.

Minds (especially my very own) are mighty mysterious.]

Source: 2024/04/my-life-in-gambling

Title: My Life in Gambling
Date: April 09, 2024

This will be a very short entry, because gambling is not a part of my life. I'm
not averse, just uninterested. My brain lacks a gambling gene.

I don't bet on sports; I don't participate in office pools; I've never once
been to the track. I don't bet on cards because I don't play cards, not even
solitaire. I've never put so much as a nickel into a slot machine. I've never
bought a single lottery ticket.

My idea of gambling is to put a dollar into a Coke machine -- sometimes you get
the Coke, sometimes the machine fails. That's chance enough for me.

Source: 2024/04/two-new-orleans-conversations

Title: A New Orleans Conversation
Date: April 14, 2024

For our annual winter stay in New Orleans, we rented a place in the old Bywater
district. It's a feature of the neighborhood that one house is a perfect example
of classic vernacular architecture while the next one over is a ramshackle mess,
smelling of mold and nearly swallowed by yellow cat's paw creeper. And then one
over after that is a vacant lot, the home having been demolished years ago.

Almost all Bywater houses touch or impinge on the sidewalk, European-style,
and many of their owners decorate the public way with pots of common annuals,
especially those lovely rocket pink snapdragons. Others set out repurposed
bathtubs and various other containers filled with flowering perennial plants
that I can't identify. It's a mighty colorful area -- when it isn't derelict.

Somewhere on Royal Street (or was it Decatur?) between Desire and Independence,
we admired the sidewalk garden of a renewed double-shotgun (a common kind of
home) and fell into neighborly chat with the bright-eyed old lady sitting on its
porch (or stoop, or veranda, or patio). We offered, "good day for taking some
sun," and she, perhaps lonely, launched into a monologue: "my friend takes care
of me. He's young. I broke my hip last year, so no more stairs." Etc. And then
she asked, quite out of the blue, "how old do you think I am?" Clearly, she was
proud to boast of her many years.

Now, I've been around enough blocks to know that it's never a good idea to
estimate someone's age. It's a difficult art -- you must guess about ten percent
below what you think is accurate, because if you guess older you've insulted
the inquirer and if too much younger you're guilty of insincere flattery. So I
hesitated, kept quiet. At last, to break the silence, I replied "well, ma'am,
how old are you?" I thought I had given a safe response because I could see that
she wanted me to be curious. "I'm 84, can you believe it?"

I was more surprised than she had imagined, because if I had ventured a guess,
I would have said 92. Or at the lowest, way up in the 80s, because, well, the
woman looked ancient and frail. She reminded me my two grandmothers, who died at
87 and 89 and who, in their last years, rarely if ever left their homes but if
they did venture out, did nothing more adventurous than to sit on a bench for a
few warm minutes.

But I'm 85, a year older than my new Bywater acquaintance. She's inactive,
winding down her life, resting in a soft chair, and I'm not only upright and
walking, but happily exploring a distant city. For a moment I felt a bit of
superiority, of triumph. I certainly did not say to my elderly friend, "yeah,
you're 84 but I'm 85, look at me." I'm not that crude. But I confess that those
or similar words passed through my brain. Not a sentiment that I admire in
myself and one I quickly banished. It was unhandsome, ungenerous even if it came
and went in a millisecond.

I know that I'm fortunate to be moderately vigorous, still strolling the avenues
and enjoying good health. Yet I am very aware that my well being is not an
achievement about which I can be vain or proud. It's simply the luck of the
draw, luck of the genes. In addition, it's a fact that I have been fortunate
enough to have had access to a lifetime of superior medical care. Without that
surgery in 2010, and the later one a decade ago, I would not have been touring
the Bywater. I'd have been dead or at best, wheelchair-bound and in pain,
gorging on advils and aspirins and narcotics. A moment's reflection served as a
good antidote to any feeling of superiority that I might harbor.

Still musing, I began to wonder about my Royal Street friend. Who is she,
aside from an ancient person savoring the sun?  What memories does she hold?
Who knows, perhaps she lived a wild and varied life. Was she a traveller, an
adventurer?  Enjoying complicated and deep relationships with a series of
devotees?  Perhaps she was a talented musician -- a soloist in the church
choir -- or an artist?  I allowed myself to fantasize what she was like in her
glamorous thirties -- crossing the equator on a cruise with her first husband,
the one with the estate in Jamaica. And the children: one a famous surgeon, the
other, the unlucky one who was a hero in Iraq but who took years to regain his
footing. Or was she, perhaps, a writer?

Everybody has a story; what is hers?

Source: 2024/04/my-life-in-cooking

Title: My Life in Cooking
Date: April 23, 2024

And now for another installment in my long-running "autobiography by topics."

Today's topic is my life as a cook. I say cook, rather than chef, because
my kitchen work has always been functional rather that artistic -- the very
opposite of sophisticated or elegant. I am most definitely not a chef -- just
a guy who can put a meal on the table. Confession: I prefer to my own food to
what is presented to me at all but the most elite restaurants. I'm basically a
hamburger-and-ketchup plebeian; fancy foods with exotic ingredients do nothing
for my pedestrian palate. Why leeks, chives, ramps or shallots when your
everyday yellow onion will do the job. Especially if it's one of those amazingly
sweet Vidalia onions.

My lack of gourmet-ism originated with my family of origin, back there in 1940s
Flatbush where cooking was not imaginative. Its basics were Velveeta cheese and
those slimy canned Harvard beets. No frills but a sufficiency where "enough
[was] as good as a feast." My mother, who presided over the kitchen, did it
all, every bit of it (my father might just have starved if he had to extend
himself to boil water). Mom was a functional cook and her limited repertoire
of meals repeated weekly. I never knew her to try something new nor did I once
see her consult a cookbook. Spices were limited to salt and pepper. Chicken
was boiled, lamb chops were broiled, flounder was poached. There was too much
malodorous liver and too much tongue and too many salmon croquettes. Almost
all meals were accompanied with mashed potatoes. My favorite food, in those
days, was noodles with a meat-and-tomato sauce (which would nowadays have been
upgraded to "Bolognese"). (The word "noodles" was later promoted to "spaghetti"
and has now been ennobled to "pasta.") On an occasional flush Sunday there was
roast beef. The family celebrated Thanksgiving with a grand turkey and countered
Yom Kippur with a defiant roast pork.

What a tedious chore it was for my mom to set out twenty-one meals a week for
the five of us, but she did so without complaint.

The only memorable meals of my childhood were supplied by my grandmother Sonia.
Unsurpassed blintzes, potato latkes, jams and jellies. My favorite meal in those
days: black radish, onion and pumpernickel complemented with gribbinis. I have
written about my love affair with the black radish here.

The first steps into cookery of my own arose out of my native frugality. When
I was in college, most of my friends ate in the dorm cafeteria or in nearby
restaurants but I soon discovered that with a little initiative I I could eat
better and cheaper. It was a bit of a learning process, because, growing up, I
regarded cooking as a kind of alchemy to which only married women were privy.
In 1957, I abandoned the dormitory for a remarkably grotty off-campus apartment
and discovered that I too could turn on a gas burner and transmogrify raw
ingredients into food. For the next three years I lived on a hunk of meat and a
boiled potato and warmed frozen peas -- at a quarter the cost of an equivalent
restaurant meal! Not elegant food -- but what a revelation!  It was not only an
improvement in standard of living, but a demonstration to myself that I need not
imitate my father's example of dependent helplessness.

My galley skills, such as they were, were also good for my social life. Dates
with my girlfriend (later my wife of more than half a century) often began with
me preparing a Saturday night dinner for her. Fortunately for the two of us, she
was not put off by my want of culinary imagination.

Let me record a sad reminiscence about the way in which we were all hog-tied by
Eisenhower-era conservatism: I did all the cooking until June of 1960, when AGP
and I married. At that point, it seemed mandatory and inevitable  that kitchen
responsibilities should be transferred from me to her. It was, we believed, an
inviolable rule of the universe that wives cooked and husbands ate. That was
the way things were in that reactionary pre-feminist period -- even though my
bride had until that point never prepared a single meal in her entire life. How
conventional, how thoughtless we both were. However, true to the stereotype, AGP
rapidly became a much better cook than I could have imagined. But what socially-
constrained idiocy! How blinkered were the two of us! It's embarrassing to
confess it all even sixty-plus years after the fact.

Once the three children joined us, cooking became less fun and more of an
obligation -- but now a chore at last shared by the two of us. Inasmuch as
we were both employed, food preparation became a weekend activity. Together
we'd cook up a cauldron of beef stew or a spaghetti sauce or something else
that could get us through the week. Lunches were improvised, but I was always
the breakfast cook. I wish I could properly estimate the number of eggs that
I scrambled or pancakes that I flipped. They would stuff a moderately-sized
warehouse, I'm sure. For AGP, meals became a burden. If I remember correctly,
it was not so much the labor of preparation as it was the organization that
distressed her. Just gathering the ingredients and keeping the refrigerator
stocked became dull boring work. Her point, and I know she was correct in this,
was that even if I did I half the cooking, she had 100% of the responsibility.
Things became even more complicated when the kids went through their vegetarian
phases and when their complicated after school activities made orderly
scheduling next to impossible.

I remember that one summer, sometime in the 70s. I announced that I would do
all the gathering and cooking for two months. AGP's only task was to lie in the
hammock all day and to eat whatever I produced. AGP enjoyed the vacation, but
she pointed out that it our society, men could get the credit for labor that was
taken for granted for women. She was once again correct in her assessment, but
nevertheless I felt that I had done a good deed. I think she enjoyed the kitchen
respite.

Eventually the kids left home and life became simpler. We were now "recovering
parents."  Food preparation became simpler and fun again. Joint fun.

Unfortunately, it was only a few years later that AGP began her long decline. Of
course I took over more and more of the kitchen responsibilities. I think for
the last ten years that AGP was with me, I was the head and only cook. How else
would we have survived?  As a result, I became more interested in the work.
As I have said, I never became a chef, but I do take some pride in my general
competence around the kitchen -- especially in my barbecued spare ribs, my beef
stew, my stuffed cabbage (grandma Sonia's recipe) and my transcendent lasagnas.

Nowadays, in my miraculous second relationship, cooking, like everything else,
is shared equally.

Gosh it's been a long haul.

Source: 2024/05/my-life-with-shakespeare-i-performance

Title: My Life with Shakespeare - I
Date: May 14, 2024

As a rule, I keep my distance from live performances of a Shakespeare play
because I seldom enjoy the experience and regularly find it misleading. This has
not always been the case. A few versions, notably the lucid Scofield Coriolanus
at Stratford in 1962, are still vivid in my brain. What has happened? 
Somewhere along the way, I've lost patience and lost interest in playgoing. Am I
alone?  I remember sitting in some theater or other in the way back when, when,
glancing left and right in my row, I could not help noting that a significant
cadre of my fellow spectators were not engrossed in the performance but were
nodding off, and that others in my vicinity were clearly bored, drifting
passively toward sweet sleep.

This is a phenomenon that I had never encountered at a baseball game where
everyone is alert and engaged. Anything but silent and sometimes raucous?

So why were all these numb Shakespeare spectators sitting as still as stones?

And why was I among them, inasmuch as I too, let me confess, was bored by the
performance. I was not, as I yearned to be, lost in the words or engaged by the
action. While I resisted sleep, except possibly for a second or two here and
there, I was treading mental water, so to speak. Not exactly hypnotized, but
certainly not transfixed. And I was in this state of inattention even though
I knew the words that the actors were saying as well or better than they knew
them themselves. Eventually, in the course of time, I came to admit to myself
that to attend a Shakespeare play was not for pleasure but rather to honor an
eminence, to pay dues to a cultural icon, to participate in a ritual of cultural
hegemony -- and that I had paid good money in order to worship at the shrine of
Shakespeare and to lend my support to what has long been labelled "Shakespeare
idolatry."  This revelation, or apercu, or insight made me unhappy as I am not
by nature given to reverence. To try to bend my will to admire on-stage oratory
felt inauthentic, contrary to myself as I knew myself.

Yet I am an unabashed, unapologetic lover of Shakespeare. Not of the theater,
but of the book. When I sit myself down to read one of Shakespeare's most
excellent plays, the experience can be and often is utterly transcendent.

It is reading that unlocks the play; puts me in touch with true genius.There's
something about the one-on-one concentration that you can give to a book in your
very own hands in your very own chair that you can't give to a performance,
where you're crammed into your space and have lost to your neighbor the battle
for the arm rest. You're distracted by the inevitable snuffles and sneezes of
your fellows and by the too-clever sets and costumes and lighting and artifice
-- all of which interfere with your grasp of what is most important about poetic
drama -- the words. But at home, I'm dazzled by the poetry and I am transported
with aesthetic bliss (however defined). I'm moved to tears and laughter and also
admiration.

He's endlessly fascinating, this Shakespeare guy, and intelligent, and a poet
like none other.

It's all I need; a comfortable posture for my ancient limbs, a bit of silence, a
book --  and I'm in awe.

Performances, in my opinion, erect a barrier to understanding and obscure rather
than illuminate the plays. It's necessarily so, because directors and actors
interpret the play.  It's their job;  it's what they do. Interpret. And every
interpretation, no matter how skillful, is an obstacle.

A reader is less constrained and can keep his mind open. No one, no thing, to
mediate between the eyes and the page.

Performances are especially hazardous when directors deliberately attempt to
make a play relevant or in accord, somehow, with the zeitgeist of the decade.
Clever catchpenny novelties do nothing for me. Why must plays be set anywhere
but where Shakespeare intended them?  Any effort to update a play, or make it
"contemporary" or "feminist" or "anti-fascist" or "anti-colonial" or whatever,
produces only distraction and distortion. Which is why the long history of
Shakespeare on stage is a woeful history of addled misinterpretation. Nahum
Tate's notorious King Lear of 1681, in which Edgar and Cordelia embrace at the
end and Lear is pensioned off is ludicrous, but not more absurd than last year's
Queen Lear.

Query: if I'm so disdainful of live performances, how is it that I'm so fond of
Shakespeare on film.

But that's a subject for another day.

Source: 2024/06/amnesia-on-film-crossroads-1942

Title: Amnesia on Film: Crossroads (1942)
Date: June 02, 2024

Source: 2024/06/my-career-as-a-dowser

Title: My Career as a Dowser
Date: June 06, 2024

When we built the summer house/cabin/hovel in 1977, we needed to dig a well,
and someone, probably the plumber, hired a dowser. I didn’t approve –-I
would have hired a credentialed hydraulic engineer. For me, dowsers belong
in the same ol' crazy crate as astrologers, phrenologists, flat-earthers,
Shakespeare-author conspiracists, along with the lunatics who report on visits
to the earth by ancient astronauts. Nevertheless, a dowser arrived, an elderly
gentleman. Curiously, he dowsed with an old pair of rusted pliers rather than
the traditional forked willow stick. He was an enthusiast for his trade and,
ignoring my skepticism, showed my how to cut a willow and exactly how to hold
it. After he left, I tried it out. A most odd experience, one of the oddest in
my life, then took place. As I walked about, brandishing the rod, from time to
time the tip of the willow would turn suddenly down. Not in a subtle way, but
forcefully and dramatically – strongly enough to redden and even slightly cut
the palms of my hands.

Even more strange -- if I handed the willow to another person and he or she
walked about, nothing happened. Nothing, that is, until I held that person's
wrist. Then the dowsing rod went all crazy and twisted downward out of the
holder's hands.

It was a wondrous incredible experience and is vivid in my memory now these
fifty years. But it was a one time only event.

Every once in a while, over the decades, just for fun, I would cut a piece of
willow and walk about, but I’ve never been able to reproduce the phenomenon.
The dowsing rod doesn’t dowse, doesn’t do anything at all;  just behaves
like an ordinary piece of wood.

I don't believe in dowsing. I don't believe that you can find underground water,
or even underground electric wires as some think, by walking about with a piece
of willow in your hands.  On the other hand, I know that something peculiar
and very real happened to me that one time. Was there water underground. I
don't know, but I know that I wouldn't dig a hole on the basis of that fleeting
evidence. I am a man of reason, or at least I like to think so.

Incidentally, the place that the 1977 dowser picked out for us to dig was a
great success. We've enjoyed a bounteous  supply of water for all these many
years.

But now that I know more about wells than I did half a century ago, I can read
the landscape well enough to recognize that the dowser picked an obvious place
to dig a well -- with or without the help of his magical pliers.

Source: 2024/09/my-onion-heart

Title: My Onion Heart
Date: September 15, 2024

Last night I woke from a dream with this peculiar phrase repeating itself in my
half-conscious brain: "it fills my onion heart with fear and trembling."

I have a couple of questions to ask of my capricious dreamatorium, which
although obviously capable of creating passable iambic pentameter is rarely
self-explanatory.

a) What is "it?"  What is the nameless dread that precipitated this piece of
blank verse, and b) what in the living heck is an "onion heart."  And why am
I accused of having one?  Is an "onion heart" pungent and tasty, when eaten
either raw or sauteed?  Or is it constructed of layers of scales and therefore
mysterious and perhaps unknowable.

Frankly, I don't have a good theory, except to say that I don't feel that to be
described as having an "onion heart" is complimentary. If my dreamatorium wanted
to say something nice about my heart, it had such relevant and easily available
alternatives as "lionheart" or "braveheart." Or even "sweetheart," for goodness
sake.

Source: 2024/09/bottom

Title: Words of My Life:  Bottom
Date: September 19, 2024

"Bottom" is another of the many words that came into my life through the medium
of baseball. As soon as I was able to walk and talk, I learned that an inning
has both a "top" and a "bottom." "Bottom of the ninth" was an optimistic phrase
because there was always the Ebbets Field hope that the Dodgers might come
through with a game-winning rally. Later, when I discovered that there was more
to human existence than baseball, the various and colorful meanings of "bottom"
began to reveal themselves. For example, the posterior part of the human body,
which I knew as the ass or the behind or the tuchas, was, I learned, called the
"bottom" by people of sophistication. A euphemism?  A Britishism?

Even later on, I discovered that bottom, signifying buttocks or butt was not the
root meaning of the word but a metaphorical extension of its original sense.
Old English botm, cognate with Latin fundus, meant land or farm or soil. This
meaning of "bottom" is well-preserved in the phrase "bottom land" -- the level
and fertile acres along the banks of a watercourse. Many English family names
are consequently topographical surnames of ancient inhabitants of various river
fronts -- such as Bottoms, Robottom, Higginbottom, Ramsbottom, Longbottom,
Winterbottom, and Bottomley. Names that have nothing to do with either innings
or asses.

The oddity that "bottom" can refer both to farmland and to the human butt can
sometimes yield unconscious comedy. For example, in 1977, I was a guest at a
wedding in the infelicitously named Kent village of Pett Bottom. I must hope
that Pett is a variant of Pitt, a "hollow," rather than commonplace "pet" with a
supernumerary "t".

These days, "bottom" is more likely to mean something like "the essence" -- as
in such phrases "to get to the bottom of the matter"; or "the bottom of one's
heart."

And then there's egregious Bottom in A Midsummer Night's Dream, who does not
disdain the mandatory pun: "This is to make an ass of me."

Source: 2024/09/aunt-molly

Title: My Aunt Mollie
Date: September 23, 2024

This post is written for my children, grandchildren, and any potential future
descendants. Aunt Mollie was an important person to my in earlier years. She
should be remembered.

Mollie was my father's older sister. She was born in 1900, the third of the
four children of Isaiah and Eta. She was an extremely private person and never
revealed the least personal information about herself. I know nothing of her
childhood and I am not even certain that she attended high school. I know that
she was for many years employed in the surgical instrument field, where she
advanced to a responsible management position and earned a reasonable salary
(for those days). She retired early, perhaps in her fifties. She never married
nor introduced me or anyone else in our family to a boyfriend, lover, or suitor,
though in later life I learned that it had been her constant habit to visit a
"Mr Isgin" every Wednesday. Who was Henry Isgin? I believe that he was a fellow
worker at her place of employment and I know that when he died he willed Mollie
his Long Island City house. That's all I know; I hope that her relationship with
him was satisfying.

Mollie's curly black hair never grayed. Her eyes were so dark that there was no
visible distinction between iris and pupil. My daughter, who knew her only in
her last years, remembers her as small, squarish, and big-bosomed.

Mollie never "moved out"; during my childhood, she lived with her parents and
later with Eta only in a small ground-floor apartment at 334 Eastern Parkway
in Crown Heights. When Eta died in 1963, she moved across the river to a her
own place at last, a modest apartment in Greenwich Village, where she lived
until her death in 1985. She enjoyed the concerts and the theater and her
independence. She was a solid New Yorker; like my father, she never learned
to drive an automobile. Unlike my father, who was uncomfortable outside his
familiar sphere and was averse to travel, Aunt Mollie was an adventurous sort.
She traveled the world, usually solo. She was constantly on the move. I heard
tell, for example, that she was a passenger on one of the first commercial
flights to China (in the 1930s).

In 1952, she offered to take me on a trip to Washington DC. I jumped at the
chance. It was my first time out of Brooklyn and quite the revelation: gosh,
there were other cities, other neighborhoods in the universe! We stayed at the
Mayflower Hotel (gosh, there were hotels!), ate in "restaurants" -- another
novelty -- visited the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials, and even took a boat
ride up the river to Mt. Vernon. We heard Harry Truman deliver a Fourth of
July address from the base of the Washington Monument. It was exhilarating
and inspiring -- a first toe-in-the-water alternative to my very marked
provinciality and to the exaggerated caution of my parents. I am sure that I
would never "gone away" to college, or relocated to the Rocky Mountain west, or
traveled to other continents if it hadn't been that Aunt Mollie introduced me to
the world outside the P S 217 schoolyard in my thirteenth year.

Mollie also helped me financially. She wasn't rich but as a single woman with a
good income she accumulated enough cash to intervene, generously, at critical
moments. In a sense, she was the family banker. She gave me a couple of thousand
dollars for part of the down payment on the Hackett Hill property and later
held, on favorable terms, the mortgage on my house on 10th Street. When she
died, she bequeathed me the remainder of the principal.  Although these were
not great sums, they were nevertheless very crucial to me and to my family's
financial well-being.

Even more important: Mollie admired and, I believe, loved my wife -- which was a
very good thing because my own mother was not so positive.

I can't say that I ever had a real conversation with Mollie. She asked little
and told less. She was not curious, or thoughtful, nor well-educated -- not
even a reader. She was always a little crude and could be critical and blunt
(though not to me). To my brother, when he was going through a tough period in
his financial life, she said, "Why don't you just get a real job." To a niece,
she offered, "Why don't you just lose weight."  A true Victorian at heart, she
regarded all illnesses as mental and moral weakness.

Mollie was proud of her extraordinary vigor and health. She once told me that
she went 40 years without seeing a doctor. She was robust and middle-aged at
84, dead at 85 -- every one of her organs having failed. Loss of mental acuity
was the first sign of decay. In 1984, she called my father on the telephone and
said, out of the blue, "Pop is here."  Dad said, "What do you mean Pop is here.
Pop died in 1946." Mollie answered, "Yes, I know that. So why is he here." 
After that shocking moment, the end came quickly.

I' have never visited my parents' graves, but I'm told that Mollie is buried on
my father's right and that my mother is buried on my father's left. So Dad lies
forever between the two women to whom he was closest in life.

Source: 2024/09/starokonstantinov

Title: More on Starokonstantinov
Date: September 26, 2024

The (website) "My Shtetl -- Jewish Towns of Ukraine" gathers information about
Starokonstantinov -- "Old Constantine" -- the town from which, in 1895, my
courageous grandparents emigrated to America. The site is in Russian but it can
be mechanical translated into awkward but intelligible English.

Some of my friends of European extraction have been able to return to the
old country villages where their families originated, but that option is not
available to me. Trust me, there's no pilgrimage to Starokonstantinov in my
future -- even if the town happens to survive the Russian invasion and the
rockets. My grandparents did not bring to Ellis Island happy memories and
nostalgia or pique my curiosity with warm fuzzy memories of their earlier years.
Nevertheless, Starokonstantinov provokes my curiosity. For how many decades
did my ancestors live in this so-obscure-to-me town?  How did they manage to
survive?

One of the compilers of the My Shtetl website, Yevgenii Schneider, has unearthed
a report on Starokonstantinov written in 1884 by a certain N. I. Zuts, a
lieutenant in the 45th Azov Infantry Regiment. Why or for whom these paragraphs
were written I have no idea, but some of it largely duplicates information that
I have previously posted. According to Lieutenant Zuts, Starokonstantinov was
founded in 1505 as the village of Kolyshchentsy in a grant from the king of
Poland to one Ivan Labunsky. On January 5, 1561, Labunsky's descendants sold
Kolyshchentsy to Prince Konstantin Ostrozhsky. Three months later, Ostrozhsky
was permitted by the king to found a city first called Konstatinov, then
Novokonstantinov, and finally in 1632 renamed Starokostiantyniv. A castle was
constructed in 1571. In 1620, the city passed into the possession of the princes
Zaslavsky, and in 1682, to the princes Lubomirsky. Starokonstinov became part of
Russia in 1793.

(It seems to be the case that Ukraine was a largely unpopulated or
underpopulated frontier until a few hundred years ago. When and why did my
people decide to try their luck on this vast semi-empty plain?)

The website does not make it clear who, if anyone, is living in these houses
today.In addition, Evgeniy Schneider appends a brief history of the Jewish
community of Starokonstantinov. I've transcribed it.

Source: 2024/10/my-baseball-first-vocabulary

Title: My Baseball-First Vocabulary
Date: October 04, 2024

Folks who weren't there can hardly appreciate how thoroughly the nation and
neighborhood into which I was born was baseball-saturated. In the 1940s and
1950s, the heyday of the fabled Dodgers, baseball was Brooklyn and Brooklyn was
the world -- of this there was, nor could be, any doubt.

Baseball was the all-encompassing medium though which we learned about success
and failure, defeat and resiliency, exhilaration and sadness, and ultimately of
the knowledge of good and evil.

Not only morality, but language itself. It's an unimpeachable fact that my early
vocabulary was solidly baseball-based. It took years and sometimes decades
before I discovered that many baseball words also carried an off-the-diamond
significance.

Readers may scoff at this claim to the linguistic priority of baseball --
because they can't imagine or can't believe how central pitching and catching
was to our experience. So "let's go to the tape."

Take, for instance, the word "pennant." During my salad years, "pennant" was a
common everyday word that meant only "league championship." If you finished 
first in your league, you "won the pennant." I had not the least glimmer of
an idea that a "pennant" was also physical object -- a flag, it turned out,
usually triangular and usually nautical. To me, a pennant was immaterial and
metaphorical. When Russ Hodges famously (to those of us of a certain age)
screamed, in 1951, "the Giants win the pennant, the Giants win the pennant,"
there was no reason for twelve-year-old me to suspect that the word had an
extra-baseball existence. (Nor did I know that "league" meant anything but
National or American, major or minor.)

Another such word is "battery," which to me and to my cohort of scruffy
schoolyard friends meant nothing more than the duo of pitcher and catcher.
"Today's battery is Newcombe and Campanella"; "they're facing the 'brother
battery' of Mort and Walker Cooper." But later it came to pass that the word
battery was known to the world beyond Ebbets as a source of electric power--
in those days lead-acid and now lithium. And that, in addition, "battery"
had violent associations -- as in "assault and battery" -- or its military
signification as an assemblage of cannons. (The word "batter" had already leapt
its baseball perimeter. Thanks to my mother, I was early familiar with the
tasty mixture that could be baked into cookies or bread). And "bat" was the old
hickory or ash, not a flying mammal.

There are many other baseball words that migrated away from their first home.
A "rubber" was a 4" wide strip of something -- was it really made of rubber?--
that lay on the mound just 60 feet and 6 inches from home plate. Later, a
rubber became an eraser and then the material from which automobile tires are
made and then, much much later, a condom. A "mound," of course, was first and
foremost a pitcher's mound, not a geographical feature. A "dugout" was where
players gathered when they weren't on the field; later it became a kind of
canoe. "Stuff" -- some days a pitcher had his good stuff, but some days his
sinker just didn't drop. A "stance" was a batter's pose in the box; some batters
had an open stance and some a closed. "Clutch" did not denote holding tight to
something or other; it meant only a "clutch hit". A "blast" was not a bomb going
off; it was long four-bagger. The "count" was not degree a of knighthood; it was
the state of balls and strikes on the batter.  The next batter would wait on
a metaphorical "deck" long before a deck became a pack of cards or an exposed
porch. A "blooper" was a "Texas leaguer"; only later did it become a flawed
outtake. Strike! Three strikes and you're out. Later, a labor movement. And many
more.

"Fair" and "foul" indicated where a batted ball fell to the earth in relation
to the first or third base lines. Macbeth's "So foul and fair a day I have not
seen" was many years into the future.

Source: 2024/10/my-life-in-objects-xviii-bronze-door-plate-

Title: My Life in Objects XIX: Bronze Door Plate
Date: October 09, 2024

It's my newest acquisition, purchased on ebay just a couple of days ago, but
already a favorite. It's a bronze door plate, very beautiful and heavy in the
hand. It's inscribed PULL. It bears no manufacturers or identifying marks but
the style is mighty pure Victorian. I imagine it came from a demolished once-
elegant downtown department store. What the heck do I plan to do with it?  Why,
it will be attached, next summer, to the old iron gate that we mounted at the
entrance to the "waterfall garden." It's whimsical, of course, because while
the gate helps to define the space, it guards absolutely nothing and is easily
circumvented.

If PUSH had been available I would have purchased it too. But PULL is
sufficient. A plate saying NO SOLICITORS has also been proposed -- but that
addition might be just a little bit of overkill (and silliness).

Source: 2024/10/words-of-my-life-outing-1

Title: Words of My Life -- Outing
Date: October 09, 2024

During my lifetime, the word "outing" has mutated beyond recognition. It first
entered my youthful vocabulary (as did so many other words) through the medium
of baseball. An "outing" -- in the old days --meant to me only a stint on the
mound. "Podres has had a good "outing" today." The more general meaning of
"outing" as a short trip taken for pleasure, such as a picnic, or a jaunt in
the country, only came into my  life many years later. "They enjoyed a family
outing to Montauk." The fact of the matter is that my family of origin didn't go
on "outings," but at some point I must have heard I heard about such journeyings
from friends or read about them in novels.

These days, I rarely encounter the baseball or picknicky meanings of "outing."
"Outing" has transformed into the obnoxious word that describes the odious and
hostile practice of exposing the sexual identity of a person against his/her
will.  From picnic to nasty, alas.

Frankly, I prefer the traditional significations and activities.

Source: 2024/10/sleeping-in-my-life

Title: Sleeping: a History
Date: October 13, 2024

I'm a terrible, terrible sleeper. It's a lifelong plight and a serious
disability. Truth to tell, I'd have more success as a contestant in a tango
contest, or as a heldentenor yodeling in front of thousands, or as a trapeze
artist or as a sumo wrestler than I have as a sleeper.

Bad sleeping runs in my family. I suppose that I inherited the trait from my
father. Growing up, we never knew where we'd find the old guy in the morning,
because during the night he'd wander from room to room and from bed to chair and
even onto that scratchy old green tufted sofa. For me, the hardest part of any
day has always been the night -- and, believe it or not, the problem has become
more severe as I grapple with old age.

My usual routine is to fall asleep prematurely (and unwisely) at 10:00 pm. Then
I wake at 12:30 am, usually in a fright from a ghastly nightmare, my brain
alert, but my body yearning for oblivion. Then I'm up for a while, involuntarily
reprising some atrocious embarrassment or shameful failure in some earlier part
of my life. Unable to find the right situation for my ancient limbs, I twirl
beneath the blankets like a rotisserie chicken. I don't want to disturb my
peacefully-slumbering bedmate, so I wander the residence, finally to settle in
an auxiliary bed. Then my wayward brain starts to ruminate on the state of the
nation, especially on the prospect of a second term for the moronic demagogue.
At this point, I reluctantly surrender to necessity and take a sleeping pill
(the powerful hypnotic ambien). I read or watch a basketball game on the TV,
but after about 45 minutes the drug takes hold and the muscles in my eyes
slacken so much that I can no longer bring the separate images of right and left
eye together. Eventually I fall into "airplane sleep" -- the kind of shallow
surface sleep that we all experience when we fly "economy" or "coach" (better
called "steerage"). At about 6 in the morning, I wake out a second horrid
dream, relieve myself, and try to snatch a couple of peaceful hours --  a hope
which I regularly fail to accomplish. Eventually, "the darkness has passed/ And
it's daylight at last."  I'm foggy-headed for a while but at last I regain my
equilibrium until it's time for another nighttime bout with Morpheus. And that's
how I pass one third of my life.

On the cheerful side, although I'm a bad nighttime sleeper, I'm a fairly
proficient daytime napper. The most wonderful and memorable sleeps of my life
have been afternoon naps. When I was in my teens, back there in the Eisenhower
era, it was my weekend custom to trot to the schoolyard in the morning and play
three-on-three half-court basketball for a couple of hours (in those days I
enjoyed an endless "second wind"). Then I'd come home for a mid-day dinner --
perhaps if the parents were feeling flush it would be a roast beef or roast pork
along with a bounty of potatoes (the most soporific of vegetables). Then I'd
retreat to my room, tune the old wood-cased Philco to a Dodgers game, perhaps
even to a double-header, and allow myself to be soothed by the rhythmic cadences
of Red Barber and Connie Desmond. A deep, profound and most satisfying nap would
then ensue -- the kind of sleep where you're so far gone that you don't know if
it's day or night, summer or winter when, hours later, you crack an exploratory
eyelid.

Where are the sleeps of yesteryear?

In my maturity, sleep has been, as I've said, a combat zone. In these last years
I've achieved weekend afternoon depth just two times. Alas and alack, it was
the drugs, the sedatives for my two surgeries that did the trick. When you're
anesthetized, at least as I experienced it, there's nothing -- no sound, no
dream, certainly no twirling -- between the moment the anesthetic kicks in and
moment it leaves. You're just not there. You're nowhere.

The ancient formula was somnus imago mortis. That is to say, sleep is the
simulacrum of death. Sleep is designed to prepare us for death. There was a time
that I would scoff at such a pious formula -- but not any more. I think that
if death is what I experienced during anesthetized sleep, why, then, there's
nothing to fear. It will be peaceful and long and very boring, but not at all
stressful.

I would like my tombstone to read, "No More Insomnia, Forever."

Source: 2024/10/words-of-my-life-an-index

Title: Words of My Life: the List So Far
Date: October 29, 2024

My series of posts called Words of My Life was inspired by a Federico
Roncoroni's Sillabario della Memoria, viaggio sentimentale tra le parole amate.
Roncoroni's book is a unique and I think original kind of autobiography -- a
history (voyage, he says) of words that have been been loved by him. Words of
My Life is a  homage to Roncoroni. So far I've written brief essays on the
following words (and I intend to continue). Just as is the entirety of the blog,
these essays constitute an autobiography in shards and fragments. Here's the
list of entries thus far. Each mini-essay is just a click away.

barmagillion

boobs

boot

bottom

cishet,

hack

fango

fluff

joint

jot and tittle,

mucilage.

nostalgia

orts

outing

pairings

pandiculation

provider

ramps

roux

sleepers

slouch,

spatchcock,

stopper.

troll

umpire,

whores

worship

yips

Source: 2024/10/museums

Title: My Life with Museums -- an Introduction
Date: October 30, 2024

In the course of my long life, I've visited hundreds of museums -- more than
I can possibly count or remember. Nor just the famous and glorious ones: how
many times, driving in unfamiliar locality, or wandering in a new city, have
I been irresistibly lured into the local landmark?  Even in the most modest
establishment, there's something new to learn and discover. Nevertheless, my
focus, lifetime, has been on art museums, where even the most iconic, most
reproduced painting or sculpture acquires new life when viewed in the flesh.
Let's face it: copies can be useful and informative, but the real thing is the
real thing -- always revelatory, and sometimes transcendent or sublime. In fact,
let me confess, in the Rembrandt Gallery at the Metropolitan Museum in New York
City, I experienced a transient version of the so-called Stendhal Syndrome. Once
and once only, but never to be forgotten.

I'm dazzled, in memory, by the vast holdings of the Borghese, the Louvre, the
Rijksmuseum, the British Museum, and an early love, the under-appreciated
Brooklyn Museum right there on Grand Army Plaza.

I'm grateful to the exhibitions and the hard-working curators that introduced
me to major painters I wouldn't otherwise have appreciated: Aelbert Cuyp and
Jan Steen at the National Gallery, Camille Pissarro at the Jewish Museum in
New York; many more. And also the specialized museums, chief among them the
Vasa Museum in Stockholm, which taught me more about life in the seventeenth
century than could a fleet of books. And a special favorite, the Corning Museum
of Glass in Corning, New York -- a most wonderful and comprehensive display of
an ancient and modern craft. But also the many local museums that I visited
during my thirty-eight cross-country migrations. Who could ever forget the Donna
Reed Museum in Denison, Ohio, or the Jell-O Museum somewhere near Buffalo, New
York?  Gosh, I'm still hoping that someday I will make it to the National
Museum of the American Coverlet in Bedford, Pennsylvania.

And then there are the troubling museums. I wonder if I will ever have the
courage to enter the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC. It was
disorienting enough to visit an open-air museum, somewhere in Lithuania, where
a variety of preserved structures from that country's miserable past have been
brought together to simulate a peasant village. It was a strange dispiriting
visit. After all, my ancestors as far back as we can know lived and worked in
such a sad little village. My visit was, I suppose, educational -- but also
melancholy and depressing. The village seemed not so much preserved as embalmed.

Source: 2024/11/another-creative-dream-1

Title: Another Creative Dream
Date: November 11, 2024

I'm aware that Oscar Wilde is reputed to have said that the most terrifying
words in the English language are -- "I would like to tell about you my
dream."  But I'm going to report on last night's dream anyway, because it's so
bizarre and interesting (at least to me).

I'm sitting at a table in a restaurant with my ladylove. Actually, it's not
exactly a restaurant; it's more like a nightclub of the kind that's familiar
to me only from 30s films, not from real life. Small tables in a very large
room, patrons wearing fancy slick clothes -- men in dark evening wear, women in
shimmering white. Low chatter. Everything normal except that wandering among
the tables is a giant African lion, male, with an intimidating mane and a long
swishing tail.

I say to my lady, "I don't like the looks of this. That lion could easily carry
off a small child."  End of dream, or at least, end of what I remember.

Once again, it's clear that my nighttime self is far more imaginative than my
pedestrian daytime self, who would never in a million years have thought to
introduce a whopping big lion from the Serengeti into an ordinary restaurant.
I'm not nearly so visionary. Does the dream have any meaning? An obvious
interpretation is that even places safe for recreation can be dangerous.  Or,
conversely, that dangers can be domesticated and made safe. Take your pick.

Source: 2024/12/deaths

Title: Deaths, 2024
Date: December 26, 2024

The year got off to an early start when Brad Gombas died on December 16. Brad
was the brother of my late brother-in-law Allen Gombas. I knew him in the
1970s, when he was a young man; he lived most of his life in New Mexico where
he established a career as a builder and craftsman. I wasn't in touch except
through the extended family communication chain. On December 26, my friend
since  1965 Ray Pike died at age 90. Ray was an accomplished journalist. Nancy
Pike and AGP were the young mothers in a playgroup that included the infants
NGP and Nina Pike -- in an earlier life it now seems. We saw Ray and Nancy at
least once a year for many decades. Then on the last day of the year Sue Palmer
died (peacefully, I'm told), after many many years of illness and pain. She was
a superbly talented artist and a friend, though not a close one, since 1969. In
February, we lost Nancy Levitt. Not a close friend (wife of a colleague) but a
long time acquaintance  -- a regular at the Takacs, seated just in front of
us these past 30 years. Sheldon "Spike" Cohen, later Alan Mills, a friend from
the PS 217 schoolyard, died in March. Esophogeal cancer that had metastasized.
A long drawn out death, with many months of hospice care. In May. Bill Wood
died. He was a world-famous scientist and a friend. It must be 20 years now
since his wife, Renate Wood, a poet, left us. Bill had been in a relationship
with another old acquaintance, Marilyn Krysl, for these many years. Marilyn
died a couple of months after Bill; she had been in "memory care" for several
months. During the summer, we lost two former English colleagues. The first to
go was congenial Chuck Squier, at the age of 91, who had moved to Boise, Idaho
to be near his children; he was a friend and also a long time neighbor on the
Hill; the second: nice guy Doug Burger. In August I discovered that Anatol Anton
had died earlier in the year. I knew Anatol when he was a member of the CU
Department of Philosophy in the 70s or 80s, but hadn't been in touch since he
left Boulder to return to San Francisco. Anatol was a cheerful bear of a man,
far to  the political left, who grew up in Greenwich Village with a semi-famous
painter for a father. Fred Litto, classmate from P S 217 and Erasmus, died in
Brazil, where he had lived for 50 years; we always planned to get together, but
it never happened. Another PS 217 friend, Tony Sogluizzo, died in the spring
but I didn't find out about it until much later. He was a genuinely decent and
gentle man who had a good career as a librarian. Late in December, we attended
the dignified funeral of Bill Belew, husband of Lynn's friend Sharon Belew. 
And so the year came to an end.

Source: 2024/12/books-i-read-2024

Title: Books I Read, 2024
Date: December 26, 2024

Ernest Hemingway, For Whom the Bell Tolls; Raymond Chandler, The Big Sleep;
Felipe Alou, My Baseball Journey; Guy de la Bedoyere, Gladius, the World of
the Roman Soldier; Gordon Dee Alcorn, Owls; Martin H. Levinson, Brooklyn
Boomer; J.N. Adams, Bilingualism and the Latin Language; Sybille Haynes,
Etruscan Civilization, a Cultural History; Philip Freeman, Julian, Rome's
Last Pagan Emperor; G & L Bonfante, The Etruscan Language, An Introduction;
Ernest Hemingway, The Snows of Kilimanjaro and Other Stories; Booth Tarkington,
The Magnificent Ambersons; Ellen Gilchrist, In the Land of Dreamy Dreams;
Kim Chernin, In My Mother's House; Ines Augrain Thomas, Memoirs of an 84
Year Old; Louise Penny, The Cruelest Month; Abramovitch and Galvin, Jews of
Brooklyn; Helen Czerski, The Blue Machine, How the Ocean Works; Ian Buruma,
Spinoza, Freedom's Messiah; Robert Leighton, Tarquinia, an Etruscan City; Joseph
B. Solodow, Latin Alive; William Shakespeare, Coriolanus, Barry S Brown, La
Signora Watson e I Segreti di Parkington Manor; Carlo Levi, Christ Stopped at
Eboli; Patrick Joyce, Remembering peasants, a personal history of a vanished
world; Charles Darwin, Origin of Species (parts); Sean Sayers, The Making of a
Marxist Philosopher, Leo Tolstoi, Anna Karenina; David Gibbins, The History
of the World in Twelve Shipwrecks; Lisa Kaltenegger, Alien Earths; Nicholas
Kristof, Chasing Hope; William Shakespeare, Much Ado about Nothing; Abdulrazak
Gurnah, Other Lives; Mollie Gillen, The Masseys; Hibl & Hibl, The Handel Lamps
Book;  William Shakespeare, King Lear; Caroline Dodds Pennock, On Savage
Shores; Andrew Lipman, Squanto, a Native Odyssey; Thomas Hardy, Far from the
Madding Crowd; Lee Siegel, Groucho Marx; Ben Goldfarb, Eager, the Surprising
Secret Life of Beavers; Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern Bearers and other
Essays; Alice Munro, Too Much Happiness; Margarette Lincoln, London and the
17th Century; Julian Barnes, The Sense of an Ending; Mark Kurlansky, The Basque
History of the World.