

================================================================================Source: 2005/11/abkhazian_has_f

Title: Abkhazian Consonants
Date: November 18, 2005

Abkhazian has fifty-eight consonants. By contrast, English, a language which
is not consonant-poor, has twenty-three: the ones for which there are the
alphabetic letters such as b, d, f, etc. plus sh, ch, dz, ng, the occasional
trilled r, and the two sounds that are indicated by th (voiced in 'soothe' and
unvoiced in 'sooth').

Twenty-three consonants can make an infinite number of words; fifty-eight
consonants are even more of a mouthful. How can the human speech apparatus
produce so many distinguishable sounds?  "By utilizing all points of
articulation from the lips back to the larynx," says an Abhakazian linguist, and
"by associating with plain consonants such secondary features as labialization,
palatalisation, and pharyngalisation." More simply, everywhere that tongue,
lips, teeth, palate, or throat can either stop the flow of air or allow air to
pass through must be put into play. Moreover, If I understand correctly, a sound
made by vibrating, for instance, the area of the uvular might occur in both
labialized (i.e. rounded lips) and unlabialized variants.

I'm guessing that Abkhazian would be formidably difficult to understand,
especially for those who are acquainted only with Indo-European languages.

Abkhazian is one of the indigenous North West Caucasian languages, distantly
related to Circassian and the now extinct Ubykh). It may be descended from
Hattic, which may have been spoken in the empire of the Hittites. There are
something like a million Abkhazian speakers, half in Abkhazia itself, a country
that borders the Black Sea to the northwest of Georgia, and half in Turkey and
other locations in the Abkhazian diaspora. Written language came only in the
mid-nineteenth century to the wild Caucasus. Abkhazians have been described as
20% Muslim, 80% Christian, and 100% pagan, their religion "a peculiar mosaic of
fragments of religious beliefs" in which "Christian ceremonies, Muslim rites,
and pagan observances are so closely interwoven that it seems impossible to
separate them."

Though the Abkhazian consonant system is daunting, it's a relief to learn that
the language uses only one vowel - ah - and also that both the extinct Ubykh and
a still existing dialect of Abkhazian named Bzyp (pronunciation??) employed "a
minimum of eighty consonants." Is eighty the record?

Source: 2005/11/the_clocks_of_r

Title: The Clocks of Rome
Date: November 21, 2005

On the library's shelf of new books a few days ago there was a biography of
Gaius Valerius Catullus (Aubrey Burl, Catullus, a Poet in the Rome of Julius
Caesar, 2004). I’ve had a warm feeling for Catullus since translating, line
by line as a schoolboy, the great erotic epithalamion written for the wedding
of Junia Aurunculeia and Manlius Torquatus. An epithalamion is a song for the
bedding of the bride, and Catullus’s poem overflows with a sexual urgency,
an emotion unacknowledged in the public discourse of my younger days. While my
teacher attended to such chilly questions as whether the meter was glyconic or
pherecretean, I understood with my whole body that Manlius and Junia were warmer
than Rock and Doris or Ozzie and Harriet.

I borrowed the biography of the poet because I remembered being informed that a
life of Catullus could never be written. Too little was known of him—only that
he was raised far to the north of Rome, somewhere in the vicinity of Verona,
that he was of half-Celtic stock, that he was very wealthy, and that he died at
the age of thirty in 54 B.C. And sure enough, the new biography isn’t really
a biography at all, but rather a gossipy account of political, military, and
social doings in Rome during the years when Catullus flourished.

Much was familiar, but an aspect of Roman reality that I should have remembered,
yet didn’t, was that the ancients kept time differently than we do. They were,
for example, weekless. Moreover, they allotted twelve hours to the period from
sunrise to sunset and twelve hours from sunset to sunrise. But of course, days
are longer in the summer and shorter in the winter, so an hour at the summer
solstice would be about twenty-five per cent longer than an hour at the equinox,
and an hour in midwinter about twenty-five per cent shorter. On any given day,
the length of an hour would be slightly different than yesterday’s hour or
tomorrow’s. It seems like a complicated system and I think that the modern
method of keeping the hours constant in length regardless of the season is quite
a sensible improvement. Rome was largely a world of sundials. Mechanical clocks,
a late medieval invention, were almost a millennium and a half into the future,
and the clepsydra, the ancient water-clock, was not so adjustable or so subtle
an instrument that it could be altered slightly from day to day.

The Roman system leads naturally to another question. When the Romans lengthened
or shortened the hour, did they also vary the number of minutes – say,
seventy- five minutes to an hour in summer, forty-five minutes to an hour in
winter? Or did they keep the number of minutes constant at sixty, but allow the
minutes to fluctuate in their duration?

And why does Roman horology put me in mind of James Thurber’s observation when
he turned sixty-- that if there were fifteen months in every year, he’d only
be forty-eight?

Source: 2005/11/a_thanksgiving_

Title: A Thanksgiving Conversation
Date: November 25, 2005

A:  Do you remember how we met?

B:  We met at the August picnic. In 1969.  I insulted you.

A:  You insulted me?  That's hard to believe. What did you say?

B:  I don't remember.

A:  If you don't remember, how do you know that you insulted me?

B:   You told me so.

A:   I told you? I don't remember that you insulted me, and I don't remember
telling you that you did.

A:   You did tell me. About twenty years ago.

B:   I've forgotten about that. What did I say you said?

A:   I forget.

Source: 2005/11/the_black_sea_l

Title: The Black Sea;  Lermontov
Date: November 27, 2005

In the Black Sea just off the Bulgarian coast lies Nessabar, an island (nowadays
artificially an isthmus) that has been a trading center for several thousand
years. Still standing in the old city are churches and fortifications that date
from the 8th and 9th century. It's authentic and it's intriguing, but it's also
one of the very few places in Bulgaria that's distinctly over-touristed, so it
was a relief to hop the informal ferry (really no more than a glorified dinghy)
from Nessebar back to the mainland. To be afloat on the fabled Black Sea felt--
how else can I say it? -- Romantic and a far cry from landlocked Colorado. It
was that windy boat ride that pushed me into reading about the inhabitants of
the Black Sea littoral and of the neighboring Caucasus. This is the land of
the ancient Thracians, builders of tumuli, of the Scythians, who went to war
with mares only, and also of the Sarmatians (of whom the sum of my knowledge
had been the story of the ten virgins of Sarmatia deflowered in a single night
by the Emperor Procopius -- who was, according to Montaigne, a "master workman
and famous in the task." It's a land that is presently the home to Abkhazians,
Georgians, Circassians, Ossetians, Chechens.

My ruminating eventually brought to mind that I've read a novel set in the
Caucasus -- Mikhail Lermontov's A Hero of our Time. The novel was written
in the late 1830s (its author was killed in an idiotic duel in 1841 at the
age of twenty-seven). A sickly but wealthy Muscovite, Lermontov had been sent
to the frosty Caucasus several times in his childhood for the bracing air
and the healing baths. Later, as a Russian officer, he participated in the
displacement and genocide of the Caucasian peoples -- a war that began in the
days of Peter the Great and continues to this very moment. Of the novel itself I
could recall only vaguely the deep romantic chasms and rushing mountain streams,
the unlettered tribesmen, the gallant horsemanship. Re-reading was, as always,
a revelation. The nominal hero, Pechorin, of whom I'm embarrassed to say I had
not the least memory trace -- but let's face it, forty years is a long time--
is a hyperconscious but conscienceless cad. He's the underground man as cavalry
officer.

Here's a sample hunk of plot: at a wedding, lustful Pechorin is taken by the
sight of a fair young Circassian girl named Bela. Bela is also sought by
Kazbich, a swarthy Chechen fighter, the owner of a most remarkable horse. The
horse is coveted by Bela's younger brother Azamat. Azamat and Pechorin conspire:
Azamat will kidnap and deliver his sister to Pechorin if Pechorin will help
him abscond with the horse. The intrigue succeeds and Pechorin takes the "wild
girl" Bela as his concubine. She, of course, sickens. One day, while Pechorin
is out hunting boar, Kazbich returns and attempts to re-abduct Bela. Pechorin,
returning home, shoots at Kazbich and wounds him; Kazbich escapes but not before
fatally stabbing Bela with his dagger -- preferring, it's assumed, to kill
rather than surrender her.

It seems like a horribly racist tale -- made worse by the fact that the Chechens
are regularly characterized as thieves, the Ossetians as stupid, and so on. The
equation of horse and woman is inherently offensive. But the story is redeemed
from bigotry because blonde Pechorin is by far the nastiest character in the
novel, and because the whole episode can be and perhaps should be interpreted as
a rebuke to the brutality of Russian imperialism.

It's obvious that the novel's themes are not specific to the Russian-Caucasian
frontier. It's easy to imagine a translation of A Hero of Our Time into a film
set in the American west where Chechens become Sioux, the Caucasus becomes
the Rockies, Pechorin is played by James Stewart while Bela transmutes into
Debra Paget in a buckskin skirt, and racial, imperialist and genocidal themes
are enacted in a frontier that is more familiar but equally falsified and
romanticized.

Source: 2005/11/some_of_bushs_m

Title: Bushlingo 1 -- Malapropisms
Date: November 29, 2005

Bushlingo is rich in malapropisms. The simplest occurs when an intended word is
displaced by one that is similar in sound or cadence, as in the wannabe-stirring
pronouncement that "we cannot let terrorists and rogue nations hold this
nation hostile." The word "hostile" is similar, kind of, to "hostage," but
unfortunately it is opposite in meaning, so that the effect of the malapropism
is to depict the United States not as a nation under attack but as an aggressor.
In the Bushlingo sentence, "we are making steadfast progress," it would appear
that the On-Message President meant to say "steady progress"; nevertheless,
"steadfast progress" is not without meaning. Ludicrous in Bushlingo, the near-
miss might even have had a touch of grandeur in a more able mouth, say that of
Winston Churchill. There's less ambiguity in the assertion that "reading is the
basics of all learning"; surely the Education President meant to say "basis,"
but perhaps his spongy brain had been infiltrated by the conservative slogan,
"Back to Basics." Another example of simple malapropism occurs in the defiant
"I don't have to accept their tenants," where the college-level word "tenets"
proves to be beyond the The Uniter's linguistic competence; the substitute
"tenants" inadvertently presents him not as an embattled orator but as a testy
landlord.

Bushlingo deploys malapropisms more excitingly when it replaces the anticipated
word with a coinage, as in the piteous Bartlett's-quotation-quality wail, "don't
misunderestimate me." "Misunderestimate" is a portmanteau comprised of the "mis"
in "mistake" or "misjudge" and "underestimate" and seems to mean something like
"don't underestimate me in a bad way." Perhaps, deep in his heart, the guy
knows that it is impossible to underestimate him. There is less self-betrayal
but equal novelty in the insight that "the United States and Russia are in the
midst of a transformationed relationship," where "transform" and "formation" are
packed into an overcrowded portmanteau. An even less less clever coinage appears
in the Bushlingoid judgment that "this issue doesn't resignate with the people."
"Resignate" and the intended "resonate" are near homophones;  so close in rapid
speech that the difference between the two is obvious only to those who can
read. A very similar example is contained in the proclamation "I want to reduce
our nuclear capacities to the level commiserate with keeping the peace." 
"Commensurate" is too hard a word for someone who's never seen it in print.

Coming soon: subject-verb agreement in Bushlingo.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: The Late George Apley
Date: December 03, 2005

My father was a great admirer of the popular American novelist John P. Marquand
and I remember that he specifically urged me to read Marquand's best known work,
The Late George Apley. Marquand's heyday was in the 1930s and 1940s, and I don't
think that he's much read now, although it's good to see that two of his many
novels are still in print. Yesterday I re-read The Late George Apley. It's a
fine book. The conceit is this: George Apley, an extremely wealthy Bostonian
of the Cabot-Lodge-Saltonstall class, has recently died, and an old Harvard
chum has been hired to condense Apley's letters and papers into a biography.
The fatuous editor, who portrays Apley as an exemplary being, reveals to his
readership much more than he himself can possibly understand. We hear of Apley's
rectitude, his generosity, his civic-mindedness, his loyalty to his class --
but along the way we indirectly learn many truths; for example, that Apley
should have married the beautiful and intelligent but alas Irish Mary Monahan,
but instead was hustled into a ceremony with a drab woman of his own circle.
"Remember," his father assures him, "beauty is only skin-deep." Apley upholds
proper Louisburg Square values, but occasionally he catches a glimmer of the
idea that the rules of upper-class Boston have circumscribed and warped his
life. At the end, his daughter has married (gasp) a journalist and his son
(double gasp) a divorcee. In his last weeks, Apley becomes just a trifle less
unbending: "It even occurs to me tonight, although this is simply a whim of
the moment and probably not quite sound, that you (he's writing to a long-time
friend) and I may have missed something in our day." But he can also say of his
daughter's husband, that "his peculiarity of speech and manner indicate that he
comes from a very long distance, probably the Middle West, a place I have not
seen, nor do I wish to see it."

Here's Marquand at his best. Young George (we're now in the 1870s) has a
daft grandmother. One day, at a "festive occasion," she turns to her aged
contemporary the Reverend Nathaniel Pettingill, and blurts out:  "Young man,
should you ever go blackbirding, be sure to select Negroes that are brought
down from the mountains, they are stronger and healthier than the Blacks from
the coast." Our brainless narrator explains that her outburst "displays the
vagaries of a dear old lady's mind," but readers now know that the great Apley
fortune was built on slave-trading. (The artistry of the moment is borrowed from
Dickens, and specifically from Mr. F's lunatic Aunt in Little Dorrit, who, at
dinner, for no discernible reason, suddenly cries out to the company that "when
we lived at Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers." But on the whole
Marquand owes far less to Dickens than to Howells).

I can't help wondering why my father was so insistent that I read the book.
My father had as much rectitude as anyone I've ever known, and perhaps he
was attracted to the nobler side of Apley's personality. Or was he trying to
warn me away from the kind of conformity which stifles poor George? Or, a
very conventional man himself, did he suspect that he himself was enmeshed in
Apleyan-like coils?  Or did he simply enjoy long ironic narratives?

Is it time for a Marquand revival?

Source: 2005/12/addendum_to_ler

Title: Addendum to Lermontov
Date: December 04, 2005

On November 27, writing about Lermontov's A Hero of our Time, I found it
offensive that Azamat trades his sister for a horse. I found fault with
Lermontov for employing what I judged to be a fraudulent plot device. I've since
read Amjad Jaimoukha's The Chechens (2005) where the following appears: "In
Ingush society, a man had the right to give away his sister in marriage without
her consent." (The Ingush, like the Chechens, are a subset of the Vainakh.) What
appears to be a bit of crudeness in A Hero of our Time might in reality be an
accurate representation of nineteenth-century Caucasian society. Apologies to
Lermontov.

Source: 2005/12/more_on_malapro

Title: More on Malapropisms in Bushlingo
Date: December 07, 2005

In a recent post, I conjectured that some Bushlingo malapropisms must have
originated when their bookless coiner parroted words that he had heard in
speech but had never seen in print.  I gave two examples:  the meaningless
"resignate" for "resonate" and the wildly off-target "commiserate" for
"commensurate."  Bushlingo offers other examples of such self-betraying
approximations.

Drawing from his profound well of historical knowledge, our deep president has
mused that Americans are endowed by their creator with "uninalienable rights." 
He has also proclaimed his disbelief that advertisements contain "subliminable"
messages;  he has threatened that an Iraqi who does not cooperate with us will
be "persecuted"; he has made the claim that corporate "malfeance" has affected
our economy. The inerrant President has also whined that he's been "pillared"
in the press. "Pillared" might mean "strapped to a pillar," just as "stocked"
used to mean "set in the stocks," but more likely it's a Bushlingo invention
for "pilloried" -- an unusual word far beyond the President's ninth-grade ken.
In all these cases the President, whose attention span appears to be minuscule,
has managed the first syllable --"res," "com," "sub," "mal," "pil" etc. -- just
perfectly but hasn't had the old-fashioned American stick-to-it-iveness to
persevere all the way to the end of the word.

Though no doubt Bush embraces a dark belief in the "fallacy" of human beings,
his Calvinism would be more theologically orthodox if he had pushed past the
opening "fal" and managed the full five syllables of "fallibility."

The transformation of misunderstood or incorrectly reproduced oral forms also
occurs in the incomprehensible assertion that "however they delineate, quotas
vulcanize society." To vulcanize is to add sulfur to raw rubber to make it
tougher and less elastic. What sort of mysterious social alchemy is envisioned
in the presidential use of the word vulcanize? Is it possible that he meant to
say "Balkanize?" Balkanization generally refers to a political situation in
which larger entities are subdivided into small competing units, as occurred in
the Balkan peninsula. But where in the world would Bush have encountered such a
hard word? Only orally. My guess is that he was briefed by some foreign policy
assistant who insufficiently dumbed down his presentation, and the Education
President heard a V where a B was in fact spoken.

On occasion, POTUS reveals that he's using a word that he has recently stumbled
upon, as in his observation that there are enemies of the United States who
"had been trained in some instances to disassemble--that means not tell the
truth." It sounds very much as though he had recently been introduced to the
word "dissemble" and, monkey-hear, monkey-speak, attempted to replicate the
word in his own conversation. He generously added a bonus syllable, and then,
evaluating his audience by his own dim light, thoughtfully explained the meaning
of the novel word.  No doubt his audience was galvanized.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  H. M. Pulham, Esquire
Date: December 09, 2005

I re-read J. P. Marquand's H. M. Pulham, Esquire, which was published in 1940
and was still widely read during the 50s. It's disappointing that the new novel
repeats so much of The Late George Apley. Pulham is a mock autobiography,
and once again Marquand satirizes social norms by using the device of the dim
narrator (in this case Harry himself). Pulham is an upper-class Bostonian who
should have married the enterprising and highly sexual Marvin (sic) Myles
(played by Hedy Lamarr!!! in the King Vidor film version) but instead finds
himself fastened to a whiny woman of his own set. He's stuck in an unrewarding
job, his children dislike him, and he clings so blindly to respectability that
he cannot see that his dear Kay is sleeping with his best friend. It couldn't
happen because "Bill King is a gentleman." There's much about the suffocating
miasma of Boston society, but also a pointed critique of the only alternative
that's offered -- the hollow world of New York advertising. It's a post WWI
novel, and Harry served in combat, but he can't seem to leverage the lessons of
the war to free him from his Bostonianism.

Re-reading brought to mind that the buzzword of the 1950s was "conformity." It
was an age of mass-produced housing, the routinizing of jobs, and of the ascent
of mass advertising. So far, the two Marquand novels that I have read have both
taken conformity and the failed resistance to conformity as theme. Next up:
Point of No Return. I'm curious to discover whether Marquand repeats himself
again or whether he tackles other aspects of American culture. He certainly
knows how to tell a story.

Source: 2005/12/thing_is

Title: Thing Is
Date: December 10, 2005

Here are two consecutive sentences written by Neill Woelk, a writer for
the Boulder Daily Camera. They appeared in today's paper. "Simply, if Bohn
decides to leave for another job, CU should be fairly compensated. Thing is,
Bohn doesn't have a contract yet." My questions: is "thing is" an acceptable
substitute for "moreover," or "the point is that"? and b) if it is, when did it
come to be so? To my ear, it's lazy, substandard writing far too colloquial and
slangy even for a provincial newspaper. Our of electronic curiosity, I googled
"thing is," but 43,200,000 hits was too big a basket to sift.

I take "thing is" to be a sloppy distillation of "the thing of it is." It turns
out that "the thing of it is" is well-established in American speech. Rush
Limbaugh's a big "thing of it is" guy. On the missing weapons in Iraq, "the
thing of it is, this is a serious matter"; "thing of it is, no substantive
evidence has been offered to justify any of this." So is Pat Robertson. In
answer to the question, "is it possible to receive a specific answer to a prayer
directly from the Scriptures, Pat hedges:  "Well, the thing of it is that you
can't force the Bible to say,`Judas hanged himself; go thou and do likewise.'
" So too, surprisingly, is the supposedly erudite William F. Buckley: "Now
the thing of it is, we don't know — and we won't accumulate this knowledge,
without experience...." But it's not only a right-wing locution. Here's Robert
Frost, in 1915 (in "A Servant to Servants"): "Bless you, of course, you're
keeping me from work,/ But the thing of it is, I need to be kept." And it's
older: Bret Harte also used the expression.

I can't track "thing is."  It's well established in speech, but it ought to be
beneath the dignity of a morning paper. Can anyone comment on the history of
"thing is?" I suspect (without evidence) that it's rural in origin.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_2

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Point of No Return
Date: December 13, 2005

Still another novel by John Phillips Marquand, this time Point of No Return, a
great big book (550 pages) that's too long by half. A blockbuster, I think, in
its day -- 1947 -- but disappointing to re-read after fifty or so years. Just as
in Marquand's earlier novels, the central figure, Charles Gray, feels himself
bound down like Gulliver among the Lilliputians. The many ropes are the social
ties that connect him, not this time to Boston, but to a small Massachusetts
seafaring town which Marquand calls Clyde but which is most likely modeled after
the Newburyport of the author's own childhood. Charles is deeply in love with
Jessica Lovell, who's a step above him in the social ladder (everything would
have been just fine if he had been born one street over and had gone to Harvard
instead of (gasp!) Dartmouth), but the marriage is blocked by Jessica's scheming
dad, and Charles escapes to New York, where he marries a sensible, no-nonsense
kind of gal with whom he subsists in something that more resembles a partnership
than a romance. He finds work with the Stuyvesant Bank, and the plot revolves
around two suspenseful topics: a) will Charles be promoted to vice-president of
the bank, and b) (more important to me) what will be the outcome when Charles
returns to Clyde and meets Jessica after a twenty-year absence. I read this
very long novel waiting for the climactic interview between the long-separated
lovers, and I felt cheated when Marquand dodged what I felt ought to have been
the novel's resolution. It would have been an opportunity for fine writing
and a proper resolution to the novel. Instead, I was forced to settle for an
anti- climax: Charles makes V.-P. Nor is his promotion reported ironically, as
it might or should have been-- Charles gets his promotion, but then comes to
realize that he's jumped through hoops all his life and that the Stuyvesant
Bank is just another piece of equipment.  No, no. Nothing but rhetorical drums
and trumpets for his achievement. Worse yet, the long anticipated meeting with
Jessica never comes to pass.  Marquand evades the issue. Charles returns to
Clyde, meets various friends and relatives (including his doppelganger Jackie
Mason -- not the cornball pseudo-Semitic comedian, but the accountant from
Clyde) -- who's recently become engaged to Jessica, and then hightails it back
to the big city, leaving in his wake at least one very frustrated reader.

What to make of a novelist who has made a career of satirizing the stuffy,
constricted business world and who then gives us a novel in which we're expected
to rejoice because someone makes vice-president! There's always been a certain
glamor to the lonely entrepreneur, the Thomas Edison figure, puttering in his
garage and coming up with a Big Idea, struggling to find support among the
banker-skeptics, and then, against all odds, becoming rich and successful,
providing employment for untold thousands, leading Americans to a new world of
progress, etc. etc. But what in the world can be glamorous about climbing the
corporate ladder (an action, which, as Samuel Johnson said, is performed in the
same posture as creeping)?

Charles is the conformist, not one who rebels inwardly against conformity, but
one who embraces it and turns conformity into achievement. It's no wonder that
the Fifties were so oppressive.  While in The Late George Apley, Marquand
punctured social constriction, in this novel he's come around to the dark side.

Not only that -- the linguistic surface of the novel is bland. There's no style
-- just serviceable gray prose.There are a number of good moments: a little
flirtation -- just winks and nods -- carried on between Charles and a bored
daughter-in-law while Charles discourses on stocks and bonds that's insightfully
written and suggests that there might be a bit of distance between our hero and
his chosen profession. But it's a loose end that goes nowhere.

Is this the end of my Marquand project, or do I have the initiative to tackle
yet another big novel? Stay tuned.

Source: 2005/12/border_relation

Title: Bush's Knowledge of Geography
Date: December 14, 2005

Our president's knowledge of geography is famously shaky. He seems to be under
the impression that the Kingdom of Jordan is a gulf coast country, that Africa
is a nation, and that Europe is one of America's key allies. On being shown a
map of South America, he said, to the president of that continent's largest
country, "Wow, Brazil is big." Perhaps he merely misspoke when he said that
"border relations between Canada and Mexico have never been better," but you
never know, do you?

Iraq is a large country -- over 170,000 square miles. It's larger than
California and two-thirds the size of Texas. In population it's just about the
same as Texas-- about 22,000,000 people. Does our president know these facts? 
Did he know them when he decided to invade and occupy Iraq?  Did anyone on the
diplomatic side say to him: Iraq is comparable in size and population to Texas.
Imagine that Texas was invaded and occupied by Iraqis who overthrew a native
Texan dictator and tried to replace him with a sharia-based government. How
would Texans respond?  Will it be a cakewalk?  Will Texans throw flowers at
the Iraqi soldiers?  Or will they, possibly, make a bit of a fuss?"

Source: 2005/12/edward_gibbon_c

Title: Edward Gibbon Comments on Randall (Duke) Cunningham, Halliburton, etc.
Date: December 15, 2005

"At this important crisis (i. e. the attack on Rome's Balkan outposts by Huns
in 375 A. D.), the military government of Thrace was exercised by Lupicinus and
Maximus, in whose venal minds the slightest hope of private emolument outweighed
every consideration of public advantage; and whose guilt was only alleviated by
their incapacity of discerning the pernicious effects of their rash and criminal
administration."  Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Chapter XXVI.

Source: 2005/12/flower_names

Title: Flower Names
Date: December 17, 2005

When I was a just a young sprout, every summer I would grow, from seed, in my
father's crowded backyard garden, a small plot of snapdragons. Inasmuch as I
had, or seemed to have in those years, endless time, I became a connoisseur of
the plant's growth habit: its elongated long smooth leaves with their pastel
undersides, its spikes of buds, opening from bottom to top, its varied colors,
and especially its unusual flower. I'd watch the bees lift the "dragon's"
jaw, squeeze inside, sometimes to temporarily trap themselves within. As much
as loved the flower, I think I loved its name even more. "Snapdragon"-- a
euphonious, crunchy, satisfying, evocative sound -- scary too, but how can a
flower be scary?

I recently opened the first of this year's seed catalogs to find the favorite
flower of my springtime listed as "antirrhinum." The scientific name is not
inaccurate -- it's Latinized Greek for "snoutlike" -- but I have to say that
antirrhinum is not a word that sings to me. It sounds less like a border annual
than a cold remedy..

The modern plant breeders, intent on appearing to be learned and scientific,
have gone too far. I want the old names back. Not lathyrus, but sweet pea;
not achillea, but yarrow; not dianthus barbatus, but sweet William; not
calendula, but marigold. Let us even do away with the almost naturalized name
of delphinium; bring back the larkspur. Not veronica, but speedwell. I want
a garden that's filled with stocks, lilies of the valley (not convallaria),
loosestrife (the yellow variety, not the invasive purple), love lies bleeding,
love-in-a-mist, marguerites, brushwood.

I make one exception: liverwort. Not that anyone would want to grow it, but just
in case. In fact, I banish all flower names that contain the element "wort." In
my garden, spiderwort grows under the name tradescantia. (Tradescantia, poor
thing, has a second and equally unacceptable name: cow slobber.)

Am I alone in this preference?  Not a bit.  I'm in the best company. In the
noblest poem in the English language, John Milton lists the flowers that "strew
the laureate hearse" of the dead poet Lycidas. ("Rathe" means "early"-- it
survives in "rather," which used to mean "earlier";  "freaked" is "streaked.")

Bring the rathe primrose, which forsaken dies,

The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine;

The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet,

The glowing violet,

The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine,

With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head.

It's a great swelling litany. Savor again the music of that lovely last line:
"With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head." Instead of cowslip, Milton
might have written "primula veris, family primulaceae," but he was too smart to
do so. Words like cowslip, lady's mantle, goldenrod, forget-me-not, and, yea,
snapdragon live and breathe and are laden with metaphorical perfume. Cowslips
hang their heads; primula, like antirrhinum, have no heads to hang. Moreover,
if Milton had been looking about for alternatives for the cowslip, he would
not have consulted the plant breeders but returned to popular lore and he
would have chosen from such tasty words (alternatives all to cowslip) as herb
peter, peggle, key of heaven, fairy cups, mayflower, lady's keys-- all of which
are human, humane, and evocative. But John Milton, who exhorted "daffodillies
to fill their cups with tears," had an ear, and I can therefore affirm with
absolute, unimpeachable, and total confidence that he would have rejected with
horror another synonym for the common cowslip: the palsywort.

Source: 2005/12/crosspatch_draw-1

Title: "Crosspatch, draw the latch" and Industrial Capitalism
Date: December 18, 2005

One of the most joyful of nursery rhymes, and a personal favorite, is this:

Crosspatch,

Draw the latch.

Sit by the fire and spin.

Take a cup,

And drink it up.

Then call the neighbors in.

The clicky rhymes and jaunty meter are undeniably beautiful -- and there's much
more meaning than poems of this kind usually contain.

In the first triad, a "crosspatch," -- a "cross or ill-tempered person, usually
a girl or woman" -- is at work, spinning. In the second triad, she's exhorted to
drink and also to invite her neighbors "in" -- presumably into the room, or just
as likely, the tiny cottage -- where she lives alone. In the first strophe, the
theme is isolation, but in the second, isolation is challenged by the calls of
society and by the hope of a more satisfactory and convivial life.

What can we know or imagine about the surly individual addressed by the
evocative designation, "crosspatch?"  The first element in the name --"cross"--
implies not only sourness, but also resistance, as in "cross-grained." The
second element -- "patch" -- suggests that the crosspatch's discontent is
not without cause. We can infer that she's poor because she's a person
whose garments are either assembled from various rescued materials, as in
"patchwork," or that her clothes are, in another sense of the word patch,
repaired. In addition, it's possible that ill health has caused her skin to
become "patchy."  But "patch" also signals a degree of mental stress, as in
Shakespeare's "patched fool." In this signification, patch derives from Italian
pazzo, crazy. The crosspatch is therefore disabled physically, socially and
psychologically.

At the outset of the poem, our "crosspatch" sits glowering, impoverished,
perhaps muttering indistinctly, friendless, without family, her youth blighted
by poverty, huddled against the last embers of her dying fire. What is it
that she is spinning? No doubt she ekes out a meager living in the impersonal
mercantilist "putting-out" system. Some exploitative proto-capitalist venturer
has delivered to her lonely door a quantity of unspun wool or cotton;  her job
is to return the material to him in the processed form that will then be passed
on to an equally poor weaver, then to a tailor, etc. She works alone and never
sees the fruits of her labor except for the occasional, paltry farthing that
allows her a bare subsistence. No wonder she is slightly barmy and has "drawn
the latch" -- closed herself off from her fellows. But then, suddenly, comes
the antistrophe, and in a series of importunate injunctives the crosspatch is
asked to rejoin the company of humanity. "Take a cup,/ And drink it up,/ Then
call the neighbors in."  What's in the cup?  Spiritous liquors, no doubt,
which, though designed to dull the pain of wage-slavery, also act to augment the
revelry with which the poem climaxes. The wine is not sipped, but it is drained
to the lees. And once the door is unlatched, and the neighbors -- neighbors of
both sexes, no doubt -- are called "in," why then, let the libations and the
wild rumpus begin! Alienated labor is suddenly set aside and replaced by the
natural bonds of one human being to another, and the stasis of the opening lines
of the poem transforms in a flash into a wildly kinetic bacchanal. Emotional
weakness transmutes into healthy liberated pleasure. Dour Puritanism, with its
punishing work ethic, yields to the spirit of holiday and to pagan, perhaps even
dionysian, excess. Here, in miniature, is the essence of the comic vision. In
a few powerful lines, freedom, good humor, and natural appetite triumph over
bondage, artificiality, social constriction and repression; the justifiably
sullen crosspatch, in a burst of energy, reintegrates herself into the social
nexus from which she has been banished.

Whether or not the crosspatch can permanently liberate herself from the
oppressions of industrial capitalism, or whether the anodyne and spurious relief
of alcohol is a merely transient solution is left unresolved. To ask a short
poem, however dense with meaning, to answer so difficult a question would, just
possibly, be to ask too much of it and, perhaps, to push the evidence the merest
tad too far.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_3

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
Date: December 23, 2005

Sloan Wilson's 1955 best-seller is saturated with alcohol. Nary a character can
carry on a conversation without first mixing a highball, a scotch, a manhattan,
or a batch of martinis. "Let's have a drink" is the lubricant without which the
novel couldn't proceed. In The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, the characters
not only drink like fishes but they also smoke like chimneys. There's not a
social interaction that isn't punctuated with lighting up, puffing, flicking,
extinguishing. But the use of alcohol and tobacco do not pose moral challenges;
they're just there, like food and water, and do not become issues for either the
characters or the author. Were the 50s so rich in nicotine?  I think they must
have been: our house, like everyone else's, was a thick blue haze. Between my
mother's cigarettes and my father's pipes and cigars, I must have inhaled many
lifetimes worth of second-hand smoke during my childhood. On the other hand, we
departed from the norm in that we were not spiritous. While there was always a
bottle of something or other on hand to offer to the very occasional guest, I
never once noticed either of my parents drink liquor, or beer or wine for that
matter, unprompted. Omnipresent alcohol, or rather the manners that surround its
consumption, dates The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit. Right there, in the middle
of the Beat Generation, is an old-fashioned Bourbon Generation novel.

The "gray flannel" of the title refers to the ubiquitous 50s costume of the
upwardly mobile. I re-read the novel, which I remembered more from the Gregory
Peck-Jennifer Jones epic than from the book, with the expectation that it would
be another Marquand-like story of conformity and thwarted rebellion among the
aspiring execs. In truth there is some of that, for Tom Rath, the central
figure, is for a while caught up in corporate climbing. But the button-down
world is not as vividly realized as is the prevailing suburban angst. Basically,
the novel is a story of a marriage that's lost its juice. Rath, a good man but
one who's become extremely cautious and tightly-wound, had been a paratrooper
who dropped behind enemy lines in Europe and in the Pacific. He's killed
seventeen men, most with his bare hands -- one an eighteen-year-old, and one
(accidentally) his best friend -- but he's never been able to tell his wife
Betsy about the war and about the way the war altered his values. In the last
chapter he finally breaks through the barrier, but only because he has to admit
to Betsy that, while waiting to be shipped from the European to the Pacific
theater, he lived with and fathered a child with a Roman "soldier's girl." Rath
asks a very good question -- why is it that he's not ashamed to have killed,
but he is ashamed to have loved. Rath's revelations are the heart of the novel,
but they're given curiously short shrift (as though Sloan Wilson unconsciously
allies himself Tom Rath's impulse to suppress the truth).

I think the book was so popular because it must have helped to purge some of
the psychological traumas of the war. It's a moderately good story written in
moderately bad prose.

It was sad to read Sloan Wilson's obituary (he died in 2002) and discover that
he was an alcoholic for much of his life.

Source: 2005/12/the_caucasus_ha

Title: The Caucasus; Hadji Murad
Date: December 24, 2005

When I read Neal Ascherson's Black Sea, I had to admit that I knew nothing at
all about a huge and contested part of the world. I followed up on Ascherson's
bibliography and read a series of ethnographic studies of ancient Black Sea
peoples -- Scythians, Sarmatians, etc. -- and from there moved eastward to the
Caucasus and leaned about the Abkhazians, the Ossetians, the Chechens, etc.
Yesterday I finished Nicholas Griffin's Caucasus (2001), which is half travel
book and half a biography of Imam Shamil. Shamil, of whom I also knew zero until
a few days ago, is the legendary Avar guerrilla leader who led the opposition to
the Russian conquest of the mountains in the mid-nineteenth century. He's the
national hero of the Chechens, and is a compound of Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse,
and Geronimo-- with a little Islamic fervor added in. The Russians conquered
the Caucasus with a combination of overwhelming force, superior technology,
and ruthlessness: they systematically obliterated villages, murdered as many
civilians as possible, and when all else failed, cut to the ground the primeval
beech forests -- defoliation not then an option -- in which Shamil and his
Murids found refuge.

Reading about Shamil led me to Hadji Murad -- Tolstoy's extraordinary last novel
and one in which Shamil is a minor character. In 150 pages or so, Hadji Murad
says as much about the brutality, the stupidity, and the vanity of war as War
and Peace says in ten times as many pages. Tolstoy, who had soldiered in the
Caucasus, wrote in his diary (according to Griffin) that the war was "so ugly
and unjust that anybody who wages it has to stifle the voice of his conscience."
Hadji Murad is a charismatic leader who's involved in a foolish feud with
Shamil; he surrenders to the Russians, tries to escape, and is killed and
beheaded. That's the plot, but the genius is in the telling. After recounting
an atrocity in which the Russians, in sport, destroy a small settlement, ruin
the crops, and bayonet a small child, Tolstoy describes the feelings of the
remaining villagers as they set about the hopeless task of rebuilding: "It was
not hatred, because they did not regard those Russian dogs as human beings,
but it was such repulsion, disgust and perplexity at the senseless cruelty of
these creatures, that the desire to exterminate them  -- like the desire to
exterminate rats, poisonous spiders, or wolves  -- was as natural an instinct
as that of self-preservation." Tolstoy is disgusted by the Russian actions, but
he's equally repelled by the brutal mountaineers, and he goes out of his way
to draw parallels between the utterly cruel Imam Shamil and the fat, ignorant,
vainglorious Nicholas, the Czar of All the Russians.

In the nineteenth century, the Russians cut down the forests; in 1999, they
conquered Grozhny (the capitol of Chechnya) by dynamiting every significant
building in the entire city.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_4

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Women and Thomas Harrow
Date: December 28, 2005

Women and Thomas Harrow was John P. Marquand's last novel. It was published in
1958; Marquand (born in 1893) died in 1960. It's another good but not great
book. Despite the witty surface, it's very sad. Thomas Harrow (clearly a
surrogate for Marquand himself) is a successful but not brilliant playwright;
in the course of the novel, he comes to realize that he's squandered his talent
and made a mess of his personal relationships. The last line of Women and Thomas
Harrow: "In the end, no matter how many were in the car, you always drove
alone."

I'm still trying to figure out why my father thought so well of the novels of
John Phillips Marquand. For one thing, Pop was clearly in tune with the author's
relentless anti-modernism. In form, Marquand's novels are Victorian. There's
no experimentation, nothing unusual or original in content or presentation.
Moreover, in all the novels, not a landscape but has been destroyed, not a
custom but has deteriorated, not a value but has been compromised. The modern
world in Marquand's view has become too subject to analysis, too Freudified.
Sometimes Harrow employs, with some resistance, the exact words that I heard
without irony from my father's mouth: "No one could escape from convention for
long....  It was advisable to accept the mores of one's time, no matter if they
shifted. It was better to be in tune... with the beat of marching music."  No
dancing to a different drummer either in Marquand or in my father.

Source: 2005/12/otto_premingers

Title: Otto Preminger's Laura (1944)
Date: December 28, 2005

Laura is a stylish noir whodunit that holds up well even after the passage of
sixty years. It is cleverly written and handsomely cinematographed but it also
comes with some murky psychological baggage that may or may not make sense. At
the heart of the enigma is Waldo Lydecker (played by Clifton Webb). He's so
head-over-heels in love and so ferociously jealous of Laura (the ingenue Gene
Tierney) that he'll resort to anything, even murder, to keep her from other
men. The premise is good whodunit fare, but it would make more obvious sense if
Lydecker weren't both old and gay.

Clifton Webb was fifty-five when the picture was made, but he looks and acts
ten or fifteen years older. He may be a bachelor, but he's not an eligible one.
There's a rumor that Webb had a clause in his contract with Twentieth-Century
Fox that barred the company from alluding to his homosexuality, but the
prohibition, if it existed, didn't stop him from playing Lydecker with a
pronounced gay affect. He's fussy, he's bitchy, he's a queen -- in short a stage
homosexual in every aspect except that he's not obviously interested in men.
(Well, almost never;  he does expose himself to the detective Mark McPherson
[Dana Andrews] when he steps out of the bathtub and asks McPherson to throw him
a robe.)

One clue to Lydecker's character occurs in the first scene. He's spying on the
detective, who's wandering around Lydecker's apartment, browsing an extensive
collection of fragile objets d'art. McPherson goes to pick up a piece of glass
and Lydecker calls out "Careful, that's very valuable" (I'm quoting from
memory). From this incident we learn two things: Lydecker is a collector of
beautiful works of art, and he's willing to let people look but not touch. This
same attitude controls his relations to Laura: he cherishes her beauty, he
molds her in a Pygmalion-like way, but he's also hyper-protective. For him, she
becomes an untouchable work of art (the portrait of Laura, on which the camera
focuses so obsessively, is the metaphorical signifier of her place in his mental
world). His cool sexuality (he's perfectly content with twice-a-week dinners)
and his age (he's more interested in fathering Laura than in making love to her)
are less significant than his pygmalionism.

By transforming Laura into a work of art, he attempts to preserve her virginity.
He therefore shoos away her potential lovers: he destroys the career of Jacoby,
the painter, by writing a vitriolic attack on him; he collects revealing
information about the southern gigolo Carpenter (Vincent Price), and he competes
with McPherson. It's a neat turn that to do so he becomes a detective himself
-- loitering in the snow outside Laura's apartment, eavesdropping behind a post
in a night club, etc. Eventually he comes to understand that he can't preserve
Laura's "purity;" it's then that the film turns to violence. After all is lost,
he gives away the game when he says to McPherson, with horror, "I suppose you'll
have a disgustingly earthy relationship" [i.e. with Laura].

It's fascinating that McPherson, though he has all the outward marks of the
macho gumshoe, is himself tepid about sexuality, lacks charisma and emotion, and
that the film allows him and Laura only one slight awkward peck of a kiss.The
detective is not a creature of passion, but he may be, like Lydecker, a lover of
art; it's revealed that Laura's portrait will be auctioned and that McPherson
has put in a bid on it.