

================================================================================Source: 2017/01/poor-robert-mitchum-out-of-the-past-angel-face

Title: Poor Robert Mitchum (Out of the Past, Angel Face)
Date: January 02, 2017

On successive nights, we watched Out of the Past (1947) and Angel Face
(1953). Both are, as they say, "gripping" films. In my present situation,
"gripping" means that even though the nominal curtain rose on these movies after
9:00 pm, and I was in bed, comfortable, with a full stomach, I was sufficiently
gripped that I didn't waver or snooze or nap, even for a second. Such criteria
of excellence may not seem significant to younger folk, but trust me, loyal
readers, in these latter years, staying awake and engaged is a crucial critical
yardstick.

Both Out of the Past and Angel Face are superior noirs. In both films the
central character is played by Robert Mitchum. I couldn't detect a the least
tad of difference between the two parts he plays. You could lift his Jeff
Bailey from Out of the Past and plunk him down in Angel Face as Frank Jessup
and no one would notice, except that civilian Frank would lack private-eye
Jeff's semi- official trench coat and fedora. In both films, Mitchum's character
is expressionless and sleepy-eyed and smart but, once his testosterone kicks
in, falls prey to a clever, ruthless bad bad bad girl. Both characters know
that they're being framed for murder and yet can't just pack up and move to
Nebraska or Mexico or somewhere sensible -- as any human being outside of the
world of noir would do. You, the spectator, want to raise yourself from your
soft pillow and shout at the TV and at the guys Mitchum plays, "Hey you big
lug, what the heck are you doing. Use your noodle." But lunkhead Mitchum makes
mistake after mistake. I hope everyone who's reading this post has seen the
movies, because I don't want to spoil their pleasure in the endings, but let
me just say this -- Jeff, or Frank, or Bob, please next time don't get into an
automobile with a homicidal femme fatale in the last few frames of a murder
mystery and expect to escape alive. And if you must  do so, at least check
your so-called girlfriend's purse for a silver-handled Beretta. And under no
circumstances surrender to her the keys to the vehicle. Do the driving yourself.

These films have everything one would want in a classic film noir: a relentless
wicked ambitious beautiful dame who entraps an honest but naif and helpless
ingenu, and also snappy dialogue, a gloomy claustrophobic atmosphere, multiple
plot twists and turns, and the valueless atomistic society that Hobbes feared
would follow from curtailed authority. And much yearning for cash, which is
never in adequate supply. Lots of shadows and odd-angled photography. Some good,
complicated characters but a few who are merely melodramatically evil.

Mitchum's acting is much praised of late but I don't buy it: he's effective in a
way but monochromatic to a fault. A better actor is Kirk Douglas, who  projects
gleeful menace as a corrupt, criminal businessman. But to me both movies are
carried by their female leads. Dazzling Jane Greer as Kathie Moffat is equally
adept at innocence and villainy, often in the same scene, sometimes from moment
to moment. At the end of the film, when she's killing people left and right,
she wears a nun-like snood that only an accomplished actress could transform
into a brilliant metaphor. Equally splendid is Jean Simmons as the angel-faced
Diane Tremayne, who conveys innocence, ambition, obsession, and intermittent
but genuine madness with the raise of an eyebrow (and the help of excellent
lighting). And good girl Mona Freeman shines in a restaurant scene in which she
sees right through Tremayne's beauty to the dangerous craziness beneath.

Here's Mitchum and Greer together.

Source: 2017/01/it-happened-in-brooklyn-so-they-say

Title: It Happened in Brooklyn, so  they Say
Date: January 20, 2017

If it happened in Brooklyn, it must have happened in metaphorical or
mythological rather than real Brooklyn, because it's not the Brooklyn of my
memory. It Happened in Brooklyn is a 1947 musical, I guess you'd have to call
it, featuring still skinny Frank Sinatra and womanly Kathryn Grayson, and also
Jimmie Durante, who steals the show. And also the ever-luminous Gloria Grahame
in a very small role as an Army nurse in England. Brooklyn is evoked as a fairy
tale land where everyone is nice to everyone and jobs and money fall from the
trees -- kind of an urban big rock candy mountain. Not the case -- though
nowadays Brooklyn, which used to be mocked, is every Twenty-Something's land
of putative milk and theoretical honey. In truth there's nothing much that is
recognizably Brooklynian -- even in geography -- to my jaded old eyes except a
rather beautiful sequence of Frank Sinatra singing and "dancing" on Brooklyn
Bridge. Most of the action supposedly takes place in the basement of New Utrecht
High School, but in actual fact it's a Hollywood sound stage.

Sinatra, a returned soldier, thinks he's in love with Kathryn Grayson but she
prefers Peter Lawford, playing the shy grandson of an English Dook. The film is
worth seeing if only because Sinatra and Grayson sing, believe it or not, "La ci
darem la mano" from Don Giovanni -- as far as I know Sinatra's only foray into
grand opera.

If I had been the screenwriter, I would have had Gloria Grahame jump on a luxury
liner and return to Brooklyn for the climactic concluding scene, rather than
remaining, as she does, merely a sweet overseas memory of Frankie's.

Source: 2017/01/chicolini-on-trump

Title: Chicolini on Trump
Date: January 23, 2017

Our new president has an extraordinary ability to believe what he wants to
believe, no matter the fact. He mocks a disabled reporter, we all see it with
our own eyes, and yet he denies that he did so. He claims that his inauguration
was the best attended in history, and then we look at the pictures, and see
with our own eyes, not so. It is hard to know exactly how to interpret such
effrontery, such a remarkable disregard of facts.

I fear that he is actually pulling the wool over his own eyes. He's certainly
not pulling it over ours.

He is marooned in an absurd farcical world. He is drowning in duck soup.

Mrs. Teasdale:  Your Excellency! I thought you'd left.

Cihicolini: Oh, no, I no leave.

Mrs. Teasdale:  But I saw you with my own eyes!

Chicolini:  Well, who you gonna believe? Me or your own eyes?

Unfortunately, what in fiction is farce becomes tragedy in real
life. Nonsense, assimilated as truth in the mind of a person in power, cannot
be anything but incendiary.

Source: 2017/01/some-curious-italian-plurals

Title: A Few Curious Italian Plurals
Date: January 27, 2017

On the whole, Italian is a mighty regular language. Of course it has its
irregularities, but many fewer than, say, English. Plurals, for example, are
largely predictable, but with some curious exceptions. The masculine noun bue
(ox or sometimes, by extension, a dolt) seems to call for the plural form *bui,
but it's not so; it's buoi. Dio (god), becomes dei rather than *dii. The very
ordinary word uomo (man), yields the extraordinary plural uomini -- which is
strange indeed except to oldsters who remember homo, hominis from their high
school Latin class. The word for wing is ala and, if Italian were law-abiding,
its plural should be *ale but instead it's ali. Similarly, arma should yield
*arme, but doesn't; it's armi. Eco has the plural echi, which seems normal,
except that the singular is feminine and the plural masculine, so la eco but gli
echi. Some words, conversely, have masculine singulars but feminine plurals:
most notably, uovo (egg) which becomes uova rather than *uovi, while dito
(finger) becomes the odd masculine dita. Paio (pair) is similar; its plural is
paia. Il riso (a laugh) has the plural le risa. There's the same gender switch
with the truly curious word for ear -- orrechio becomes orecchie. There are a
few words with two slightly different plural forms, many of them words for parts
of the body, such as braccio (arm) which can become bracci or braccia;  ciglio
(eyebrow), which has plurals in cigli and ciglia; ginocchio (knee) which can be
either ginocchi or ginocchia, and osso (bone) which can be ossi or ossa. I'm
fond of muro (wall) the regular plural of which is muri (the walls of a house)
but also yields the irregular plural mura, which refers to the fortifications
or walls of a city.

Source: 2017/01/gratitude

Title: Sciascian Geography
Date: January 28, 2017

Years ago, I read, in translation of course, a few of Leonardo Sciascia's
Sicilian mysteries. Excellent books: The Day of the Owl (Il giorno della
civetta -- 1961)), Equal Danger (Uguale pericolo --1973), The Challenge (Il
contesto-- 1971). Last week I tried to read one of Sciascia's short stories
in its native Italian. A good idea, but quite a struggle. Too taxing for my
present fluency. Sciascia's vocabulary is enormous, mine is puny. Not to mention
Sicilian expressions that would be stumpers and require footnoting even for
mainland Italians.

The story I tackled is Il lungo viaggio, (The Long Voyage). Some impoverished
Sicilian peasants pay a man whom we would call a coyote to smuggle them into
America; he takes their entire savings, takes them on board his ship, and then
after ten excruciating days sets them right back down in Sicily. A sad tale of
exploitation, not, alas, irrelevant today.

Sciascian geography: the Sicilians think they are headed for the middle Atlantic
coast of North America, where they will find Nugioirsi, Nuovaiorche, and my very
favorite, Brucchilin.

Source: 2017/01/anseroca

Title: News from my Brain
Date: January 29, 2017

The twins and their older brother came to visit and were playing their favorite
new game, "hide the goose." The goose?  a two foot tall hollow plastic replica
perhaps originally a lawn ornament, now an excellent child's toy. Easy to find.
After the hiding game had gone on long enough, and was just starting to become
a trifle rambunctious, I tried to signal to my fellow student of Italian that
the time had come for the goose to retire for the day -- but try as I might, I
couldn't come up with a translation for the word goose. Later, after the lads
had left, I looked in the Italian dictionary for "goose." Oca, it said. A
strange, unanticipated word.

I tried to recall the Latin word for goose. Nothing. But after several hours
(and here comes the point of the story), a word suddenly floated to the surface
-- anser. Let me tell you now, fans of Dr. Metablog, that I was exceedingly
proud of myself. Fifty-five years or so after my last study of Latin, out popped
anser. Self-celebration knew no bounds.

After I had stopped crowing about my triumph, I started to marvel at the brain
-- not just my brain, but any brain. In what corner of the brain, in what
concatenation of synapses, had the word anser been lurking lo these many
decades. And what sort of ingenious search program needed only a few hours to
ferret it out?  Glaciers have melted, rivers have changed their course, and yet
anser remained unchanged, permanently embedded somewhere in my brain. It's kind
of miraculous, isn't it?

So how did Italian acquire oca rather than a word descended from anser. Why
not *asse, for example. My dictionary of classical Latin offers no alternative
to anser, but the Italian etymological dictionary explains that the late Latin
word for goose was auca, derived from a diminutive aucellus of avis (bird)
and it cites as cognates old French oue and Occitan auca. No doubt demotic auca
replaced the "book word" anser sometime in late antiquity.

The result of this investigation: next time, I will be able to say, with great
authority, "nascondi l'oca."

Source: 2017/02/what-everyone-should-know-about-hitchcock

Title: A "Hitch" Conundrum
Date: February 07, 2017

According to his biographer (Peter Ackroyd), Alfred Hitchcock "feared and
hated the body." When he was a student at St. Ignatius in London, whenever he
used the lavatory, he scrubbed it "so that it seemed as though no one had been
there." At maturity, Hitchcock stood 5' 5" and weighed approximately 300 pounds.
His marriage to Alma Reville (4'11") was mostly "white." He claimed that it
was "sexless" and that he was a "celibated" director, and that his daughter,
Patricia, was some sort of error. "If he was not the center of conversation
or attention at a dinner table, he would often doze off." He made a bet that
a property man would not be able to spend the night chained to a camera in a
dark studio, then sabotaged him with a bottle of brandy laced with a strong
laxative. He referred to his audience as the "moron millions." He was fond of
the great painters but had no interest in any "symbolic significance or inner
meaning." The actress Ann Todd reported that he had a schoolboy's obsession with
sex and "an endless supply of very nasty and vulgar stories and jokes. He was
a very sad person." He "had a fetish about women wearing glasses." One of his
secretaries reported that he bought her five or six pairs but if she appeared
without wearing one, "it irritated the devil out of him." During the making of
Psycho, Hitchcock would place one or more grotesque models of Norman Bates'
mummified mother in Janet Leigh's dressing room, just to hear her scream. "He
would also regale her with his fund of dirty stories just before she went on
camera." When asked, "what is the deep logic of your films," he replied, "to
make the spectator suffer." When an actor was dissatisfied with a performance,
Hitchcock refused another take, saying, "They'll never know in Peoria." While
"The Birds" was being filmed, he harassed Tippi Hedren mercilessly, sending her
flowers, specifying what clothes she could wear, keeping her from her daughter,
trying to convince co-workers that they were having an affair. He gave Hedren's
young daughter (Melanie Griffith) an image of her mother lying in a coffin.
Hitchcock's recurrent dream was that his penis was made of crystal.

Is it possible that so stunted a human being might become a great artist?  Or
is it rather that his obsessions, distortions and failures of human empathy
constitute a permanent barrier to greatness and that time will reveal that even
his best films are shallow and brittle -- all surface glitter?

Source: 2017/02/paraceratherium

Title: Largest Land Mammal Ever
Date: February 14, 2017

Source: 2017/02/oscars2017

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars (2017)
Date: February 27, 2017

My ensemble: plaid wool shirt by Woolrich; trousers by Lee (regular cut --
"smoky quartz" color); socks by Costco; shoes by New Balance (with orthopedic
inserts by Dr. Scholl); leather belt by Target; foundational undergarments by
Fruit of the Loom. Accessories: eyeglasses by Flexon; hearing aids by Phonak.
Hair by Joe.

I'd like to thank all the little people -- my fashion consultants, suppliers,
and supporters -- for their imagination and hard work. I couldn't have done it
without the entire team.

Source: 2017/03/myteachersjameshutton

Title: My Teachers:  James Hutton (1902-1980)
Date: March 01, 2017

The most erudite man that I ever encountered in my own person was James
Hutton, a professor of classics when I was an undergraduate at Cornell back
there in the 1950s. Professor Hutton bristled with knowledge -- nor is this my
opinion only, but one that is well attested by his international reputation and
by the list of his writings. Hutton wrote two enormous books (800 pages each!!)
that won him his scholarly spurs: The Greek Anthology in Italy (1935) and The
Greek Anthology in France and in the Latin Writers of the Netherlands to the
Year 1800 (1946). I encountered Professor Hutton in 1958 when, callow and poorly
educated, I enrolled in a Latin course called "Terence and Catullus" (of which
more later). But first, for those curious readers out there in bloglandia who
are on tenterhooks, painfully stretched like new wool and are wondering what
the heck is the "Greek Anthology" about which James Hutton composed his
pair of magna opera and around which his life centered -- turn we now to the
pages of the Encyclopedia Brittanica.

In brief, the Anthologia Graeca is a collection of poems, mostly epigrams, that
had a complicated ancient history, but originated perhaps with an anthology
complied by Meleager of Gadara in the first century BCE, which brought
together works by many ancients including Archilochus, Alcaeus, Anacreon and
Simonides (all big names in their time). There were a series of early editions
that do not survive but an authoritative version was made by Constantine
Cephalas in the 10th century. "Cephalas appended a number of other collections:
homoerotic verse collected by Straton of Sardis in the 2nd century AD; a
collection of  Christian epigrams found in churches; a collection of satirical
and convivial epigrams collected by Diogenianus as well as Christodorus's
description of statues in the Byzantine gymnasium of Zeuxippos; and a
collection of inscriptions from a temple in Cyzicus." And then in 1300 or
thereabouts Maximus Planudes brought together an edition which became standard,
which, while adding some poems, also deleted or bowdlerized many of those that
offended his puritanical Christian sensibilities. Planudes' anthology was the
only one known to Western Europe for many centuries; manuscript transmission was
superseded when an edition based on his work was printed in 1494.

There's a lot more but that's enough information for us to understand the area
which James Hutton worked. Professor Hutton knew the anthology backwards
and forwards and made it his business to trace its considerable influence
through the Latin and vernacular poetry of late antiquity and the medieval
and renaissance worlds. Quite an endeavor, in my opinion.

Hutton was a Scotsman, born in Airth, son of a sea captain, though from where
I sat (in a small seminar room in Goldwin Smith Hall!!), it was impossible
to imagine that he had ever been a child or even a young man. He came to the
US early in life and there was not a trace of Scotland in his speech. Hutton
entered Cornell as a freshman in 1920, received three degrees there, stayed
on to teach, and retired in 1973. According to his Cornell obituary, he was a
life- long bachelor. For most of his adulthood, he lived with his mother, Mrs.
Elizabeth Hutton, and he shared a house for many years with Professor Lane
Cooper, his teacher and another bachelor Cornell classicist. After the death of
his mother and of Cooper, he continued to live at 123 Roberts Place with his
cousin/housekeeper, Mrs. Margaret Green. Perhaps he was a delightful presence
among his friends, but to my eyes he was a pale, tall, gaunt, dry-as-a stick,
bony man devoid of humor or juice. Born only two years before my own father, he
seemed to be generations older.

Now a few words about Terence and Catullus, the twin subjects of my 1958 Latin
classroom experience.

Terence (Publius Terentius Afer) was Roman playwright possibly of Berber origin
but certainly originally a north African slave. Brought to Rome and freed,
he wrote six comedies, adapted from Greek originals, of which we students of
Professor Hutton plowed through three: Andria (166 BC); The Self-Tormentor (163
BC) and the Adelphi (160 BC). Terence drowned on a trip to Greece, age 25. His
must have been a marvelously romantic life, even though much curtailed. Too bad
we know only its barest outline.

Here's the title page to the first "modern" edition of Terence's works (1496)

In Terence's plays, young noblemen dally with prostitutes or mistresses even
as their fathers insist that they marry more respectable ladies. Plots, often
contrived by the dull hero's wily slave, fail to come to fruition because the
conspirators are carelessly overheard. Sometimes apparently unrelated women (one
rich, the other poor), turn out to be sisters. Sham marriages and double-dealing
are frequent. It is not uncommon that sons discover by accident, in the last
scene of the play, the identities of their biological fathers. When there are
plans to destroy female infants, the girls are rescued and raised secretly, only
to come forward as beauties at a critical juncture of the plot. Young noblemen
are prone to breaking into the houses of pimps to carry off the girls they
love. Generally, plays end with multiple and suitable marriages, the old folks
outwitted and the youngsters carrying the day. Slaves are freed.

Meanwhile, characters coin memorable aphorisms in succinct, elegant
Latin. Everyone knows "Homo sum, nihil a me alienum puto"  -- I am a man,
nothing human is alien to me.  But also quot homines tot sententiae: suus
cuique mos -- So many men, as many opinions; to each his own way. And "fortis
fortuna adiuvat" --  fortune favors the brave.  And "nullumst iam dictum quod
nos dictum sit prius" --nothing new is said that has not been said before. And
"amantium irae amoris integratio est" -- lover's quarrels are the renewal of
love.

But with all these comic goings-on and witty sayings, there was not one moment
that I can remember when Professor James Hutton laughed or smiled or indicated
in the least that the plays were clever or amusing. Instead, we discussed
grammatical questions with much emphasis on the differences between second
century and first century Latin. Dry as dust, it was. The opportunity to find
the common humanity of ancient Romans and 1950s Cornellians was missed, even
shirked.

Terence's louche and lively plots must have posed a problem for Professor
Hutton; Catullus of Verona, a poet of love and sex and bawdy, could only have
caused even more of a difficulty. In the edition in which we read Catullus, a
drab gray book which must have dated from the early part of the century, certain
of the more scabrous poems were omitted but, in a moment of confused prudery,
printed -- in a smaller font --in an appendix. I suspect that they were also
bowdlerized. Some of the words that Catullus used in his freer verse were not to
be found in our dictionary, which had also been cleansed. And in a translation
that I consulted (was it the Loeb?) the offending poems did appear, but only in
Italian. Was the idea that if anyone could read Italian he must be sophisticated
enough to deal with Catullan pornography. Perhaps my readers think that I'm
fantasizing or imagining this half-hearted censorship, but it's as true as true.
Swear.

Even after all these years, two of Catullus's poems stay in my mind. The best,
the most frequently republished and the most influential is known to classicists
as Catullus 5. It's a remarkable poem. Here's the Latin, which is not difficult.

Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus

Rumoresque senum severiorum

omnes unius aestimemus assis.

Soles occidere et redire possunt;

nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux

Nox est perpetua una dormienda

da mi basia mille, deinde centum

dein mille altera, dein secunda centum

deinde com milia multa fecerimus

conturbabimus illa, ne sciamus,

aut ne quis malus invidere possitor

cum tantum sciat esse basiorum.

And here's a translation. "Let us live, my Lesbia, and love. The gossipings of
stern old men let us value at just one penny.  Suns may set and rise again,
but us, when once the brief light has set, night is one perpetual sleep. Give
me a thousand kisses, then a hundred, then another thousand, then a second
hundred, then yet another thousand, then a hundred, then when we have counted
up many thousands, let us shake [the abacus] lest some evil man be envious when
he knows how many kisses there were." That is to say, Let us keep on making
love no matter what the old envious guys think. (Lesbia has nothing to do with
lesbians; it's just code for the name of the married woman with whom Catullus
was sleeping.)

I have no recollection of any discussion of this peach of a poem in 1958.
Perhaps we talked about the ingenious lux/Nox juxtaposition, but I am sure we
didn't touch on either the boasted adultery or the joys of sex. We were still
in the last gasp of Victoriana. We were pre-Beatles, pre-Kennedy, pre-readily
available contraceptives. Some things were not to be discussed.

The other poem that stands in my memory is Catullus 61, a joyous epithalamion
(or marriage song) which celebrates, with great gusto, the wedding of Vinia and
Manlius. It is sensual and almost hypnotic. It's frankness about sexual pleasure
pleased me in 1958, when such things were rare. Still pleases me.

But what about the omitted poems, the ones too "coarse" for our tender eyes and
ears?  How would James Hutton have dealt with them. Not at all, of course.
But now, censorship and self-censorship and propriety eased, we can read the
poem that begins Paedicabo ego vos et irrumabo. which I can now translate as
"I will fuck you in the ass and then fuck you in the face." And goes on from
there. Not part of the 1958 curriculum. In Professor Hutton's class, we were
more comfortable discussing a synezis of the genitive than any exercise of the
genitalia.

But I wonder, now, about, James Hutton, at home after a hard day of declining
and conjugating, at dinner with his mother and his bachelor roommate. What did
Professor Hutton think about Catullus's "paedicabo ego vos et irrumabo".

This I know: whether repelled or offended or secretly sympathetic, he certainly
did not share his feelings with his students.

Source: 2017/03/chinatown-odd-man-out

Title: Chinatown -- Odd Man Out
Date: March 03, 2017

At the Vivian de St. Vrain Theater, also known as the bedroom, pleasurably
supine on what Italians call the letto matrimoniale, we watch films from all
decades of cinema history. The new technologies deluge us with riches. Films
arrive by mail, by download, and on TCM and MGM and Encore Classics. It's all so
remarkably easy.

We especially enjoy unplanned, spontaneous juxtapositions. Two nights ago, for
example, we re-re-re-rewatched, on Encore, a film that must be on everyone's top
ten list, the great noir classic Chinatown. Dazzled we were, once again. And
then, last night, courtesy of the U. S. Post Office and Netflix, along came
Carol Reed's masterpiece, Odd Man Out. There was, trust me, no plan to follow
the one with the other -- but what a stroke of good fortune!!

Chinatown (1974) gives us a fully-realized Los Angeles in the 1930s. The plot
is complicated but not confusing. J. J. Gittes, a bored, compromised detective,
is smart enough to unravel the plan to steal the water and smart enough to
identify the murderer but nevertheless too innocent to grasp the unspeakable
corruption at the heart of the of Mulwray-Cross family. Odd Man Out (1947),
which also manages to make its Belfast setting as real as real, offers only
the slightest plot -- Johnny McQueen's desperate attempt to escape his city.
Yet what a remarkable story and how ably peopled with a variety of characters.
It becomes almost picaresque in organization as Johnny reels from adventure to
adventure, encountering Irish samaritans good, bad, and traitorous. On the
surface the films are miles apart --Los Angeles all bright colors and fancy
clothes, awash with prosperity, Belfast dark dark dark and gloomy. And yet the
two films seemed oddly similar.

The overlaps and echoes were such that we decided to investigate. Here's what
we discovered, via the wikipedia entry on Chinatown. "Filmmaker Roman Polanski
(the director of Chinatown) has repeatedly cited Odd Man Out as his favorite
film. 'I still consider it to be one of the best movies I've ever seen and a
film which made me want to pursue this career more than anything else....  I
always dreamed of doing things of this sort or that style.  To a certain extent
I must say that I somehow perpetuate the ideas of that movie in what I do.'"
 So our speculation about the similarities was validated. Unquestionably,
Polanski had Carol Reed in mind while making Chinatown.

Let us cut to the chase and (spoilers coming, so watch out!) concentrate on the
two films' last scenes. Johnny McQueen, badly wounded, is trying to make it
down to the docks to get himself out of Belfast. He's helped by his girlfriend
Kathleen Ryan. For a hopeful second, it appears that he's going to escape, but
the police surround him. He can no longer see, but he asks Kathleen, "Is it
far?"  Kathleen replies (and you have to be made of stone not to drop a tear),
"It's a long way, Johnny, but I'm coming with you." She shoots at the police and
they respond with "deadly force." It's suicide by cop -- a sad emotional love-
death Romeo and Juliet ending. The ending of Chinatown is much more hopeless.
Evelyn Mulwray tries to escape her father, corrupt and powerful Noah Cross. She
drives away with her daughter but a fusillade of police bullets kills her. Evil,
malevolent Cross wins everything -- the money, the land, the water, the child.
(Polanski even altered the original ending to make it darker, more like Odd Man
Out.) "Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown" --  i.e. inexplicable, impenetrable.

More on Polanski here.

Source: 2017/03/maestropit

Title: "Maestro to the Pit"
Date: March 07, 2017

Several times a year, we attend the opera -- that is, we wander over to the
Metropolitan Opera widescreen HD broadcasts at our local movie theater.
Last week, it was Dvorak's Rusalka --overproduced, over-costumed, a mighty
silly story, but nevertheless glorious. Sung in Czech. Of course, I didn't
understand a word, but then I never do expect to do so, even when the opera is
sung in a language with which I'm supposed to be on speaking terms. But it's not
the libretto which we savor, it's the music.

Nevertheless at each performance there's a solemn  moment when language moves
front and center. It comes after the preliminary fol-de-rol and acknowledgements
and interviews and trailers-for-next-month's performance are finally dispensed
with. Now, at long last, the camera locates the head-setted director, who sits
at huge intimidating console of buttons and knobs and switches and lights. And
now here they come, the words of magic and enchantment: "maestro to the pit."

In that pithy, incantatory sentence is encapsulated all the ritual power of
language. It's a hieratic moment. After such a magnificent statement,
everything else is anticlimax (linguistically speaking).

Freed by these words, the shamanic conductor heretofore invisible, steps up,
turns his back to the audience and faces the orchestra, brandishes his baton,
and initiates the business of the day.

"Maestro to the pit."  I love the idea that the generic term for conductor is
"maestro." I love the quasi-oxymoronic juxtaposition of "maestro" and "pit."
 In fact, I love the word "pit" in this context. Not a hole in the ground, nor
the pit of hell, nor a place in which to chuck pieces of dismembered bodies. No,
an orchestra pit, which is a horse of an entirely different color. Good thing
it's not the custom to say "conductor to the podium." How flat, how banal, how
unsacral. No dignity, no grandeur, no poetry.

No, it's "maestro to the pit." And let it always be so.

And by the way, I make a pretty good barbecue sauce, and I'm proud to say
that my spare ribs are semi-famous. Let the word go forth, that now and
forever, whenever I'm called to the grill, it's going to be "maestro to the
pit."

Source: 2017/03/youcancountonmeagain

Title: You Can Count on Me Again and Again
Date: March 10, 2017

All my movie-loving friends told me that I must watch Kenneth
Lonergan's Manchester-by-the-Sea (2016). That was before the film won all
those awards. So I crashed the Netflix line and there it was in my mailbox the
first day that it was released on disk. And indeed it's a fine film. No car
chases, no special effects, just real people wrestling their way through his
world of woe. Good dialogue. Excellent camera work, excellent editing, splendid
acting.

But half way through the film, I began to experience disappointment. An
unavoidable sense of dejavuitude. Wait, haven't I seen this before? And then I
remembered Lonergan's earlier film, You Can Count on Me (2000). Hmmm.

In YCCoM, 20ish small-town boy Terry Prescott is unsteady and unfocused because
he has lost his parents in an automobile accident. in MbtS, 30ish small-town boy
Lee Chandler is sullen and isolated because he has lost his children in a house
fire. In YCCoM,  Terry Prescott has a nephew, son of his much more grounded
sister, with whom he tries to connect. In MBtS, Lee Chandler has a nephew, son
of his brother, with whom he tries to connect. In YCCoM, Terry Prescott gets
into a fight with a guy he used to know very well. In MbtS, Lee Chandler gets
into a bar fight with a guy he's never met.  In YCCoM, Terry Prescott can't
stay put, has to be on the road; in MbtS, Lee Chandler is stuck at home, can't
get out of his rut.

The details are different, but it's unquestionably the same story, inverted. It
can almost be thought of as a sequel, with Casey Affleck recapitulating the role
created by Mark Ruffalo.

They're both excellent films -- just a trifle redundant. As a would-be
enthusiast of the later effort, I felt just a little cheated.

All writers, even the best, repeat themselves. Nevertheless, I'm hoping that
Kenneth Lonergan's next picture, to which I'm looking forward with great
anticipation, breaks out of the box, tries something entirely new.

Source: 2017/03/birthday2017

Title: Birthday Gifts for Me Me Me
Date: March 13, 2017

A few years ago I posted, right here on this blague, pictures of some handsome
objects that would make good birthday presents for yours truly. But one March 11
after another March 11 has come and gone, and -- nothing. Not a single reader,
acquaintance, friend, or relative has embraced the opportunity. There has not
been so much as a serious inquiry, even though my suggestions were eminently
sensible.

I'm going to try once again this year. After all, unemployment is down, the
stock market is up, and there's more loose change out there. (And perhaps more
escapism.) Moreover, there won't be many more birthdays for me -- I'm getting up
there in years. It's now or never.

So -- fans of Vivian de St. Vrain, and Vrainites everywhere, seize the day.

OK, steady now. What about a castle in Ireland? I would really enjoy a castle.
There are many on the market this year, and they're quite reasonably priced, as
castles go.

For example, here's Ballindooley, a starter Castle in Galway.

Even though it's small, it has undeniable "curb appeal." The realtor claims that
it was built toward the end of the 15th century in the Norman style and probably
for the DeBurgo family. The realtor also notes that there's "a new stone parapet
and that there have been recent repairs to the machicolations."

Inasmuch as I wouldn't dream of owning a castle where the machicolations were
all busted up, I'm happy for the reassurance. The price: a bargain at a mere
950,000 euros.

Though I wouldn't turn up my nose at Ballindooley, I would certainly prefer
Killaghy Castle at Mullinahone in Tipperary.

It's a better value. The original castle was built, the realtor claims (I
haven't seen the documentation) in the first decade of the 13th century. A "long
house" was added during Tudor times, and two more buildings were attached during
the 18th century -- so it's already been updated. Plus there are two walled
gardens with "excellent mature specimen trees."  An ominous note though: "price
upon request."

So, loyal readers, it's time for you to chip in your pennies and farthings and
join together for one big happy birthday celebration for me.

And please, don't forget that in order for me to care for your gift properly,
I'm going to need a bit of an endowment --  which I do not see as much of a
problem. Plus furnishings.

And by the way, for those of you who are not "in the know" about castles, a
"machicolation" is a "projecting gallery at the top of a castle wall, supported
by a row of corbeled arches and having openings in the floor through which
stones and boiling liquids could be dropped on attackers."

I like a castle that says, "all welcome."

Source: 2017/03/mallofme

Title: The Mall of Me
Date: March 16, 2017

I can, however, imagine a shopping mall designed for my particular and personal
satisfaction. It would be called "The Mall of Me."

Anchoring one end of the Mall of Me is a large book store, carrying both new
and used, but stocked with volumes of history, fine arts, crafts, popular
science, biography, travel, fiction, gardening and what used to be called
"natural history", with lots of room to browse and sit and read. Proviso: the
"bookstore of me" carries zero books on Spirituality, Self-Improvement, Soul
Regression, Tarot, Alternative Therapies, or Healing Arts. No books written by
TV pastors or repentant politicians recently released from prison or by instant
millionaires. No celebrity autobiographies. At the other end of the Mall of Me,
there's a shop selling music cds which  specializes in the great age of middle
European music from 1685 (birth of Bach) to 1911 (death of Mahler), but also
features a treasury of classic blues, bluegrass, American roots, popular song,
rock and roll, and gospel of the golden age. No New Age, No Rap, no Electronic.
Between my two "anchors," there will be a good garden store featuring expensive,
elegant, heavy-in-the-hand garden tools. No power mowers or power tools, but
when appropriate to the season, racks of seeds, preferably of heirloom and
antique vegetables. Next to it, a movie memorabilia and poster store, with large
collections from the earliest days of cinema right through 1950, especially
Shakespeare movies. And then I'd like a high-end antique store displaying walls
and shelves of classical and Asian works of art. Unfortunately, because of
budgetary constraints, I won't be doing any purchasing in this particular shop,
but I'll be pleased to browse in it, at least weekly, perhaps oftener. Also, a
cafe where a guy could purchase a hot chocolate and an almond croissant. I would
also like a store that specializes in 19th and early 20th century Caucasian rugs
and wall-hangings though here, once again -- it would be more for appreciating
than for actual buying. Subject to the same constraints, a baseball memorabilia
shop -- National League only. A high end crafts store. And as for restaurants:
a Jewish deli, modeled after the now defunct Second Avenue Delicatessen. An
imaginative Asian fusion restaurant. A bagel bakery. No fish, and certainly no
sushi. Perhaps a hole-in-the-wall one-person walk-in shop where a guy or gal
could help me with computer and cell phone anomalies and failures -- someone
who speaks in traditional English, not in acronyms. And then there will be
buskers: at one end of the mall, a string quartet; at the other end, a bluegrass
band. No fire-eaters, contortionists, or drummers banging on pots and pans. All
performers personally vetted by me. No panhandlers or noble solicitors with
their dread clipboards.

And of course, some intelligently-designed play areas for infants, new walkers
and small children. And some comfortable chairs for their parents (and me) to
sit and watch the kiddies frolic.

Yes, I think that will do it.  It's the Mall of Me.

Now that I think of it, everyone should have their own mall. Instead of vast
mall installations, let's have targeted malls. Individually designed and
executed.

Merchandising genius!!

Source: 2017/03/chalaza

Title: Chalaza
Date: March 21, 2017

If you asked me to guess what the word "chalaza" means, I'd say, from its sound,
that it would have to be an odd cactus-y looking plant that grows only in the
Atacama desert and flowers once a decade, or an extinct language formerly
spoken in the southern Caucasus mountains, or perhaps some sort of Levantine
breadstick. It's a strange exotic word. But if then I told you that you've seen
thousands, perhaps many thousands of chalazas (or chalazae) with your own eyes,
and eaten as many, you'd be perplexed, even startled. Because you have eaten
them.

Anyone who's cracked an egg has noticed two ropey white bands that extend from
the yolk and are rooted in the transparent albumen.

Here's some more information about chalazae which I quote from Tim Birkhead's
The Most Perfect Thing (2016), a detailed and most enthusiastic book all about
eggs.  "The role of the chalazae is to suspend the yolk within the albumen....
One end of each chalaza is attached to the ovum itself... and the other is
firmly lodged in the layer of dense viscous albumen, which itself is attached to
the shell membranes at the pointed and blunt ends of the egg. The chalazae allow
the yolk to rotate when the egg is turned so that the embryo always remains on
top of the yolk and within the inner liquid albumen layers. This self-righting
ability is [necessary] because the embryo develops on the least dense side of
the yolk. Keeping the embryo uppermost ensures that it is always closest to the
parent's brood patch for maximum warmth, but also closest to the inner surface
of the shell for maximum access to oxygen."

No chalazae, no chicks.

I'm astonished that although I have scrambled thousands of eggs, and certainly
noticed the "ropey strands," I never gave them the slightest thought. How
incurious of me!

Birkhead's book is a revelation. He is the egg man of our times. Occasionally
he gets so carried away with his joy in the egg that he veers into unconscious
comedy. I adore the phrase, "a renaissance in the study of eggshell
pigmentation."  Or, "guillemots are not quite unique in incubating
shit-covered eggs."  Or, "tinamous lay the most extraordinary and beautiful
eggs."  Or, "there is something sensual about eggs."

About the word chalaza: it's from the Greek meaning "small knot." Nor is it new:
it entered the language (in Latinized form) in 1704.

Some practical information: the more prominent the chalazae, the fresher the
egg.

Source: 2017/03/idomeno

Title: Gender-blind Casting?
Date: March 28, 2017

Last Saturday, we hiked to the multiplex to hear and watch the Met's HD
performance of Idomeneo. Once again, the opera did not disappoint. Early Mozart
and glorious, especially the rousing choruses, while soprano Nadine Sierra was
a luminous Illia. A silly story, of course, but for once there was a happy
ending --a young man and a young woman, of different heritages, were allowed to
marry-- hurrah. Not without the forgiveness of a god--in this case, Neptune,
who could have saved everyone a lot of trouble if he had been quicker to act
but unfortunately didn't bother to theophanize until the passing of four hours
(including extended intermissions) and three long acts of melodic anguish and
dread.

Nevertheless, I was troubled. "And what was it this time, Mr. Malcontent," you
ask.

It was the "trouser" role. The "hero" of the opera, Idamante, the guy who gets
the girl, was played by Alice Coote, a soprano, a middle-aged woman not at all
"boyish," but full-figured, prominently bosomed, and generously hipped. She was
costumed as an ancient Cretan soldier, with an ineffective corset under her
corselet and with a circle of what looked like old-fashioned elongated leather
shaving strops or giant bookmarks hanging from waist to ankle. But her outfit
did not fool me, even though I'm very good at suspending disbelief. Trust me, I
can suspend like crazy.

And I know that there's no point going to the opera if you can't suspend
disbelief. One would think that once you accept the idea that the performers are
going to aria at each other whenever they are together and aria at the audience
when they are alone, and that they are followed wherever they go by a 100-piece
orchestra, you can believe anything at all. But I have to admit that I boggled
at Coote/Idamante and that I was sufficiently distracted that my pleasure in the
opera was compromised, diminished. At the climax, I thought, "oh no, don't let
them kiss." (They didn't, when they should have, and would have, if Idamante had
been not a soprano but a tenor or baritone -- is it possible that the director
was as squeamish as I.)

Idamante is customarily (but not always) played by a soprano because the part
was originally written for a castrato, in this case Signor Vincenzo del Prato
(no doubt known to his buddies as del Prato the castrato, or perhaps, as gli
italiani would say, del Prato il castrato). I suppose that it is considered
"authentic" to sing the part in the register in which it was composed. But
why not transpose it down an octave and give it to a handsome tenor. Yes, it
would be different, but to my eyes, much better. After all, authenticity has
already been compromised --  Alice Coote is no Vincenzo del Prato. Nor do I
hear even the most enthusiastic supporters of "period" performances call for a
restoration of castrati.

Shakespeare's women were played by boys. But even the new Globe, with its fetish
for ancient ways, does not insist on a boy Cleopatra or a boy Juliet. And all to
the good, in my opinion.

Source: 2017/03/thescarf

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Scarf (1951)
Date: March 30, 2017

The Scarf is a most curious, eccentric film. Something of its oddity is conveyed
by TCM's one-sentence plot summary: "An asylum escapee meets a waitress and
hides on a turkey farm; supposedly he killed someone." The film was written and
directed by E. A. (Ewald Andre) Dupont, one of the many German refugees working
in Hollywood during and after the war, and features a splendid cast including
John Ireland, Mercedes McCambridge, Emlyn Williams and especially James Barton,
in a rather brilliant performance as a good-hearted, grizzled, hermit farmer
whose flock of turkeys serves as source of income and as watchdog and possibly
as metaphor.

John Howard Barrington escapes from an institution for the criminally insane.
It seems that he's been incarcerated for a murder that he can't remember
committing. Some sort of stress amnesia, the audience is expected to believe. He
falls in with Connie Carter, a forthright waitress-singer-floozy: she introduces
herself succinctly: "I'm no lily, not at all.  But my morals have no zipper.
Let it go at that."  Connie wears an unusual scarf; when Barrington notices
it he regains a smidgen of memory. It's going to be the clue to resolving his
amnesia.  After many an adventure and some good photography, it is revealed
that judge, jury and Barrington himself have been deceived. Barrington is
innocent and the real murderer and villain is Dr. David Dunbar, an effete
confidence man/psychologist who has hidden his own psychopathic past. At the
climax, all is revealed (with the help of the scarf) and turns out for the best
--  Barrington gets the girl, regains his memory and his innocence, and takes
up the serious business of farming turkeys.

I found The Scarf absolutely riveting although I had to suspend disbelief over
the many holes in the plot and some occasional crazy continuity problems. But
amnesia movies can be mighty flexible about such details.

And there's a subtext of theatrical repetition-compulsion:  Emlyn Williams, who
plays the maniac-murderer David Dunbar, "became an overnight star in 1935, with
his thriller Night Must Fall, which he wrote and also played the lead role of a
psychopathic murderer."

Source: 2017/04/bluegardenia

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Blue Gardenia (1953)
Date: April 03, 2017

Source: 2017/04/journalofacrime1934

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Journal of a Crime (1934)
Date: April 07, 2017

This pre-Code film deploys amnesia in a manner that is bizarre and possibly
unique. Paul, a playwright, is conducting a no ambiguity, no euphemism affair
with the actress Odette. His wife Francoise is jealous, so much so that she
shoots and kills her rival. And gets away with it. However, she is overcome with
guilt and falls into a profound depression, which the actress Ruth Chatterton
portrays convincingly, perhaps because her face lacks expression even when she
is jubilant. It appears for a while as though Francoise is going to succumb
to guilt. However, she is seriously injured in an automobile accident. She is
hospitalized but recovers, losing only her memory. But no memory, no guilt, and
in the end Francoise has recovered her husband and her health and happily sips
martinis on the Riviera. It's a rare case of therapeutic amnesia. Loss of memory
doesn't create a problem; it solves it. And why is Paul content to re-unite
with his wife the murderess? Because he is convinced that it is all God's
will -- a mighty shallow expedient. So God too is complicit in the murder and
its aftermath.

This was 1934; they couldn't have made it that way in 1935, when adultery and
crime were required to be punished.

Here's Ruth Chatterton, famous in her day but now almost forgotten:

Source: 2017/04/ww2memories

Title: World War II Memories
Date: April 10, 2017

I was six years old when the war ended in 1945, so my memories are few and
arise in no particular order. I remember hearing news reports on the radio
that were datelined "Moscow"-- but I conflated Moscow with Bosco, a brand of
chocolate syrup popular in the 1940s. I remember that the floor of our kitchen
was disfigured with an infinite number of black marks -- rubber was in short
supply and the substituted soles left nasty blotches. My mother said, "We'll
wait until the war is over to replace the linoleum." Many commodities were in
short supply: instead of butter there was a white oleomargerine into which a
packet of orange food color was mashed to simulate a credible yellow. There were
ration books and ration stamps for gasoline and sugar and coffee and greens.
My mother was furious that Mr. Lerner, who owned the fruit and vegetable shop
on 18th Avenue, sold black-market lettuces from the back of his store. A bus
driver was rude to a passenger; my mother said: "all the decent young men are
overseas." We saved our nickels and brought money to school to buy war bonds.
Following government advice, my father dug up his carefully tended lawn and
planted a "victory garden" of vegetables. There were frequent blackouts: my
father's friend Jack Patent sported a white hard hat because he was a warden.
My Uncle Dan, a major in the Army Air Corps, came home from the Burma border
for a thirty-day furlough and showed me his captured German Luger. We received
air mail letters from him and from other soldiers with details blacked out by
military censors. I complained to my mother: "Mrs. Callery (my first grade
teacher) isn't nice to me." My mother said, "You have to forgive her; she's lost
four of her boys in the war." Lost?  Four of her boys? I did not understand.
On a sunny spring day in 1945, we heard on the radio that President Roosevelt
was dead; my mother sat on the stoop and cried. And in August of that same
year, when our family was visiting someone on a lake somewhere, all of a sudden
the adults who had motor boats were zooming back and forth and shouting and
laughing. I asked what was happening and my father said, "the war is over."

Uncle Jack's tank was demolished by German cannon fire and he was the crew's
only survivor. He lived with shrapnel in his brain until the age of ninety-one.
Cousin Saul's older brother was killed in New Guinea, but Sarah, his mother,
"knew" that he was alive and waited for the knock on the door or the telephone
call until the end of her days. Meanwhile, the poor fellow's bones lay bleaching
at Buna or some other long-forgotten field of battle. Before the war, my mother
told me, we used to receive mail from the old country -- from the many members
of the Chafetz and Tomaszewski and Middlebank and Hessel families who had stayed
behind. "But after the war, nothing."

Can we, even now, bear to imagine what became of all those Malkas and Rifkas and
Levs and Mendels?

Source: 2017/04/loveletters19

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Love Letters (1945)
Date: April 17, 2017

Here's another film in the sub-genre that might be called a "Did I Do It."  And
still another case of "post-murder amnesia."

Singleton, who can't remember anything, even her own first name, is played by
Jennifer Jones with a kind of distant unfocused look about her. She is seriously
troubled; in addition to her amnesia, she's been the victim of a prank in which
Alan Quinton (Joseph Cotten) wrote her Cyrano-like love letters under the name
of the lout Roger Morland. She fell in love with the author of the letters, but
alas, deceived, married the lout. Now the lout has been murdered and Singleton,
blamed for it, is just out of the mental hospital where she was incarcerated.
Did she do it?  Of course not. She may not have a clue, but Alan and we the
audience suspect that she's too pretty and harmless to have done anything bad,
let alone committed a murder. Eventually, the truth outs and the real murderer
is revealed. Singleton regains her memory and gains the replacement husband (the
eloquent Alan that she wanted all along). It's a mighty unbelievable story but
whenever amnesia is involved, probability goes flying out the window.

Bosley Crowther, the New York Times film critic at the time, who never liked
anything, called it "sentimental twaddle." I myself, once disbelief is not only
suspended but obliterated, found it to be a quite an engaging mystery.

Source: 2017/04/a-letter-to-my

Title: A Letter to my Grandchildren
Date: April 18, 2017

What was it like in the 1940s when I was your age?  Very different. Milk was
delivered daily in bottles: a milk-wagon, drawn by a tired, plodding old horse,
appeared on East 9th Street three times a week before we sat down to breakfast.
There were also daily visits from a horse-drawn vegetable truck. An itinerant
knife-sharpener came once every couple of months. And also a very old man with
a large sack thrown over his back, singing out in the loudest voice I've ever
heard, 'I cash clothes." There were squarish automobiles (Packards, DeSotos,
Studebakers), but far fewer than today -- so few that kids would play punchball
and stickball right in the middle of the street, just stepping to the side to
let that occasional car whizz by. Kids also skated in the street, using clunky
metal skates that attached to the shoe by turning a "skate key." There was
no television, but everyone listened to the radio. "Portable" radios were as
big as bread boxes. Some people had refrigerators (much smaller than modern
ones), but most had "iceboxes." Every week, an ice delivery man would haul a
block of ice (about a foot-and-a-half square if I remember correctly) with
large tongs and set it in the icebox. Coal was delivered in barrels: men with
heavy gloves would roll the barrels from the truck to the ground-level coal
chute. All telephones were attached to the wall with wires. Long distance phone
calls were expensive and only for emergencies. People did not communicate by
e-mail or by texting, but by means of postcards and letters. A "letter" was a
piece of paper on which whole paragraphs were written; it was inserted into an
"envelope" and put in a "mail box" for delivery. Hard to believe, I know. There
were no word processors. I learned to write using a "straight pen." There were
no dvd's or cd's or streaming. Instead, we had "records," vinyl discs 12-inches
in diameter which were placed on a rotating "turntable" on which rested a hand
with a stylus, at first steel and then later diamond. It was primitive, I know,
but it worked rather well. There were no credit cards. Some people had checking
accounts, but 99% of commercial transactions were completed with "money." When I
started at P. S. 217, in 1944, I wore "knickers" (pants that went to just below
the knee and were held in place with elastic) and long socks. You can sometimes
see knickers in old illustrated books or in clothes museums. Men always wore
hats: fedoras or derbies or panamas or bowlers or pork-pies, usually made of
felt. Women wore hats too, some with veils, most of them godawful ugly. Young
folks "courted." In those days, before people became intimate, they would go
through a period in which they would "date" and talk and get to know each other.
This period could last for weeks or even months. Astonishing, I know, but trust
me, it happened that way in the old days. "The past is another country; they do
things differently there."

Source: 2017/04/oreofritteria

Title: Deepfried Oreos
Date: April 20, 2017

On the main street of Estes Park (Gateway to Rocky Mountain National Park),
a sign outside the restaurant advertised "deepfried oreos." I was both
flabbergasted and thunderstruck, not believing my eyes. But here's the evidence:

Just above ice cream and below "funnel cakes" (but that's another story). Is it
a hoax, or can there be such a thing? Absolutely, there's many a google-entry
on "deepfried oreos." Several different recipes, one more hideous than the next.
A piece of cuisine americaine that had somehow escaped me all these many years.

One of my waggish friends writes: "I should confess that the last time my wife
and I were in Paris, we sampled the deep fried Oreos at a little café on the
rue de Rivoli. The sommelier suggested a hearty Cabernet to take the edge off
the sweetness of the dish and the wine worked beautifully with the cookie
filling, an amalgam of flavors that made our senses tingle." I of course was
skeptical of his story. No knowledgeable sommelier would recommend a red wine
because it was well known that deepfried oreos were best served with champagne
or gatorade.

Is it possible that deepfried oreos could become part of the cuisine of old
Europe? Will it be the case that in every Italian village, just between the
macelleria and the quaint pasticceria there will be an oreofritteria? A
mom-and- pop oreofritteria using recipes that have been in the family for
centuries -- but in danger of being taken over by the big American chain,
a subsidiary of -- who knows what -- called Signor Oreofritto. A terrifying
prospect all around.

Source: 2017/04/sexual-dimorphism-why

Title: Sexual Dimorphism -- What's the point?
Date: April 25, 2017

By all rights I should have been attending to the intricate areas of my face
while shaving, but I lapsed into a reverie. My obsession of the moment--the
beard. Why? Why in the world do human males grow hair on their faces? What's the
point? The beard is completely valueless except to Gillette and Schick and now
Harry.

If the beard had a genuine function and if it honestly kept a person warm in
winter, then for what reason would evolution deprive the gals of equivalent
protection?

Do bearded males garner a larger share of the nubile maidens than the shaved and
beardless? Or a disproportionate share of the wealth? I know of no evidence that
they do so. The fact that most men shave their beards argues that beards lack
power or function.

It's sexual dimorphism without purpose or logic. My guess--and it's only a guess
--is that the beard-gene clung to a gene with a useful male purpose a couple of
hundred thousand years ago and never let go. Accidental hirsuteness.

I suppose that there are times when sexual dimorphism can be useful. Those
magnificent manes sported by the lions of the Serengeti certainly make a
formidable statement--noli me tangere and by the way remember to keep your paws
off the the ladies in my harem. I can see that--but then, the males of the
enormous extinct European lion managed without a ruff, as do Bengal tigers.

The gorgeous display of the male peacock is exuberant but inessential--more
subtle birds manage to signal their gender and their availability without such a
prodigious waste of resources.

I should be relieved that it's only the beard that I have to worry about.
Imagine if by some quirk of evolution, males of my species grew a big rack of
antlers. Way more inconvenient than a mere beard. What a bother!! I can easily
imagine myself lodged in a narrow doorway, or lying in bed trying to find a
comfortable position while the antlers scratch the headboard, put holes in the
pillow, or poke the eye of the beloved.

Perhaps an advanced civilization would demand that we disbud the antlers at
birth? Or we might go the other route and celebrate a magnificent set. We might
have evolved into a society that decorated or colored or polished the antlers.
"How are you wearing your antlers this winter?" "Natural brown, I think, this
year, but with golden highlights." Chains of "Mr. Antler" or "Antler King" shops
("discount on sharpening this week only"). And for guys declined into the vale
of years--prosthetic antlers.

Better a beard than antlers. Definitely.

Source: 2017/04/more-on-markwayne-mullings

Title: Representative Markwayne Mullin Back in the News
Date: April 27, 2017

Four years ago, I listened to a radio interview with Markwayne Mullin, a new
member of the House of Representatives from eastern Oklahoma, and was absolutely
flabbergasted. Astonished and dismayed, I wrote a few paragraphs about him.
Here''s what I said then: "It wasn't that he was inarticulate or stupid. It was
that he was so utterly smug, so absolutely and entirely certain of himself. He
has no doubts. He knows exactly what ails the country -- too much government
-- and he knows how to fix it -- lower taxes, less regulation, more free
untrammeled capitalism. He does not seem to be aware that the United States of
America is a big, complicated, multi-faceted country. Markwayne Mullin possesses
all the arrogance of ignorance, in spades."

And here he is, Representative Markwayne Mullin, smiling in front of the
mandatory flag.

I went on to report on Mullin's views, which were the usual list of utterly
unoriginal, thoughtless, simplistic tea party talking points. I concluded by
offering the hope (or might I say it) the prayer, which was "that Markwayne
Mullin, who as he begins his congressional career is superficial to the very
core of his being, will come to Washington, meet some folks from different parts
of the country and from different ethnic backgrounds, learn a little about the
world, come to an appreciation of the complexity of things, and grow up to be a
useful broad-minded compassionate public servant. It's not impossible, but it's
not going to happen until Mullin realizes that he doesn't know everything about
everything, and that the practices that made Mullin Plumbing such a success may
not be the same practices that will promote the general welfare over all of the
US of A. I'm hopeful, but frankly, I'm not at all optimistic."

Well, the calendar has shed a few leaves, and it's come to pass as I feared.
Representative Markwayne Mullin has no more brain than earwax. He's learned
nothing.

He's back in the news:

"An Oklahoma congressman is facing scrutiny after a video posted Monday showed
him telling constituents at a town hall that they do not pay his salary.

“You say you pay for me to do this? That’s bull crap. I pay for myself,”
Rep. Markwayne Mullin told constituents at a town hall in Jay, Oklahoma. "I paid
enough taxes before I got here and continue to through my company to pay my own
salary. This is a service. No one here pays me to go.”

“Pays you to go where?” a constituent objected.

“This is a service for me, not a career, and I thank God this is not how I
make my living,” Mullin responded.

“Oh please, then don’t run,” a constituent said."

As I understand the exchange, Mr. Mullin believes that inasmuch as the taxes
that he paid before he became a congressman exceeds the salary he now draws,
that he has limited or no responsibility to his constituents. Not at all a
persuasive argument, because like the rest of us, Mullin's taxes go to the
defense department and to HEW with a few dribs and drabs left over for social
programs and only a trickle for paying for the House of Representatives

But that's not the heart of the matter. The important question is this:  why
the heck is Mullin in congress? Obviously, he hates the job and and even more
obviously he hates his constituents. He has no respect for government.

Perhaps it's time for Mr. Mullin to reconsider his career. What everyone wants
in a representative is someone who will inform himself, be sensible, broad-
minded, be able to work with all parties, and be respectful of his constituents.
Mr. Mullin fails on all counts. Let's assume he's a good plumber. Look, Oklahoma
needs  good plumbers. Please, Mr. Mullin. Do the work you were called to.
Markwayne, go back to where you came from, fix those pipes, and stay away from
government. Please, don't run again. You've done your bit; let someone else take
a crack at it.

Source: 2017/04/leonardo-the-enlightened-lion

Title: "Leonardo the Enlightened Lion" by Ralph Ganesha Jefferson
Date: April 30, 2017

Once Leonardo defeated the old king and began to rule the pride, he evolved into
a more modern lion -- more sensitive, more sharing, and more mindful. While he
did not trim his mane or become less manly, he transitioned to a new kind of
male.

First he decided no longer to bite the necks of the lionesses whom he mounted.
Instead he wooed them gently with wine and flowers. He was a considerate mounter
-- always taking care that the experience was sweet for his lionesses. He
learned to roar more musically.

And soon after, he gave up the custom of breaking the backs of the kittens of
the previous king. Instead, he nurtured the babies and brought them porridge and
toys and stuffed animals. Nor did he drive the juvenile males into the bush. He
taught them to dance and to draw and to meditate.

And finally Leonardo stopped treating other animals as prey. He became a gazelle
guardian. Conscious of the environment, he encouraged all in his pride to eat
organic fruits and vegetables and wholesome ancient grains.

Nowadays Leonardo the enlightened lion starts each day with a large bowl of
gluten-free granola and yoghurt.

He's into wellness.

Source: 2017/05/lostchord

Title: "The Lost Chord"
Date: May 05, 2017

Insomnia once again -- a nightly affliction, a family trait. Perhaps we lack a
gene that lets others sleep from dusk to dawn. Have I noted here that I want my
tombstone inscribed with the motto, just beneath my name and dates, "No More
Insomnia, Forever."

During the wakeful nights, I've taken to listening to old-time radio. My
favorite: WHRO out of Norfolk, Virginia. Last night, I heard some tenor from
the 1920s (perhaps John McCormack) in a scratchy recording (tuba for bass) wail
or warble "The Lost Chord"-- quite the 3 am treat it was. A flood of memories
arose, because "The Lost Chord" was one of the songs that we learned during
the PS 217 assembly back there in Flatbush in the 1950s. I recalled with some
amusement that our determined "music specialist," Miss Georgia Keiselbach, a big
lumbering woman with a trained contralto voice, tried gamely to inculcate an
anguished mid-Victorian quasi religious parlor song into the minds of a roomful
of fidgety 10-year-olds. Quite an experience. I was entranced by Sir Arthur
Sullivan's melody, but I have to admit that the lyric was incomprehensible to me
then and is still quite a challenge to this day.

So I investigated. Onto the internet, which, fortunately, works very well at 4
am.

The words to "The Lost Chord" are by Adelaide Anne Procter, after Tennyson
apparently the most popular poet of her day, although I must confess that
I had never heard of her even though I'm supposed to know something about
nineteenth- century English literature.

Here's Ms. Procter's fervid poem:

Seated one day at the organ,I was weary and ill at ease,And my fingers wandered
idlyOver the noisy keys.I know not what I was playing,Or what I was dreaming
then;But I struck one chord of music Like the sound of a great Amen.It flooded
the crimson twilight,Like the close of an angel's psalm,And it lay on my fevered
spiritWith a touch of infinite calm.It quieted pain and sorrow,Like love
overcoming strife;It seemed the harmonious echoFrom our discordant life.It
linked all perplexed meaningsInto one perfect peace,And trembled away into
silenceAs if it were loth to cease.I have sought, but I seek it vainly,That one
lost chord divine,Which came from the soul of the organ,And entered into mine.It
may be that death's bright angelWill speak in that chord again,It may be that
only in Heav'nI shall hear that grand Amen.

I'll paraphrase (even though I know that paraphrase is not a nice thing to do
to a poem): in a reverie at the organ the poet experiences something grand
that is aesthetic, transcendent, ineffable, and fleeting. The "lost chord
divine" -- note the Miltonic deployment of adjectives -- stands for the hope
or wish or belief that there is such a place as heaven and that it's a place
where weariness, fever, pain, sorrow, perplexity, strife, and discord are
superseded by the "infinite calm" and "perfect peace" of the "grand Amen."  A
not unusual or extraordinary nineteenth-century sentiment where the hunt for the
disappearing god was frequently mediated by art -- in this particular case by
the art of music.

As long as I'm reducing the poem to its paraphraseable meaning, I might also add
that Procter, like many poets before and after her, has conflated religious and
sexual longing. I derive this meaning, inaccessible to the roomful of quavering
sopranos of which I was one, and very likely unsuspected by Miss Keiselbach
herself, from the vocabulary of passion in which the poem is couched: "crimson,"
"touch," "lay" "love," "trembled."  And from the sentence, "It came from the
soul of the organ,/  And entered into mine," where it might be argued, slightly
frivolously, that any line of poetry that contains "came" "organ" and "entered"
has got to be about a symbolic sexual encounter. Especially when the ambiguous
word "mine" can denote either "my soul" or "my organ." So in this extravagant
reading, in which it is once again clearly demonstrated that you can take the
boy out of Brooklyn but you can't take the Brooklyn out of the boy, "The Lost
Chord" is not only about the search for "perfect peace" but also for the perfect
orgasm which will provide infinite calm to the poetess when she "dies" -- a word
which is itself a Victorian euphemism for sexual climax. The lost chord is the
big O (and I don't mean Oscar R.)

Just for fun of it let me also adduce a couple of sentences from the wikipedia
article on Adelaide Anne Procter: "Modern critics argue that Procter's work is
significant for what it reveals about how Victorian women otherwise repressed
feelings." "One critic suggests that Procter may have been a lesbian and in
love with Matilda Hays; other critics have called Procter's relationship with
Hays 'emotionally intense.'" "Procter became engaged in 1858. The identity of
Procter's fiancé remains unknown, and the proposed marriage never took place."
"In 1851, Procter converted to Roman Catholicism." "Procter never married. She
became unhealthy, possibly due to her charity work, and died of tuberculosis at
the age of 38." I'll let my loyal readers connect the dots.

Source: 2017/05/hoop-words-once-more

Title: Greek and Latin Basketballese
Date: May 08, 2017

Now that we've at last come to the NBA playoffs and are heading toward another
Warriors-Cavaliers showdown, it's fitting that we reflect on basketball jargon,
which is distinguished by its many colorful monosyllables: hoops, hops, bigs,
stuff, slam, jam, slash, dish, board, glass, dunk, pick, screen, paint, lane,
point, wing, trey, rim, post, trap, "D", roll, box, press, tip, swish, bank,
brick, feed, stroke, hole, "J", rock, range.

But down-home slang is not basketball's only linguistic register.

Curiously, roundball jargon exhibits a contrary tendency toward polysyllabic
words of Greek and Latin origin. Some teams, for example, are said to be
"physical." "Physical" (from Gr. physicos = nature) means, in basketballese,
simply "rough" and does not imply that the other team plays either an ethereal
or spiritual game. It used to be that a guard played on the "outside" and
a center on the "inside"; nowadays they've become "perimeter" (Gr.) and
"interior" (L.) players. A fast break has become "transition offense." A
player doesn't drive to the basket; he "penetrates." Players no longer
jump; they "elevate"; they don't block an opponent's shot, they "reject"
it. In an odd linguistic development, a point guard no longer passes the
ball; he "distributes" (Latin: distribuere, to allot) it. In its ordinary
signification, to "distribute" a basketball would be to cut it into pieces
like a loaf of bread and give each teammate a slice, but not so in the language
of basketball. Only a few years ago, it was still possible to "switch" from
guarding one man in order to guard another; now players "rotate." "Rotate,"
derived from "rota," the Latin word for wheel, properly means "to turn on an
axis, to spin." A defender who did not switch but rotated would pirouette, and
pirouetting would not be an effective defensive strategy. (A better classical
upgrade for switch would be "revolve.") Even sillier than rotate: "rotate
over" or "rotate around"-- a usage that evokes the grotesquerie of a big guy
in a tutu pirouetting across the baseline -- a vision that is all the more
picturesque now that traditional basketball shorts have been replaced by big ol'
floppy bloomers. Just last night I heard a TV announcer declare that a seven-
foot tall player had "a lot of verticality." (I suppose that if he fell to
the floor he would have lots of "horizontality"). Players don't score; they
"convert," as in, "they had a transition opportunity  but failed to convert."
They don't push an opponent out of the way;  no, no, no, -- they create space
(Latin: creant spatium). Although I am not a physicist, I suspect that space
is something like matter, and can therefore neither be created nor destroyed. At
least not created by power forwards, however potent they may be. How silly of
me to object; neither the laws of physics nor the usual constraints of language
are binding on punditor basketballensis. OK, game's on; let's see how well they
play -- oops, sorry, how well they execute.

Source: 2017/05/enoughisasgoodasafeast

Title: "Enough is as Good as a Feast" or Possibly Better
Date: May 11, 2017

Source: 2017/10/theeventjune30

Title: What I Said at Our "Event"
Date: October 17, 2017

"Thank you all for coming. We appreciate it more than you can possibly imagine .
We've needed, and relied on, the support that all of you have given us         .

It's no secret that both Lynn and I have gone through some difficult times. It's
good to host a cheerful event.

A number of people have asked us about our use of the word "wed" in the
invitation that we sent to you. (We said, you remember, that we were 'wed" on
June 30). I don't want to mislead you. We didn't mean to imply that we involved
either state or church in our relationship. There didn't seem to be any point
for us to get married legally. People marry for the sake of children, but we've
decided that we're not going to have children.

Here's the story. Lynn and I wanted to acknowledge in a public way the
seriousness and permanence of our friendship -- for our families, and, I think,
especially for our grandchildren (there are ten of them). We wanted our families
to know that our relationship wasn't like some streetcar or trolley that you
hop on and hop off. So we decided to invite our most nuclear family to Lynn's
backyard garden for a brief "ceremony" -- just my children and grandchildren,
her children and grandchildren, her brother, my brother, the various spouses --
and pledge our love and fidelity. But then one of my daughters-in-law, Connie,
said that we couldn't ask people to fly in from all over the USA just for a
five minute ceremony. She suggested that we at least exchange rings. It seemed
like a good idea. So we walked over to Classic Facets on the Pearl Street Mall
and bought two not antique but vintage rings -- because we're vintage people.
Handsome rings, as you can see. And then as long as everyone was coming here a
day early we decided that we should have dinner the night before. And if you're
going to have a dinner you might as well have some music. So gradually the
"ceremony" evolved and grew. But more importantly -- and here's the point -- the
meaning of the event evolved as well. It became more significant, more profound,
more intimate. We never liked the phrase "commitment ceremony" or even the word
"commitment" because it sounds as though you are being sent either to jail or to
a mental institution, and we didn't have the vocabulary for what we intended to
do. But little by little, while we planned the event, and even more so, after
we performed the ceremony, we began to feel more and more married -- in all the
positive senses of the word. We can now say "wed" and mean it. I haven't yet
been able to say "husband" or "wife" but I suspect that one day in the not too
distant future those words will manifest themselves. But the point is that in
all the ways that matter, we are "wed."

When my Vermont friend Bert, who's just my age, got married 18 years ago, I said
to him, Bert, is it real --that you're head over heels in love at age 60? At the
time, it seemed so improbable. But now, here I am, just a year and a half short
of 80, and setting out on a new life. And 60 seems like dewy youth.

So let me repeat to you now what I said to Lynn on June 30. "I bring you my
children and my grandchildren, my prosthetic tooth, my lens implants, my hearing
aids, my non-standard but warm heart, and I take you and your children and
grandchildren and your titanium hip and arthritic finger and I say, "let us
make a life of it."

And let me just add that between us we have been married for 100 years (an
average of 50 apiece). So we ought to know what we're doing.

And what we're going to do is to ride this old trolley right to the end of the
line."

Source: 2017/10/yet-another-comcast-experience

Title: Yet Another Comcast Experience
Date: October 18, 2017

I had to change the name on my Comcast -- now they call it Xfinity -- account
(internet, TV, "landline"). In the pencil and paper days, you would just cross
out the old name and put in the new. But that's not how it works nowadays. I
didn't want to call the company and be put on hold for a half an hour, and then
accidentally disconnected, which happens pretty regularly, so I drove over to
the Xfinity storefront on Baseline. Very slick modern spacious venue. You're
supposed to sign in on the computer at the front desk, but the computer was down
so they just had a paper sign-up sheet -- embarrassing I would think to the
employees to have to resort to something as antique as a written list. I noticed
that I was tenth in line and I looked around and I saw that there were only
two clerks -- they're probably called "technicians" or some other highfalutin'
name, but they're clerks. I guessed a forty-five minute wait and I wasn't far
off. I had forgotten to bring my cell phone so I couldn't amuse myself with FB
or the NYT or texting friends so I looked at the various items for sale and I
immediately felt mighty ignorant. There were all sorts of devices that I didn't
know what they did, and if I did recognize them, they were described in language
that made not the slightest bit of sense to me. One cellphone, for example,
offered both CDMA and GSM. Which is probably a good thing, and maybe someone
could explain to me what they do and why you need both of them. And would  I
want the cellphone with or without the Qi charger? That sort of thing. There
were lots of connectors with fancy plugs for connecting one device to another,
which is good if you know what you want to connect, and why, and if you have
a solid grasp of your ports. So the forty-five minutes flew by and eventually
my name was called and there I was at the counter with this young guy with a
scruffy beard that looked like his lifetime growth of facial hair. I explained
that I wanted to change the name on the account and he got to work. It seems
that you can't just change the name but you have to cancel the one account and
set up a new one so we went through the "mother's maiden name" thing and "last
four digits of your social" and so on. It seemed to go on forever and every
once in a while my technician would look up and say sort of mournfully to me
"the computer's kind of slow today." While I was with him, two old guys, older
than me, brought their bills to the next technician over and said, essentially,
"I don't understand a thing about my bill. What am I paying for. What is this
charge." Both guys went away mollified by the explanation but both said that
they had to figure out how to reduce the monthly bill. And it's a fact that the
monthly bill is rather complex. For example, I don't know why I pay a $6.00
monthly "athletic fee" but the clerk explained that it allows the company to
televise high school football and small college football games which means that
I'd be able to see Cherry Creek play Fairview or the University of Northern
Colorado play Mesa College which is something I suppose though no particular
advantage to me inasmuch as I'm personally boycotting all football because of
the incidence of traumatic dementia. But that's not the point. It took between
half and hour and forty-five minutes for my technician to make all the changes
and I signed my name several times to acknowledge this and that which I didn't
entirely understand and I was about to leave at last, but my fuzzy-cheeked
technician gave me a piece of paper on which he highlighted a telephone number.
He said, "There's one more step. When you get home, you call this number and
they will "activate" your TV and your internet and your telephone. I said, why
don't you just call them, or hand me your telephone and I'll call the activator
now but he said that wasn't the way it was done -- I had to call from my home.
So I went home picked up the telephone, but it wasn't working. No dial tone.
Of course it wasn't working -- it hadn't been "activated." The message on the
telephone screen was "check tel line," but of course I had no idea how to do
that. How did Xfinity in their wisdom and experience expect a consumer to
activate an account from an inactivated telephone. A rather large glitch in the
system I would think. However, I'm a resourceful guy so I picked up my cell
phone and called the number. I got through immediately and went through the
sequence of this press 1 if that press 2 but there was no option for activating,
so I said, several times, "I would like to talk to a human being" and after a
number of iterations and going around the choices from 1 to 5 I got through to a
person. I explained the situation very carefully to my new clerk or technician
who sounded as though he could be in India and we did the mother's maiden name
thing and the last four digits of your social and I was put on hold several
times which always makes me very nervous and finally he came back and said
that he was going to transfer me to the "activation unit," who turned out to
be a pleasant-voiced lightly-accented woman who was all business, but it took
her about half an hour to activate me because Tel 2 kept lighting up on the
modem before Tel 1 which is apparently not the way it's supposed to happen.
But eventually it came to pass. I asked my new friend where she was physically
located and she said "the Philippines." So now I'm back in business and it only
took maybe three and a half hours at the very most to change the name on the
account. Which is much longer than it took to find out why I had a $13.00 charge
including a late payment fee on my Traveler's auto insurance (put on hold twice)
or why I'm paying for a electronic newspaper subscription but can't access the
newspaper on line (on hold three times), where I eventually gave up and canceled
the subscription (it had been a long day).

Source: 2017/10/broomjumping1

Title: "Jumping the Broom"
Date: October 19, 2017

In Charles Dickens' Great Expectations, it is reported that the woman who is
eventually revealed to be Estella's mother was married "over the broomstick
(as we say), to a tramping man." Dickens offers no explanation for "over the
broomstick," apparently assuming that it was a concept with which his readers
were familiar. There is in fact a long tradition of 'jumping the broom" to
certify informally a marriage sanctioned neither by state or church. It was
practiced in west Africa where it symbolized the sweeping away of the old life
and of a leap into the new world of fertility and increase. "Jumping the broom"
was also a frequent practice in southern American slave culture where legal
marriage was prohibited. The custom was a feature of ancient Celtic societies,
especially among the Welsh and the Picts. As practiced by the Picts, broom
jumping neither predicted nor solicited fertility.

Source: 2017/10/otsi

Title: Bringing Us up to Date on Otzi the Ice Man
Date: October 24, 2017

Otzi the freeze-dried 5300 year old Tyrolean man/mummy continues to be studied
and his corpse regularly yields new information.

Otzi was about 45 years old, stood 5'3" and weighed only about 110 pounds. He
had been wounded with an arrow in the shoulder which pierced an artery. He may
have bled to death or, alternatively, died from a blow to the head. He had brown
eyes, a dark beard, and long dark brown hair. He was wearing a bearskin hat, a
goat loincloth, a goat cloak, and goat leggings with deerskin laces. His shoes
were complex -- bearskin soles and deerskin uppers and were lined with hay --
presumably for both comfort and insulation. He had a calfskin belt in which he
carried flint and bone tools, including a flint dagger, a large bow and a quiver
of chamois hide reinforced with hazelwood. The quiver contained unfinished
arrows made of shoots from the guelder rose tree. He had a container constructed
of birch bark. He carried equipment for lighting a fire -- a flammable fungus,
a piece of pyrite, and a flint. Otzi also carried a woven net for trapping
prey and a mat made of grass fibers which probably served as a raincoat. And
frameworks of hazel twigs that most likely were snowshoes. His outfit consisted
of materials drawn from 18 different kinds of wood. His last meal, consumed
two hours before his death, was of various unidentified plant material, and a
helping of ibex meat. Otzi was lactose intolerant. His skin was marked in about
50 places with "tattoos" where charcoal had been rubbed into incisions. Some
ribs (he lacked a twelfth rib) and his nose bone had been previously broken but
had healed. He carried a stone ax with a copper edge --a rare and expensive
possession. To judge from the traces of arsenic in his body he might have been
a copper smith. An analysis of his mitochondria revealed that he belonged to
haplogroup K which was a typical marker of members of the farming culture that
was then expanding into Europe. His closest relatives today are found on Corsica
and Sardinia. He also belonged to a Y-chromosome haploid group G which which is
also associated with migrating farmers. He had a rare mutation known as G-L91
which has been discovered in 19 contemporary residents of the Tyrol. He was not
healthy. His knee joints were in bad shape and caused him considerable pain,
his teeth were worn down and inflamed, his lungs show traces of soot particles
probably from living in badly ventilated spaces. He suffered from Lyme disease,
rheumatism, intestinal parasites, hardened arteries, gallstones, and an ugly
growth on his little toe perhaps caused by frostbite. It would appear that he
had had a hard life.

Source: 2017/10/feeding-me

Title: Feeding Me
Date: October 29, 2017

I calculate that for the last seventy-five years I've eaten a box of raisins
every month (I'm a big fan of raisins and of dried fruit in general). A box of
raisins is about 5 inches tall, 4 inches wide and 2 inches deep, or forty cubic
inches. In a an average year, I eat 40 x 12 or 480 cubic inches of raisins. If
I maintained my raisin-eating pace, it would take me four years to eat through
a cubic foot of them. And it follows that in the last seventy-five years I've
eaten approximately 19 cubic feet of raisins, which amounts to a stack or block
of raisins three feet long, three feet wide and two feet high. That's a heck
of a lot of raisins. And that's just raisins --  I'm not even counting table
grapes, also eaten plentifully over the decades. And wine.

I myself did not breed, plant, trim, fertilize or harvest the Thompson Seedless
or Flame grapes. I did not fence the deer out of the orchard. No did I process
the grapes. Nor box, ship, load, unload, or stock them in the market. Someone
else made the boxes from wood that another person chainsawed to the ground. I
just brought the raisins home from the market and sprinkled them on my oatmeal.
Someone else, many someone elses, did all the hard work.

I wonder how many people and how much accumulated skill it took to provide me
with 19 lifetime cubic feet of raisins.

Then there's milk. I've drunk many many cartons of milk. I'm too lazy to do the
calculations, but I'm going to guess that I've consumed a hundred times more
cubic feet of milk than I have of raisins. Probably a spacious roomful. And
once again, I did not domesticate those fearsome wild European cattle, nor did
I breed or milk them, or pasteurize  the milk, or ship it. I did not invent
refrigeration, nor did I manufacture or install the refrigerators. I did not
drive the milk truck (itself the creation of many hands). I hunted and gathered
by walking to the market and plucking a carton (whole milk, vitamin D added)
from the case. Easy as pie.

And what about potatoes? And pasta?

I don't think I need to go through any other of the commodities I consume.
My point is simple: that it takes a titanic effort by society to keep me me
me going. That I am borne on the shoulders of farmers, truckers, engineers,
mechanics -- not to mention our neolithic ancestors who first looked at a cow
and thought "glass of cold milk" or at a wild grape and thought "those would
make good raisins if we could just get the moisture content down."

So to all those people who think they are "independent" and who assert that they
can fend for themselves, I say bullshit. If you eat anything at all, you're part
of the great web of humanity that stretches around the earth and also extends
back 65,000 years.

So when you sit down to eat, and offer a prayer, don't thank god. Thank your
industrious imaginative fellow humans.

Source: 2017/11/what-is-an-amana-board

Title: Do the Dodgers Have an Outfielder Named Bacchus Pederson?
Date: November 01, 2017

Judging from his spectacularly wonderful name you might guess that Bacchus
Pederson is either a character in a novel by Thomas Pynchon or the son of a
Swedish father and a patriotic Greek mother. Not so. He's the creation not of
eccentric parents or postmodern fiction the but of the voice recognition system
that's been close-captioning that 2017 Dodgers-Astros World Series. He's an
imaginary being. He does not exist. Except on the TV screen.

There is, however, a up-and-coming not-Greek-but-Jewish on-his-mother's-side
left hand hitting center fielder for the Los Angeles Dodgers named Joc Pederson.
And what is the relationship between Joc and Bacchus, you ask?

The other day (and the following morning because the game went on roughly
forever), I watched the epic 13-12 Houston win over the Dodgers. A most exciting
game. There was bad umpiring by the home plate official, there were balls
flying out of the bandbox and onto the short porches, there was some beautiful
defensive plays and some costly mental errors. See-saw, back and forth.

And yet more. Inasmuch as my veteran ears are past their prime and over the
hill, I now supplement my hearing with "close captioning." I try to catch
what Joe Buck and John Smoltz say and then watch as their words, or some
approximation of their words, flashes across the screen. It's an activity that
is almost as fascinating and much more amusing than the game itself. And it is
out of this experience that the fanciful mythological figure of Bacchus Pederson
emerges. Smoltz says "a fly ball to center and back goes Pederson." CC writes "a
fly ball to center and Bacchus Pederson." No human being would translate "back
goes" into "Bacchus". It's nonsensical and not even decent English grammar. t's
got to be a machine, an idiot savant machine, that, stumped by "back goes," has
located "Bacchus" in its word hoard.

And similarly, what is an "Amana board?"  Something wooden manufactured in the
Amana colonies in Iowa, you might guess. No, it's CC for "a man aboard."

CC produces all sorts of comic linguistic wonders because it's utterly
untethered to common sense.

When John Smoltz, a human being who knows all there is to know about pitching,
said that the left-hander was going to try to "bury it in the back foot,"
knowledgeable baseball fans would understand exactly what was meant. The lefty
intended to throw an unhittable pitch by coming as close as possible to the
left-handed batter's left foot. However, readers would have to be mighty clever
to interpret the meaningless wild CC phrase "Marriott in the back foot."

Other electronic locutions were easier. Not much of problem with "hit it into
the upper tank" or "rubbing him of a double" or "sacrifice bump" or "Taylor will
eat it off."

Some CC flights of fancy require a little more interpretive skill. Will the
Dodger manager replace his pitcher with "a fresher god?" Perhaps a "fresher
guy." Did the pitching staff "hand out seven rocks?" Seven walks is more likely.
Do the Dodgers have a right fielder named Yossi el Pogue?  No, but they do have
Yasiel Puig. Was a reliever taken out after "a short student?" Naw, it was a
short stint. Did a pitch come "in her half" of the plate?  Who is "her"?  But
no, it was "inner half." Is it possible that a batter "applied to center?"  No
but he might very well have "flied to center."

Here's one that is Impossible to comprehend: "Turner headset hard." I had to
rewind and listen again: "Turner hits it hard."

Sometimes CC sounds vaguely spiritual. "Flies want to center," says CC. Do they
really, I ask. But what Joe Buck said was "flies one to center."

My favorites, aside from the immortal Bacchus Pederson, are errors that make no
sense at all. What does it mean to say that a pitcher is a "shortest writer."
And that he "threw his lighter."  The correct locutions: he was a "short
strider" who "threw his slider."

Voice recognition systems are technological marvels, no doubt. But they have a
way to go. There's still a place at the table for humans.

Source: 2017/11/a-word-problem

Title: A "Word Problem"
Date: November 04, 2017

If one 4 1/2 year old grandson can launch five foot stream of urine from where
he stands to the base of a tree, how many 80-year-old grandfathers would it take
to equal the performance?

Some answers:  a) 20 (tag team line of grampas each contributing 4").  b) does
it count if I hurl my Depends?  c) I know the answer but I forgot.

Source: 2017/11/all-you-need-to-know-about-antres

Title: All You Need to Know about Antres
Date: November 12, 2017

"Antres" is among the rarest of rare words. Shakespeare's Othello speaks of
"antres vast and deserts idle" in the magnificent oration in which he takes
issue with the Venetian bigotry that claimed that he was only able to win
white Desdemona by employing drugs and witchcraft. No, it wasn't because he
was a sorcerer; it was because he was accomplished, heroic, romantic. "Antres"
is one of the exotic words that defines the great African general as a
non-Venetian -- an outlander, an "erring barbarian," an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger."

Shakespeare coined "antres" just for the occasion, deriving it from Latin
antrum, a cave. He never used "antres" again, nor did anyone else until
Keats fleetingly revived the word two centuries afterward. "Antres" never
domesticated into English and remains curious and remote, eternally in need
of an explanatory footnote. It is unlikely that Shakespeare expected that a
popular or even a courtly audience would grasp "antres" at first hearing. It's
a risky word, but Shakespeare didn't become Shakespeare without taking risks.

The playwright coupled the neologism "antres" to another shiny new Latinism
to produce "antres vast," a phrase which translates into the language
of 2017 as "really big caves." Yet no translation can do justice to
the spacious resonance of "antres vast." The caverns to which Othello
refers are monstrously huge -- grown grander and even more inaccessible
because Shakespeare ingeniously placed the modifier after rather than before
the noun. "Antres vast" are a hundredfold more mysterious -- darker, more
echoic, more glinty with stalactites and stalagmites -- than "vast antres."

"Antres vast" occurs in tandem with a second and equally remarkable noun-
adjective combination: "deserts idle." Othello reports that before he came to
Venice, he had not only traversed "rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose
heads touch heaven" but had also dwelt among "antres vast and deserts
idle." Strictly speaking, deserts cannot be "idle," but they can be vacant
or useless. "Deserts idle" reinforces and augments "antres vast." Taken
together, the two phrases are infinitely more evocative than either alone.

As a structure of sound, "antres vast and deserts idle" pivots on the "d"
of "and" and the "d" of "deserts" and it positions "antres" and "idle"
in symmetrical opposition. The two key words are dissimilar yet cleverly
interlinked, each comprised of an open vowel (Antres, Idle), a dental (anTres,
iDle), and a liquid (antRes, idLe). It is not by accident that "antres vast
and deserts idle" is such a euphonious and mouth-filling phrase.

Shakespeare not only invented "antres" for Othello's oration but also took
care to surround it with other linguistic novelties. For example: Othello
claims to have encountered "cannibals that each other eat/ The anthropophagi."
"Cannibal" is now a commonplace noun, but in 1604 it was a newcomer to the
language. "Cannibal" derives from "Carib," the name of a recently-encountered
people-- reputed to be man-eaters --who gave their appellation to the sea in
which they lived. "Cannibal" was sufficiently strange--it had only made harbor
in England (arriving by way of Spain) in the 1550s--that Shakespeare felt a
need to define it, which he did once in English ("that each other eat") and
once in Greek ("anthropophagi"). "Anthropophagi," a word that had originated
with Herodotus, was as new to English--and as seldom employed--as "cannibal."

"Antres vast," "deserts idle," "cannibals" and "anthropophagi" play crucial
parts in Othello's stirring autobiographical fragment.

I spake of most disastrous chances,

Of moving accidents by flood and field,

Of hair-breadth scapes i'th'imminent deadly breach,

Of being taken by the insolent foe

And sold to slavery;  of my redemption thence,

And portance in my travel's history:

Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,

Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,

It was my hint to speak -- such was the process.

And of the cannibals that each other eat,

The anthropophagi, and men whose heads

Do grow beneath their shoulders.

It's an astonishing story, each element more incredible than the one that
precedes it. Hair-breadth escapes?  Every hero can boast of them. Redemption
from slavery? A bit less likely. Hills whose heads touch heaven? A pardonable
hyperbole. Cannibals?  Surely, less believable still. The Othello landscape
then crosses the border from exotic to fabulous when it adduces "men whose
heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders." These headless men are the
blemmyae -- Nubian or sometimes Ethiopian -- who were a feature of 
pseudo-anthropological folklore from Pliny to Sir Walter Raleigh. The skepticism
that these monstrous creatures ought to provoke is diluted because the road to
the blemmyes passes through "antres vast and deserts idle." If audiences
had not been lulled and seduced by "antres," they might dismiss Othello as a
mere braggart soldier-- rather than admire him for the near-magician that he
becomes in his self- dramatization.

Shakespeare had yet another purpose for "antres vast." In the sentence that
treads on the heels of the "men whose heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders,"
Othello abruptly turned his attention to Desdemona. His language dulls. "This
(i.e. his exotic narrative) to hear would Desdemona seriously incline,/ But
still the house affairs would draw her hence." Shakespeare strategically
contrasts Othello's vocabulary to Desdemona's when he juxtaposes "antres
vast" to "house affairs." Only the tinnest of ears can fail to be struck
by the difference between the two phrases. Antres vast--house affairs; house
affairs-- antres vast. The gap between these two most pregnant phrases is small
enough to allow the electric impulses of sex and romance to spark, but is too
wide to allow genuine understanding or empathy to shoot the gap. The tragedy
of Desdemona and Othello arises out of the unbridgeable space between "antres
vast" and "house affairs."

Shakespeare therefore knew exactly what he was about when he invented the word
"antres."

If he had been in a more antic mood, less determined
to characterize Othello's massive dignity, he might have coined a word from
another Latin word for cave, e.g. spelunca.  But "spelunkies vast" --
or even "spelunkies splendid" -- could not possibly do the work of "antres
vast."

Source: 2017/11/the-farmer-in-the-dell

Title: The Cheese Stands Alone
Date: November 13, 2017

Certainly in the 1940s and perhaps in later decades, first-graders all over
America were taught an "activity" based on a song called "The Farmer in the
Dell." Older readers of this blague, if they are courageous enough to delve into
long-forgotten and repressed pockets of the past, might dare to summon up the
memory.

Here's the game:  Ten young waifs, divided equally by gender, formed a circle
holding hands around the Chosen One who was designated the "farmer." The gamins
(and gamines) sang the following song:

The farmer in the dell,

The farmer in the dell.

Heigh-ho the derry-o,

The farmer in the dell.

While they sang, the "farmer" walked around the inside of the circle and chose
a partner from the circle of children. Then the tune was repeated with the key
word altered:

The farmer takes a wife,

The farmer takes a wife,

Heigh-ho the derry-o

The farmer takes a wife.

The "wife" then joined him inside the circle, and the plot thickened. Now they
sang:

"The wife takes a child,

The wife takes a child;

Heigh-ho the derry-o

The wife takes a child."

And so on down and down the great chain of being.

"The child takes a nurse...

"The nurse takes a cow...

"The cow takes a dog...

"The dog takes a cat...

"The cat takes a mouse..."

And finally, when all the players have been chosen but one, the game ended on
the following exclusionary note:

"The cheese stands alone.

The cheese stands alone.

Heigh-ho the derry-o,

The cheese stands alone."

What was the point of this weird game? Why was it included in the
"curriculum?"  Even seventy years later, it seems to be not fun but gratuitous
cruelty. The most popular, the handsomest boy picks the most alluring young
lady, and then choices are made in order of status. The game seems to have been
devised to reinforce a hierarchical social structure. It was unAmerican, neither
democratic or egalitarian. In retrospect, the game was triumphalist with regard
to the farmer and his wife and harsh as all get out to the mouse and the cheese.
If literary critics were to get their hands on this verse, they would be forced
to notice the tragic pattern -- marriage at the outset followed by inevitable
decline into isolation and soul-death.

Needless to say, I myself identify not with the prosperous farmer and his
vivacious wife, but with the lumpish cheese. Velveeta it probably was, a big
shapeless orange block of it, because no fancy aristocratic European cheeses
were known to those of us who grew up in the 1940s PS 217 schoolyard. A sad
cheese, inanimate, excluded from society, unchosen, least loved. Does the entire
history of poetry offer a more mournful note than "the cheese stands alone?"
Poor poor pitiful solitary neglected cheese.

In recompense (it's too late for an apology) let us remember, three quarters of
a century later, that cheeses have feelings too.

And for the curious, a "dell" is "a small valley in a forest, tucked away from
the rest of civilization." At the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island Avenue,
where PS 217 was to be found, there were, trust me, no wooded dells. Concrete
sidewalks, chain-link fences, yes. Dells no. Delis, but no dells.

Source: 2017/11/a-new-fear

Title: A New Fear
Date: November 16, 2017

When I was a exceedingly young fellow (teens and twenties), I suffered from a
great fear of death. It was not obsessive or constant, but enough to keep me
lying awake at night, sometimes in a sweaty panic. It was not a fear of death
itself, nor a concern about anguish in an afterlife -- hell a story which I
always regarded as a pathetic fiction and fraud. No, my fear was that I would
miss out on things. Children, grandchildren, springtimes, love, baseball,
mountains, travel, books, knowledge, corn and hamburgers in August, the works.
I wanted to live to an old age for the experiences. I well remember that in the
1960s, when I was barely out of adolescence, I would project myself forward to
the distant future, as far as to the year 2000, the new millennium. I remember
thinking, if I can just make it to 2000, when I'll be sixty-one, I'll have lived
a full life. I'll be ready to go.

Well, 2000 has long ago come and gone, and here I am, pushing eighty, and in
excellent, almost miraculous health. Such good health, in fact, that on good
days I climb our neighboring foothills like a gazelle. (On bad days, even
walking downhill seems as though I'm slogging through a swamp of mucilage, but
that's another matter.)

I no longer fear death. No matter what else happens to me, I'm not going to die
young, with my promises, such as they were, unfulfilled.

But the fear of dying young has been superseded by a new fear -- the fear of
living too long. When did the transition occur?

I don't want to outlive my time. I don't want to outlive my friends, my family,
my health. I'm already the senior member, the patriarch, of my extended
family -- not just the direct line from my grandparents, but of the extended
cousinhood. In my family, there are no elders and only a couple of near-coevals.
I don't want to become an isolate. Even more so, I don't want to lose my
mobility or my mind. I don't want to find myself in a nursing home, pee on my
pants, bedridden, "locked-in". And I'm going to do everything I can to avoid
allowing myself to get into that situation. I've seen people in that trap at
close hand too many times -- and it ain't pretty.

Meanwhile, I'm enjoying the perspective of the moment. I'm glad that I managed
to get to this point. From where I stand, I can remember my grandparents and
I know my grandchildren. I'm at the midpoint, the apex, of five generations.
I marvel at the changes -- recall, will you, that my grandfather was born in
darkest Ukraine in 1863, my youngest grandchildren were born in hi-tech Boulder,
Colorado in 2013. Need I say more?

Source: 2017/11/spearefirstspeech

Title: Shakespeare Gets Going
Date: November 21, 2017

Setting aside the suspicion that The First Part of Henry the Sixth is a
collaborative work or perhaps even a "prequel" to Parts Two and Three, the
play can be read as if its first few lines were the earliest example of
Shakespeare's playwriting. If so, then, what can be learned, right there at
the very beginning, by looking closely at Act one, scene one, line one?

Here's the first considerable speech in the play -- just about the very
moment, let us imagine, in which Mr. W. S.'s "rough and all-unable" goose quill
touched paper. Thirty-seven or thirty-eight astonishing plays lie in the
future.

The adventure begins as Gloucester eulogizes the recently-deceased
Henry V. The speech is not brilliant, not accomplished; in fact, it's just
plain vanilla ordinary. But it's a seed, a kernel.

Gloucester:   England ne'er had a king until his time.

Virtue he had, deserving to command:

His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams:

His arms spread wider that a dragon's wings;

His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire

More dazzled and drove back his enemies

Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.

What should I say?  his deeds exceed all speech:

He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.

A reader or playgoer would have to be superbly insightful to predict that this
Shakespeare would become the Shakespeare. This opening speech is a a mighty
flat piece of rhetoric.

It's formulaic  -- simply a litany or list. First comes an item, a
noun (virtue, sword, arms, eyes, deeds) which is then amplified by a
hyperbolic qualifier (beams, wings, fire, sun). It's open-ended; it could
go on indefinitely. But because it's so much a formula, there's no
surprise--there's no mystery or excitement about where Gloucester is heading.

Moreover, for each element in the list, there's a congruence between the
unit of thought and the unit of verse. The sentiment of each of the first
four items on the list is exactly contained in a five-beat, ten-syllable line
of verse--a pedestrian procedure which Shakespeare would soon transcend. And
finally, there's an excess of old-fashioned, traditional alliteration: "His
Brandish'd sward did Blind me with his Beams" "affects the letter" and browbeats
the brain with the letter B. It goes almost without saying that there's nothing
in this speech that is particular (Elizabethans would say peculiar) to either
Gloucester or Henry. This is Anyduke reciting sentences about Anyking.

But then something truly amazing occurs.  Although it looks as
though Gloucester is gathering his strength and his breath for a speech that
might go on for forty lines and which would celebrate many more of the late
kings's amazing attributes, he suddenly changes plans and truncates his
intention:  "What should I say?  his deeds exceed all speech."

Gloucester seems to have run out of rhetorical gas. He is frustrated because he
simply doesn't have the words. He throws in the rhetorical towel, so to speak.
He surrenders. And he's right to do so, because at this early moment neither he
nor Shakespeare has the power to generate a language that is equal to Henry's
deeds. Better to stop speaking if you are utterly unable to say what you want to
say.

Yet what is the task of such a playwright as Shakespeare?

It is not to do exactly what Gloucester admits that he cannot do? -- to find the
words that are commensurate with the deed -- as Shakespeare certainly will when
he returns to Henry in the 1598 play which concludes and climaxes this sequence
of eight history plays. In a decade, Shakespeare will move from the pathos of
"What shall I say?" to a rich eloquence that is up to the task.

"What shall I say?" is therefore an important question -- the most important
question of all, in fact -- and the playwright asks it right here at the
outset. Readers can watch and learn as Shakespeare little by little, in play
after play, gradually invents a rhetorical style in which speech not only
equals but eventually comes to exceed all deeds.

Source: 2017/11/oneill-nebraska

Title: O'Neill, Nebraska
Date: November 24, 2017

Source: 2017/11/lydiamariachild

Title: "Hurrah for the Pumpkin Pie"
Date: November 29, 2017

Another Thanksgiving come and gone, and here am I in a nostalgic mood, harking
back to those songs that we sang in the PS 217 "assembly" in the 40s and 50s
of the last millennium. With Miss Georgia Keiselbach at the piano, we marched,
in size places, decorated in white shirts and green ties, into the school
auditorium and warbled our dear little hearts out every Thursday at 10:00 am.

I remember very well the stirring but perplexing Thanksgiving hymn that began

We gather together to ask the Lord’s blessing;He chastens and hastens His will
to make known.The wicked oppressing now cease from distressing.Sing praises to
His Name; He forgets not His own.

Looking backward, I admit that I understood the first line of the stanza but was
pretty much boggled by what came next. "Chasten" and "hasten" make a wonderful
internal rhyme, but who does He hasten and how exactly does He chasten? 
A syntactical mystery for sure. Were we expected to believe that the Great
Signifier in the Sky "chastens and hastens" His own will?  Why in the world
should he be asked to do so?

Nor did I grasp the meaning of third line, because I didn't recognize that "the
wicked oppressing" meant "the oppressing wicked" or more precisely "the wicked
who are oppressing someone." But who were they "oppressing"? Apparently, the
"distressing", that is, the people who are distressed. And who, to be more
specific, were the innocent distressed who were being oppressed. Us?  Our
teachers? Let me now confess that I sang then and remember at this moment the
line as "now cease us from distressing", thinking that we, the pupils, must
have been the "wicked" and that it was our now enlightened task to cease from
oppressing the distressed. I read the line as a provocation to guilt, even
though I knew that I myself, third-grader, had never oppressed anyone.

Nor was I the only confused 10-year-old, because BB, my PS 217 classmate and
consultant on our assemblies, remembered the line as "The wicked oppressing now
seize us from distressing" -- a sentence which is way beyond my parsing skills.

Of the last line of the quatrain, I grasped "Sing praises to his name" but "He
forgets not His own" opened another can of confused worms. I construed "His own"
to be shorthand for "his own name." But what kind of Lord forgets his own name?
 As BB, equally misled, says, 'it's god, just three letters; how hard is that?"

The hymn goes on for another four puzzling stanzas, though to tell truth, I
don't remember whether they were required of us PS 217 choristers. I for one am
retrospectively pleased that we omitted the stanza that included the lines "We
praise thee, O God, our Redeemer, Creator,/ In grateful devotion our tribute we
bring" which surely seemed even then a trifle too theological.

Despite the fact that I was mostly clueless, I rather enjoyed belting out the
hymn's anapests. It's a joyous, rollicking piece of music. Whether it was
appropriate for a public school in the heart of immigrant Brooklyn is another
question. But hey, it was the 50s, before we all became so multicultural.

Nevertheless, out of spirit of curiosity, and because it's now so easy even for
us lazybones to investigate such questions, I turned once again to wikipedia and
typed in "We gather together." Warning: surprise in store.

It's a Christian hymn (of course) written in 1597 by one Adrianus Valerius to
celebrate the victory in the Battle of Turnhout, a turning point in the Dutch
Protestant war of liberation against Spanish Catholic domination. It first
appeared in print in a 1626 collection of Dutch folk and patriotic songs but
didn't find its way to the New World until 1903 and became popular only in
1935 when it was included in the "national hymnal of the Methodist-Episcopal
Church." During World War II, which was entering its last phase when I was
a kindergartner in PS 217, the hymn became popular because "'the wicked
oppressing' was understood to refer to Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan." Which
is, I suppose, how an anti-Catholic Protestant hymn came to be included in our
curriculum. After all, it was out of such strange and unpredictable meldings and
divagations that Brooklyn/American culture was formed.

"We gather together" was not our only Thanksgiving song. We also sang th       e
entirely unobjectionabl                                                        e

Over the river, and through the wood,

To Grandmother's house we go;

The horse knows the way to carry the sleigh

Through the white and drifted snow - oh.

I found this song lovely but otherworldly, because my own particular grandmother
lived not over the river but in a tiny third-floor walk-up on distinctly
unpastoral Coney Island Avenue, where there was an occasional tired horse,
pulling a vegetable wagon, but there were few sleighs.

But as it turns out, "Over the river" too has a history.

That's a portrait of its author, Lydia Maria Child. She looks rather forbidding,
as though she might have taught sixth grade at PS 217, but on further
investigation she turns out to have been a radical and revolutionary woman to
whose accomplishments I wish we had been introduced. Born in 1802, she started
her writing career with the novel Hobomok which depicts and approves of the
marriage of an Indian man and a white woman. It caused a small scandal. In 1833,
she published An Appeal in Favor of that Class of Americans Called Africans
which proposed the immediate emancipation of slaves, arguing that slavery was
as harmful to slave-owners as to the enslaved. It was the first anti-slavery
book printed in America. Ms. Child was also an early advocate of women's rights
and spoke favorably of sexual passion. Of course she was ostracized from polite
society. In 1844, she published the small innocuous poem for which she is
remembered, which concludes "Hurrah for the fun! Is the pudding done?/Hurrah for
the pumpkin pie!" -- a sentiment to which there can be no possible objection or
dissent.

Source: 2017/12/grassley

Title: Why I Am So Damned Pissed at Charles Grassley
Date: December 07, 2017

Inasmuch "on horror's head horrors accumulate" every single Trump day, I
wonder why an atrocity out of the mouth of Senator Charles Grassley (of once
progressive Iowa) pisses me off to the top of my bent. Over the top, actually,
even though he's probably no worse than the others.

In an aha!! moment with the Des Moines Register, Senator Grassley defended his
vote against the inheritance tax thusly: "I think not having the estate tax
recognizes the people that are investing as opposed to those that are just
spending every darn penny they have, whether it's on booze or women or movies."
 His very words. Out of his own ignorant head.

Why am I so enraged? Let us count the ways.

First, it goes without saying that Grassley doesn't know that most ordinary
citizens have a hard time making ends meet. That they raid the kids' piggy-bank
at the end of every month. That they regularly postpone filling that
prescription or repairing the car until next month's paycheck arrives. That they
can't invest in stocks because they're busy "investing" in bananas and oatmeal
and potatoes, not because they're frittering their money away on playthings.
Grassley is completely out of touch with reality -- with the way real people
live.

But it's worse than that. It's not only that he's unconnected to his
constituents  --  he oozes contempt for them (and therefore for me). Wasting
their money on movies, the poor ignorant slobs. If they had self-control and
brains of Chuck Grassley quality, why they'd go out and buy a couple of hundred
shares of a good growth stock and contribute to the American economy. He's worse
than Marie Antoinette, who, bad as she was, never said, "let them buy stocks."

And therefore it follows in the universe of Grassley values that the tax system
should penalize the improvident and reward the rich. (Which it already does in
myriad ways, most obviously by taxing unearned income -- e.g. capital growth --
at half the rate of sweat labor).

And in Chuck Grassley's view, to reward the rich and penalize the poor is the
higher morality -- because  the rich will invest and the poor will do nothing
but spend every darn penny.  To those who have much shall be given, even if
they don't need or want it.

And while I'm stoking my indignation, let me add that I'm offended by the
Chuckster's sanctimonious "darn" -- he can thieve from the working class but
he's too prissy to swear while doing so. And I'm also just slightly off my gourd
that he includes "women" among the vices of regular Iowans -- as though (if I
understand his point) all money is earned and spent by "men." I think that the
dumb Chuck slipped -- let down his guard for a second -- and revealed that in
his heart he doesn't acknowledge that women are wage-earners nor that they are
wage-earners who vote.

And I am also pissed because the whole argument against the estate tax is
fraudulent. The case for repeal has nothing to do with small farmers or small
businessmen. It already excludes the first $11,000,000 of estates and therefore
affects only a very small number of multimillionaires and billionaires who can
well afford to contribute a bit to the general welfare. The sole purpose, and
the intended effect of the repeal, is to satisfy the greed of a handful or
plutocrats who want to pass their wealth to their heirs and therefore maintain a
perpetual class of wealthy aristocrats. Just like France before the revolution,
when the titled were exempted from taxation. Chuck -- do  your realize that
your sentiments are profoundly unAmerican.

So let me say to Senator Charles Grassley, with respect for the high office that
you hold and with as much love as I can muster, Chuck, you are a moron, and you
can take your insulting opinions, roll them up, and stick them where the sun
don't shine.

Source: 2017/12/mucilage

Title: Notes on "Mucilage."
Date: December 11, 2017

“Mucilage” is a word whose sound is wildly inappropriate to its meaning.
In the world of adhesive nomenclature, “paste” is good and “glue” is
even better. Trisyllabic mucilage ought to denote something far more serious --
perhaps a problem involving waste disposal ("OK, we've rescued the elephants,
but what are we going to do with all that mucilage.")

In my life, mucilage made its mark long before glue arrived on the scene. In
Brooklyn (and perhaps elsewhere) 1940s schoolchildren were issued small curvy
bottles of the yellow stuff, each fitted with a red-rubber tip which was slit
so that a drop or two of mucilage could be emitted when the bottle was pressed
to the surface of your construction-paper or doily project. Actually, the slit
regularly became caked and occluded and the hardened mucilage had to be scraped
off with your fingernails. It was a lot like nose-picking.

LePage’s Mucilage, I believe it was called. We said Page as "page" but
surely LePage's Mucilage if pronounced Frenchly (le pahje) would be far more
euphonious. Some claim that if you were building a model airplane, you would
use mucilage on your fuselage, but I believe such an assertion to be the kind of
persiflage at which I take umbrage.

And yes, the word is a descendant and cousin of Latin mucus, meaning mucus.

Unbeknownst to 1940s me, mucilage has a life outside the bottle. It is a
glycoprotein and exopolysaccharide found in most plants where it helps to store
water and thicken membranes. I have now learned that the sticky stuff on the
leaf tips of the insect-catching sundews that live at the edge of our pond is a
form of mucilage.

I would be curious to know from what plants William Nelson LePage distilled the
vast vats of mucilage that were diluted and parceled out to schoolchildren,
who then spent the hour after "Arts and Crafts" removing nasty mucilage scale
from their fingers. But I do now know why schools loved the stuff  -- because
vegetable mucilage is, if not exactly edible, not poisonous either. No hoofs
were harmed during its production.

Once having established the mucilage monopoly, Mr. LePage must have brought
home zillions. And if his descendants were as sticky-fingered as I suspect
they must have been, they will be enjoying the profits on their yachts or in
their Manhattan penthouses to this day while we 1940s pupils are left with only
memory-traces of mucilage's peculiar feel and odor.

Other words of my life:

slouch,

cishet,

yips

ramps

jot and tittle

worship

hack

Source: 2017/12/ladyonatrain

Title: Lady on a Train (1945)
Date: December 12, 2017

When you start to watch a 1945 black-and-white movie called Lady on a Train you
have certain expectations, especially when you're told in advance that it's
about a woman who sees a murder take place from a train window. And when the
movie features such noir stalwarts as Dan Duryea and Ralph Bellamy. And
especially when the title of the movie evokes The Lady Vanishes and Lady in the
Lake and Strangers on a Train. But Lady on a Train is not what you might think
it's going to be; in fact, it's a film that never has a clue about what it is or
wants to be. It's an unsatisfying hodgepodge.

There are some films that are so bad that they become fascinating for sheer
awfulness. Lady on a Train is that kind of awful. It starts out noir-y and
offers, intermittently, fistfights and mistaken identities and shadows, lots of
shadows, and enough red herrings to feed cast and crew for the entire time the
film was in production. But it also takes a shot at comedy -- not sophisticated
banter but broad farce: in one scene, trying to hide herself from a hired
gunsel, the heroine disguises herself as a chair and moves around from place
to place just as she would in an Abbott and Costello vehicle. And then, if
farce/noir weren't enough of a burden, at three separate times during the
events, with the least possible justification, Deanna Durbin, playing at being a
detective, breaks into song, but only because she's Deanna Durbin, not because
the film requires her to do so. So it's a noir-farce-sentimental musical. It
just don't work, except for connoisseurs of badness.

Plus it features two of the ugliest hats ever to come out of the Hollywood
chapeau-shop:

After making this film (and another clunker) Deanna Durbin left Hollywood, where
she had been the highest paid woman in America, married and moved to France,
never appeared on stage or on film again -- and reassumed her birthname, Edna
Mae Durbin. It's a decision one can respect.

Source: 2017/12/lodz

Title: Written For the Great-Great-Grandchildren of Solomon Goss (1878-1972)
Date: December 19, 2017

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, Asher:

Althea's grandfather, Solomon Goss (born Guza), who contributed 1/16 of your
genetic inheritance, fled Poland after the worker's rebellion in Lodz in 1905,
walked across Europe to Rotterdam where he boarded a ship and traveled steerage-
class to Philadelphia. He had been a silk weaver in the old country and was able
to find similar work here. In two years he saved enough money to pay for second-
class passage (not the dreaded steerage) for his young bride Miriam Halpern.

Solomon Goss played his part in the wave of political and social unrest that
rocked the Russian Empire in the first years of the twentieth century --
uprisings that preceded and anticipated the 1917 Russian Revolution. The
resistance had at its root the exploitation of workers especially in rapidly
industrializing cities like Lodz (which had grown six-fold in a generation), in
the state policy of enforced Russification, in czarist tyranny both cruel and
arbitrary, and in heady intellectual and Marxist ferment both in universities
and in informal worker self-education projects. The workers' strikes and revolts
in Lodz (the city, though Polish, was then incorporated into the Empire) were
part of that great historical process. The Lodz Insurrection, also called the
June Days, was one of the largest of these local rebellions. Following months
of unrest and strikes, repressed by Russian police and soldiers, enraged
workers began building barricades and assaulting police and military patrols.
Additional troops, including the hated Cossacks, were called in. By June 23, the
city and commerce was immobilized. Martial law was declared. But rocks proved
futile against bullets and horses. By June 25, the uprising was crushed. It was
officially reported that several hundred workers were killed but modern scholars
estimate that between 1000 and 2000 died and many more were injured. There were
arrests and imprisonments and executions. In this atmosphere Solomon Goss, who
had manned the barricades, wisely decided that his time in Lodz had come to an
end.

I do not know how he was able to walk to the Netherlands and shipboard. A
secular non-believer, he would not have been welcomed at local synagogues. Were
there way-stations manned by sympathetic socialists?  How did he eat?  Where
did he sleep? He never talked about his trek and if anyone ever asked him, they
did not pass the information along to me.

When he came to America he found work in the silk mills in and around Paterson,
New Jersey, which was then known as the "Silk City." Weavers were skilled
workers. Most were immigrants from traditional silk-weaving areas in England,
Germany, and Italy but there was also a considerable influx from Lodz itself.
The working day was ten hours long with a half day on Saturday and the new
fifty-five hour week was considered a victory for the workers. Between 1881 and
1900 there were nearly 140 strikes. By the first decade of the 20th century,
practically every mill had one or more labor organizations.

Solomon Goss told me that when he would take a job in a mill, he would
immediately set out to organize and radicalize his comrades. As a result, he
said, he was frequently fired. But he was, he claimed, a very skilled worker,
able to operate four looms at once (he looked down on American-trained workers
whom he thought of as inferior and whom he derided as "Columbus weavers)."

By 1913, close to 5,000 Jewish men and women worked in the Paterson silk
factories. It was in Paterson that Solomon Goss must have participated in one
of the crucial events in American labor history, the Paterson silk strike. In
February. nearly 300 mills and dye houses were closed, as 24,000 men, women,
and children joined in an industry-wide strike. The strikers' demands were
radical. They wanted an eight-hour day as well as increases in wages. Workers
agreed that no one would return to work until all of the owners accepted their
terms. Picket lines kept "scabs" and strike breakers out of the mills. More than
2,000 workers allowed themselves to be arrested, flooding the jails. But mill
owners held firm and refused to meet with the workers. By the end of May, the
workers' solidarity cracked. English-speaking and better paid workers voted to
accept settlements with individual mill owners. At the same time workers started
to cross the picket lines. In July the central strike committee voted to endorse
shop-by-shop settlements. The Paterson silk strike collapsed and owners conceded
nothing. "Your power is in your folded arms," IWW leader "Big Bill" Haywood had
said. But the mill owners, with greater resources, outlasted the hungry workers.

I do not know how Solomon Goss responded to this second crushing defeat nor
when he abandoned the silk trade. But in the 1940s, when Althea first knew
him, he operated a "candy store" in Clifton Heights, New Jersey. When I met
him in the late 50s, he had long ago sold the store and moved with Miriam to a
tiny apartment in Utica, New York, where his son Dan and wife "Grandma Anne"
(your great-grandma) lived. The man who had once been a proud unionist and
socialist and who considered himself a follower of Daniel de Leon, founder of
the Socialist Worker's Party, had drifted into conservatism, even voting for
Richard Nixon in 1972. Defeat and poverty and deracination had not ennobled
him. On the contrary, he was to my eyes a mean old man, given to gratuitously
cruel and cutting remarks. His default stance toward me and toward the world was
scorn. Miriam died in the late 60s; Solomon, having alienated his friends and
relations, lived out his widowhood in a single room in a hotel in Rockaway and
ultimately in the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale, where, a secularist to
the end, he complained to Althea and to me about the intermittently broadcast
Hebrew prayers.

I find it almost impossible to reconcile the two sides of the man: the sour,
sad, nasty old reactionary that he became and the heroic youthful fighter for
social justice who fought the Cossacks, walked seven hundred miles from Lodz to
Rotterdam and, I like to imagine, welcomed his beloved, radiant bride at the New
York dock with tears in his eyes.

Source: 2017/12/eleveneleven

Title: An Enigmatic Nighttime Experience
Date: December 26, 2017

The person with whom I share a bed reported that last night, following some
incomprehensible mutterings, I sleep talked, clear as a bell, the sentence
fragment "four ones, which I interpret as eleven hundred and eleven."

I have absolutely no remembrance of saying these words, nor of any dream that
might provide them with a context.

Some observations:

a) I'm mighty proud of myself for having a dream that was so literate.  I mean,
"interpret."  Not your run-of-the-mill sleep vocabulary.

b) What could "four ones" refer to?  Four aces?  Some sort of runic          ?
inscription  Score keeping                                                    ?

c)  What about eleven hundred and eleven?  A late antiquity or early medieval
date?  A quantity, but of what?

d)  Why did some part of my brain feel obliged to "interpret" the phrase "four
ones?" Did my right brain think that my left brain was communicating in code?

Altogether inexplicable. But fascinating. The brain seems to have  a mind of
its own.