

================================================================================Source: 2018/01/constantine

Title: More Genealogy Written for my Grandchildren
Date: January 02, 2018

Dear grandchildren:

I once asked my father, your great-grandfather Emanuel Pearlman, where in the
Ukraine we originated. He said that he was told that it was a village called
(and here he used a very deep guttural initial consonant) Xhosantin-gebernya
 -- an answer that left me not much enlightened. If he knew more -- and I don't
think he did -- he didn't say. Our family did not cultivate nostalgia for the
old country. Nor much curiosity either. We had no reason to yearn.

But new information about our past has recently come to me. According to a
correspondence between my late cousin Marion and a distant Israeli relative,
it is now clear that our family hails from the the town of StaryConstantine --
also called Starokostiantiyniv in Ukrainian and Alt Konstantine in Yiddish.
It was a small city of perhaps 30,000 people at its height, founded, as far
as wikipedia and I can figure, in the sixteenth century by a noble or wealthy
person named Konstanty Ostrogski who built himself a castle sometime during the
1560s. Castles are built for protection in lawless places, but then, most places
were lawless in late medieval Europe. Old Constantine is in northern Ukraine
at the junction of the Ikopot and Sluch rivers. Here's a picture of the Old
Constantine castle across from the Sluch:

But when, you ask, did your and my ancestors settle in Old Constantine?  I
remember it mentioned when I was a child that our family came to the Ukraine
from "the west", which I assumed to be Germany because my grandmother Eta's
maiden name was Hessel (though in fact Hessel is more commonly Danish rather
than German). The Jewish community in Old Constantine dates to the sixteenth
century, it is reported. "The town’s Jews suffered Cossack onslaughts during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. At the end of the nineteenth century,
more than half of the town’s population was Jewish." That's all we know.

However, in the nineteenth century, there lived in Old Constantine a husband and
wife named Yaakov and Menucha Sheindl Perelman. They dwelt in a house on the
corner of Ragnedinshkaya and Bolshaya Vasikovshaya streets (a house which was
destroyed during the second world war). Yaakov Mikolshtein Perelman was born
about 1830, lived a long life, and died in about 1920. According to the story,
he resided in the one house his entire life. His wife, Menucha Sheindl came
from Radomyshyl, a village not far from Old Constantine that was historically
a center of Jewish settlement. (In 1797 a total of 1,424 people or 80% of the
total population were Jewish). Menucha Sheindl Perelman was the daughter of a
sugar and wool merchant named Solomon Rabinovich, who was so rich that "they
changed houses for Passover" -- which is a custom heretofore unknown to me.
Menucha died in 1908 at age 75 or thereabouts. The family, once wealthy, lost
everything in the 1917 revolution and the disorder and purges that followed.

And how are Yaakov and Menucha related to you, my grandchildren?  Well,
they're your great-great-great grandparents. According to the newly discovered
information, they had eighteen children "mostly twins," of whom only nine
survived to adulthood. Seven daughters were born before your great-great
grandfather Isaiah (also called Buzya or Buzzy) saw the light. Isaiah it is
reported, was born "the year the serfs were freed," which is 1861, but I know
that he was 83 when he died in 1946, so I calculate that he was born in 1863.
But perhaps Isaiah didn't know his own age which wouldn't have been unusual
in an era of bad record keeping. When he was thirty-five, Isaiah emigrated to
America, arriving in 1896 or thereabouts.

Why did he set out for the New World?  Certainly the troubled conditions in Old
Constantine were reason enough. But there's also something of a story. Isaiah
married (I don't know whom) but after one night of marriage he asked for a
divorce. I don't know if the divorce was granted, but I do know that very soon
afterward he left town with Eta (or Yetta) Hessel, also from Old Constantine.
She was 23 or 24, a decade or a dozen years younger than he.

Why the one-day marriage?  No one knows what happened that night, but it
couldn't have been good. A sexual impediment?  An arranged marriage gone bad?
 Prior misdeeds come to light?  The discovery of pregnancy?  We're free to
speculate, but never to know.

However, we do know that Isaiah and his father did not see the world with
the same eyes. Yaakov was religious; his son Isaiah was an atheist. We don't
know Yaakov's politics, but we know that Isaiah was some sort of leftist or
communist. Something of a free-thinker, after the style of Moses Mendelssohn.
And perhaps Karl Marx. And we can also guess that it might have been impossible
to remain in Old Constantine after the marriage contretemps.

In New York City, Isaiah and Yetta had four children: Max, born around 1896,
Solomon, born about 1898; Mollie, born in 1900; and my father Emanuel, the
youngest, born on December 22, 1904.

My grandfather Isaiah also had two younger brothers. There was Chaim, who
followed him to America some years later and from whose daughter Rose spring the
Goldberg and Chodosh lines. And also Isaiah's youngest brother, who was named
Meshulam Zusi Perelman. He did not follow his older brothers, and I don't know
his history, but his family left the Ukraine and it's his Israeli granddaughter
Nechama Sheindl Brukman (born Perlman) through whom these facts were recovered.
Nechama Brukman died in 2008 at age 86.

It is most melancholy to read that in 1939 there were 6,743 Jews living in Old
Constantine, accounting for 31 percent of the total population, and that the
entire Jewish community, some no doubt our cousins, were murdered during the
first years of the war.

Source: 2018/01/new-geological-words

Title: Geological Words New to Me
Date: January 03, 2018

Unlike most sciences, where there are numerous pseudo-Greek or pseudo-Latin
coinages, geology offers all sorts picturesque and lovely words that have
been in the language for years  -- and are novel to me. So "graywacke" --a
muddy sandstone containing particles of quartz"; "fumarole" -- a small vent
emitting jets of steam; "sinter"  -- a crust of calcium carbonate; "molfette"
-- a vent emitting gases such as carbon dioxide; "coquina" -- a cemented mass
of debris of shells; "clint" -- a sharp ridge; "grike" -- a fissure or crack
opened by dissolving limestone; "knickpoint" -- a sharp step, up or down, in
a river; "gour" -- a calcite ridge formed when water rich in carbonate flows
over an irregular surface; "drumlin" -- an isolated mountain; "nunatak" -- a
projecting peak in land otherwise covered by ice;  "firn"-- a mass of ice
pellets compacted by the weight of snow above;  "cwm" -- a steep rock basin;
 "col" -- a narrow pass; "esker" -- a winding ridge formed by retreating
glaciers; "pingo" -- a cone, dome  or hump caused when freezing water expands
beneath the permafrost and pushes up the earth; "yardang" -- parallel ridges of
hard rock.

I'm not convinced that I could recognize any of these phenomena of my own
accord. I'd probably need a professional geologist or guide. But the words
themselves sure are magnificent.  And this is just a small sample of the
wordhoard.

Source: 2018/01/godless

Title: Small Screen Godlessness
Date: January 06, 2018

We binge-watched the seven-hour mini-series Godless in three marathon nights.

Godless is a Western, or more exactly a fantasia on Western-movie themes and
incidents. To the genre-literate, almost every plot element or character will
be familiar, but shootouts and jail breaks and horse-rustling and miraculously
healing bullet wounds were re-combined in ways that kept our attention. I'm
proud to say that I didn't fall asleep once during the three long evenings,
which is quite a compliment to the series, inasmuch as I've recently emerged as
an Olympic-quality narcolept, prone to drift into sleep at the drop of a hat,
even during the second overtime.

The three most interesting features of Godless, were, in my opinion, a) the
landscape, which, although it surrounds us here in Boulder, seemed particularly
crisp on the hi def screen, b) the horses, which are noble beasts of their own
and were respectfully depicted and admired by the cinematographer, and c) the
character of MaryAgnes, played by Merit Wever, who was rather wonderful in the
role and who was rewarded with a lot of the good lines. MaryAgnes is a tough
young rifle-toting crack shot who plays for the other team but who you want on
your side.

I thought that Jeff Daniels who played the ruthless mass-murderer Frank Griffin
overacted like crazy. If overacting were a crime, he'd be looking at a good
twenty years in solitary. Plus I know it's the fashion that your deranged evil
charismatic lunatic villain always has to be a bible thumper yet let's face
it -- that's a cliche that has served its purpose and earned its retirement.
Speaking of religion -- even aside from the title of the series and the
observation that it's a godless country there's a heck of a lot of religion
stuff both good and bad but mostly bad in this series. For example, much of
the backstory evokes the Mountain Meadow Massacre -- one of the most dreadful
acts of domestic terrorism in our nation's history -- which was perpetrated by
Mormons (although Mormon participation is underplayed and instead the atrocity
is attributed to a nonspecific religious fanaticism). There are frequent scenes
of worship and pilgrimage as well as intermittent focus on the new church that
the villagers of LaBelle are constructing and specifically on the fashioning
of a substantial cross that is photographed as though it were brimming with
significance. Moreover, the inhabitants of LaBelle wait six and seven-eighths
episodes for the new preacher to arrive but when he finally appears he has
only the most banal platitudes to deliver. Frankly, I'm not positive whether
the writer of Godless thought the preacher's speech was genuinely profound or
whether he couldn't give him better words, or whether he was trying to assert
that the pieties of faith offered no consolation whatever to the beat-up
townspeople. It would have been better if the preacher had just sung an
appropriate hymn and let the LaBelleians join in so we could at least end with
good music.

Godless offers a number of revisionist moments where tradition is overturned,
sometimes too obviously. An instance: LaBelle is inhabited almost entirely by
women and it is the women who make the decisions and take the active roles; men
are passive bystanders. Quite an inversion of the usual macho practice. And
also: usually in the westerns when there's the threat of intermarriage between
the races, it's the dark skin who gets killed. This time the commonplace was
turned on its head with the gratuitous killing of he white guy -- but I think
it was a bit too pointed to name him "Whitey." And the Indians: now that we
have the word "orientalism" to describe the mythologizing and falsifying of
people of the east, we could apply the word "Indianism" to the romanticizing
of the Paiutes, who are depicted as repositories of supernatural mystery and
tribal wisdom (which is I suppose is a step up from brutal savages, but still
not respectful or true). "Indianism" leads to a grotesque failure in the story
when the sheriff is accompanied by a lone brave on horseback who may or may not
be a ghost and who should have thudded to the cutting-room floor (along with
some faux-spiritual nonsense, totally out of place, about the sheriff losing and
regaining his shadow).

The series centered on the conflict between father and adopted son -- a
borrowing straight out of Red River, but this time around there's not going to
be a reconciliation. The allegorically-named son Roy Goode winds up shooting his
father, up close, pistol to temple. Which I liked a lot, because, first of all,
I was by this time totally inured to violence, and also because the evil addled
father-villain-prophet repeatedly claimed the ability to foresee his own death
and "this isn't it." "You're wrong," says Goode, pulling the trigger. So much
for prophecy. Immediately afterwards, the hero rides alone into the sunset --
not into a metaphorical sunset but a very real and carefully photographed sunset
-- even though if he had his wits about him he would take his more-than-a-match
lady friend with him. It's a unsatisfying conclusion and one that is dictated, I
think, more by the zillion Saturday afternoon Westerns of my childhood than by
the internal logic of the film. She loves him. But Western heroes named Goode
just plain love their horses more than hearth, home and sex and they are all
secretly afraid that if they marry and allow themselves to become domesticated
they'll wind up like poor uxorious powerless Van Heflin in Shane.

Source: 2018/01/englishinitalian

Title: Some English Words Incorporated into Contemporary Italian
Date: January 08, 2018

Italian has the ability to swallow English words whole, not even bothering to
Italianize them. Here are a few examples drawn from a 2016 novel by Stefano
Benni.

"Freezer," as in diventa rigido come un peluche lasciato nel freezer."
("It became stiff like a stuffed animal left in the freezer.")  "I
cornflakes," incorporated as a plural noun. "Ha occhiali rossi da rockstar."
 ("He had the red eyeglasses of a rockstar.") "Un overdose."  "La soap opera,"
entering Italian as a feminine singular noun, no doubt because of the "a" ending
of "opera."  "Un popcorn."  "Compriamo un gadget" ("We are buying a gadget.")
"Sembra un clown in pensione." ("He seemed like a retired clown"). Gli zoom
fotografici." "La mia partner."  "Il controllare piu sexy del mondo." ("The
world's sexiest conductor.")  "Ha iniziato con multi okay". ("He started with
many okays.) "Jukebox d'epoca." "Old-fashioned (classic) jukebox."  "La
famiglia era in relax." ("The family was relaxed)."

Ecc.

Source: 2018/01/menucha-sheindel-perelman-spector

Title: Another Paragraph Written for my Grandchildren
Date: January 11, 2018

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, Asher:

This is a picture of my father's grandmother (that is, my great-grandmother
and therefore your great-great-great grandmother) whom I can now identify as
Menucha Sheindl Perelman (born Rabinovich) who died in 1908 at the age of 75
or thereabouts. She was born in the shtetl of Radomyshyl and married Yaakov
Perelman of Old Constantine in western Ukraine. Menucha is reported to have had
18 children including many twins. Seven daughters and three sons survived to
adulthood. The four daughters whose names are known were Rochel Lerner, Reizel
Shposhnik, Miriam, and Chaya-Beila, who married Schmul Spector (I remember now
that my father had a cousin named Julian Spector). Her sons were Isaiah or Buzya
my grandfather, then Chaim, and Meshulam.

My father told once told me story that seems incredible. He said that he had a
grandmother in the Ukraine who came from a large family. He said that she had
ten children but that all of them died in a week during a cholera epidemic. Then
they had five more children. Or perhaps there were five children who died in the
epidemic and then they had ten more. Both stories are hard to believe.

What would it be like to lose five or ten children in a week? How could anyone
ever recover from the grief?  How could you live?  It's possible that this
story attaches to Menucha Sheindl Perelman, who lost at least eight children.
But it might also be a Hessel story (i.e. my father's mother's side of the
family, not his father's).

Provenance:  I have no idea how this picture came into my possession. It's a
drawing, not a photograph. A copy of a drawing, to be more precise, not the
original. My father told me that it was done by an itinerant Ukrainian artist
(apparently a pre-photography custom). I wish that I could say more about
Menucha's costume, especially the scarf. Is it traditional garb? Or about her
very dark hair, which might be a sheitel, the wig worn by the orthodox.

Is it possible -- is it truly the case that the woman pictured above bore
eighteen children?  And Inasmuch as your direct ancestor Isaiah was child
number sixteen, if she had said to her husband Yaakov, after birthing number
fifteen, "I'm done, Yaakov, no more children" -- which would have been a
perfectly understandable sentiment -- then it's obvious that none of us would
exist.

Other news of your old country ancestors:  here,  here, and here.

Source: 2018/01/ulyssesbytennyson

Title: Old Age, Poetry, Ulysses
Date: January 15, 2018

It wasn't until I reached college that I discovered poetry. My comic-book,
super-hero and baseball-infused brain was until then, poetry-wise, an almost
complete tabula rasa; I say "almost" because at eight or nine eight years old I
had already memorized two great classics of American literature: "Casey at the
Bat" and also the poem by Grantland Rice about Tinkers, Evers, and Chance. In
addition, I knew the ubiquitous stercoraceous distich the first line of which
is "Here I sit, broken-hearted" and a related gnomic verse that begins, "No
matter how much you wiggle and dance." Then in 1956 I left Flatbush for higher
education and enrolled in a course in English Literature. The rest, as they say,
is history. It was love sonnets and rich luscious liquid poems by Marlowe and
Keats and Hopkins that entranced me. The more intellectual poems were too taxing
for my immature head. Lycidas, which I now can acknowledge to be the finest
poem in the language, was utterly impenetrable for at least a decade, although
I immediately responded to its music: "With nectar pure his oozy locks he
laves."

One of my teachers sagely observed that certain poets and certain poems were
for youth, some for maturity, and some for old age. "You may no longer like
then what you like now." Which has come to pass. As an example of poetry for
the latter years, he adduced Tennyson's "Ulysses." "This poem may not mean much
to you now, but it will some day, if you live long enough." I remember that I
was much taken with the touchstone line "Far on the ringing plains of windy
Troy" but I thought that "Ulysses" was too much about a really old guy trying to
cheer himself up and I did not see it holding a place in any future that I could
envision.

Well, folks, I've now arrived at the so-called golden years, or, more properly,
the endgame, or extra innings (which in some sports is called sudden death)
and guess what?  "Ulysses" has returned, front and center, exactly as was
predicted 50+ years ago. It's right on target.

Tennyson's Ulysses is Homer's adventurer a generation older, kinging it in
Ithaca, but bored, unchallenged, and unstimulated. "It little profits that an
idle king,/ By this still hearth, among these barren crags,/ Matched with an
aged wife, I mete and dole/ Unequal laws unto a savage race,/ That hoard and
sleep, and feed,/ And know not me."

To put it vulgarly, Ulysses plans to bust out of the home for old kings. He's
been a warrior, a hero, and a roving explorer. He "cannot rest from travel." He
needs to search "beyond the utmost bound of human thought." He leaves Penelope,
and he resigns the government of Ithaca to his bureaucratically-minded son
Telemachus. The last lines of the poem, the leave-taking, are most stirring:

Come, my friends

"Tis not too late to seek a newer world.

Push off, and sitting well in order smite

The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths

Of all the western stars, until I die.

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Though much is taken, much abides,

And though we are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are;

One equal temper of heroic hearts

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will

To strive to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Yes, I know -- the diction is a little antiquated and artificial, the urge to
get away a trifle too vehement. But nevertheless, I'm moved by the resilience,
the perseverance. Though tear-inducing, the poem is anything but lachrymose. And
it's accepting: "that which we are, we are."

It has lately become the fashion to interpret "Ulysses" as a poem about
capitalism and imperialism. In this reading, Ulysses is just another white male,
off to conquer and colonize The Alien Other. Or to see it as a poem about male
privilege: he's a bad husband, abandoning the family. Or to conceive the poem as
a structure of ironies, in which Ulysses doesn't realize that he undermines his
own suppositions. There's a tad of truth in these arguments, as there always is,
because Tennyson was caught up in a Victorian striving that he didn't fully or
consciously assimilate. But frankly, I feel sorry for readers who can't hear the
verve and excitement in Ulysses's expansive view of things.

Moreover, it turns out that Tennyson was absolutely correct to proclaim that
there is a time in life when "not to yield" is an act of daily heroism.

Source: 2018/01/wyominglumet

Title: "Wyoming"
Date: January 17, 2018

I am totally in love with a bit of dialogue in Dog Day Afternoon (1975), the
great Sidney Lumet social drama/comedy/crime film.

Sonny's plan to finance his wife Leon 's sex change operation by robbing a bank
has run aground. In exchange for freeing his hostages, Sonny wants a plane
to take him to a foreign country. He asks his not-so-brilliant friend/co-
conspirator Sal to what country he would want to travel. Sal cogitates for a
while, then suggests, "Wyoming."  After a pause, Sonny replies, "Sal, Wyoming's
not a country." The exchange (by John Cazale as Sal and Al Pacino as Sonny) is
delivered magnificently -- Cazale with blank-faced understated sincerity, Pacino
with tempered exasperation.

"Wyoming" was not in the script (nor in the essay from which the script was
drawn) but was improvised by Cazale. A moment of pure genius.

If you haven't seen the film, run -- not walk -- to your nearest TV.

Source: 2018/01/my-apology-by-zeus

Title: Zeus: the Apology
Date: January 24, 2018

If I've offended anyone, I'm really sorry. I didn't mean to; I have tremendous
respect for pretty and desirable women. 10s, all of them. So let me just start
by saying that many years ago, decades or centuries I can't remember exactly
when, I had a thunderous crush on Io. She claims that she signaled me that she
wasn't interested, but I did not stop. You know, when you're a god, they let you
do it. You can do anything. It was probably a mistake to have turned her into a
heifer but I think she enjoyed it then -- even if she complains about it now.
Same thing with Leda; it's possible that I misinterpreted her but I honestly
thought that her "no" meant "maybe" or "yes," so I turned myself into a swan
and grabbed her by the pussy. Maybe I should have backed off, especially since
she had already spent that same night with her husband Tyndareus, who had, as
everyone knows, very small hands, if you know what I mean. It's good to be a
god. And then there was Semele. I mean, she was one of my very own priestesses,
and I realize now that your own priestesses ought to be off limits. But she
provoked me by bathing nude in the river Asopus. And I happened to be flying by
in the shape of an eagle. What happened, happened. It was definitely wrong of
her to ask to look at me face to face and I regret that I incinerated her, but
it wasn't my fault. Europa was also an error, but she should have known better
than to come near to me when I'm in the shape of a white bull. And the same with
Taygete who came to me as a doe with golden horns. I couldn't stop myself. I've
always had a thing for golden horns, though I think Pindar made a bit too much
of it. And then there was Dia, who happened by, so she says, when I was in the
shape of a stallion. What can you expect of a stallion? Alcmene, that's another
story. She was tall and beautiful, with eyes that reminded me of Aphrodite.
I definitely wanted her. I had to disguise myself as her husband Amphitryon
to make love to her. Maybe it was wrong to do so, but I don't think she ever
figured out what actually happened, which kind of excuses me. And then there was
my adventure with Antiope, where I disguised myself as a satyr; and once you're
a satyr well, you know, a satyr does what a satyr does. To seduce Callisto, I
had to transform myself into Artemis, which sounds a little like girl-on-girl
action, but it really wasn't because it was me. Come to think of it, I can't
remember exactly how we did it. And also: I blame Acrisius for shutting up his
daughter Danae in a bronze tower. I took it as a deliberate provocation. I had
to sneak through an air vent to impregnate Danae in the form of a shower of
golden rain, which, I have to tell you, wasn't entirely satisfying and just a
little bit kinky.

But what can I say?  I don't want to play the victim, because, after all, I am
a god, but I had a hard childhood, what with my father castrating my grandfather
and then me being suckled by the goat Amalthea. You get off to a bad start when
you're suckled by a goat.

Source: 2018/02/more-family-news-what-my-father-ate

Title: More Family News:  What My Father Ate
Date: February 01, 2018

Sardines, a tin at a time. Herring, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans, which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed never
to eat tongue again, and, trust me, I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken
liver mixed with hard-boiled eggs and onions. Steak, when we could afford
it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen meats -- salami, baloney,
corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of Heinz. Apples, seeds
and all, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially white
chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, soaked in gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. Slimy canned Harvard beets. No alcohol,
nary a drop. On hot days, not beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee.
Cheese, either Velveeta or Swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb
cake direct from Ebinger's Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or
soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat cereal. Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning,
bagels and rolls, warm from the bakery, eaten while reading the the Times (25
cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream, the more exotic the flavor the
better.

Source: 2018/02/666

Title: 666
Date: February 05, 2018

Donald Trump has taken credit for the rise in the stock market. "The stock
market hit yet another record high yesterday. There is great confidence in the
moves that my Administration is making.” If he is responsible for the rise,
then surely he is also responsible for the fall. It can be no accident, and can
only be a signal from the other world, that Trump's market fell exactly 666
points last Friday. One trillion of market value was erased with the wave of
the supernatural wand. Six hundred and sixty- six is "the number of the beast"
in Revelation. Inasmuch as everything happens for a reason, we must ask what
the Lord is telling us. The 666 point drop undeniably demonstrates that DT is
"the man of sin" who "opposes and exalts himself above every god or object of
worship" (2 Thessalonians 2:1). He is the false god who has erected his tower
at 666 Fifth Avenue. Heed, O supporters of Trump, the words and acts of the
Lord, for the man of the flaming hair is the egg of the serpent, the false
prophet, the anti-Christ.

No possible probable manner of doubt.

Source: 2018/02/the-afterlife

Title: My Afterlife
Date: February 15, 2018

Source: 2018/02/united-airlines-to-charge-to-use-toilet

Title: United Airlines to Charge to Use Toilet
Date: February 25, 2018

United Airlines has announced that starting March 1, passengers will be charged
for the use of on-board toilet facilities. "Charges will be nominal," according
to United spokesperson Alma Santistevan, "just five dollars for the first
five minutes and two dollars for every subsequent minute, but passengers must
remember to bring their credit cards with them to the facility."

Toilets are now being equipped with card-operated locks but passengers may still
use the facilities for free until the end of the month.

Last year, United carried 95,611,500 passengers. "Even if each passenger uses
the facilities just once a trip, we are looking at half a billion dollars of
additional revenue with very little capital expense," explained Santistevan.
"Stockholders will be very very pleased."

United is considering additional charges for toilet paper and for paper hand
towels. Barf bags will also require a small fee.

Other airlines are expected to follow suit.

United CEO Scott Brandon was asked if he anticipated passenger resistance.
"There will be some grumbling at first," he replied, "but passengers will get
used to it. After all, they've accepted smaller seats, charges for water, rude
service, unpredictable bumping, huge fees for cancellations and plane changes,
luggage surcharges, pets stuffed into overhead bins and suffocated, as well as
the occasional person dragged from his seat screaming. Besides, what choice do
they have? They've got to piss."

Source: 2018/03/wallf

Title: Corporations to Buy "Naming Rights" to Trump Wall
Date: March 16, 2018

The White House announced today that "naming rights" to stretches of the Trump
Wall across the southern U. S. border are up for sale.

Portions have been pre-sold. Among the corporations that will have their names
in neon on the wall are Chick-Fil-A and Hobby Lobby. The largest single stretch
has been claimed by Koch Industries, Inc. Together with its subsidiaries
Invista, Georgia-Pacific, Molex, Flint Hills Resources, Koch Pipeline, Koch
Fertilizer, Koch Minerals, Matador Cattle, and Guardian Industries, Koch will
place signs on almost six hundred miles of wall. It is rumored that the National
Rifle Association has contracted to name a large portion of the Texas barrier.

The White House did not say how much the corporations paid for the naming
rights.  Charles Koch, in a rare interview, asserted that the cost was "a good
buy.  But it's not about money," he added, "it's about patriotism."

Trump Industries has also claimed a few choices miles of the wall but has yet to
make a payment.

Source: 2018/03/status-report

Title: Status Report
Date: March 16, 2018

A few days ago Vivian de St. Vrain aka Dr. Metablog began his last year as a
septuagenarian. His next birthday, 80. Astonishing. Unbelievable. And kind of
miraculous.

When I was boy, I thought that people of such an advanced age were very likely
extra-terrestrials or possibly members of another species. I remember my ancient
ancestors and relations as very small people, odd-smelling (chicken soup and
mothballs), whose faces were covered with knobs, whelks and unsightly dark
spots. As a group, they appeared to my youthful eyes as swollen, distorted,
asymmetrical.

But now, at this present age, I don't feel even the slightest bit extra-
galactic. I feel like me. Except, of course, when I catch sight of my reflection
in a shop window as I stroll the mall. Who is that white-haired guy?

Here's my status report at age 79. I'm healthy. All my organs might work a
little slower, a little grumpier about doing their jobs, but none of them has
crapped out completely. My joints are relatively supple, especially my knees.
I have great knees. I experience muscle pains and muscle spasms occasionally,
and my back is bad, but it's better than it was a decade or two ago, thanks to
the surgery. I tire more easily and recover from fatigue more slowly. My memory
is not as sharp as heretofore, but it's still pretty good, better than most.
I'm learning a new language and I admit that I have to look up new words two or
three times before they stick. Sometimes four or five times, truth be told. My
capacity for abstract thinking, never strong, has definitely diminished, but my
sense of humor is intact.

I'm not taking any medicines, except for an occasional sleeping pill. The
bifocals and the lens implants are working just fine. So are the hearing aids.
And the tooth implant is still firmly in place. The rest of me, I'm proud to
say, is all original equipment.

On the whole, I'd say that I've come through some dark times and that I'm
enjoying a personal renaissance. How long will it last? Impossible to predict.
A day, a year, ten years?  But hey, I have love in my life. Children who are
thriving. Lovely grandchildren.

I must acknowledge that at my age I could be growing something deadly and that
the least little twinge could be an early sign of a fatal disease. And although
nothing of that kind has happened yet, it's inevitable that something will
happen. Life is term-limited and I've lost too many friends and relations to
deny the obvious. I'm acutely aware that each day is precious.

Source: 2018/03/betrothal

Title: Report: Barron Trump Betrothed to Putin's Daughter Katerina Kabaeva
Date: March 21, 2018

Numerous European websites are reporting that Barron Trump, the 12-year-old
son of United States President Donald J. Trump, has been betrothed to Katerina
Kabaeva, the 11-year-old daughter of Vladimir Putin and "first mistress" Alina
Kabaeva.

White House spokesman Sarah Huckabee Sanders refused to comment on the report.
But another member of the Trump administration, who spoke under the condition
that his name not be revealed, said that, "if the story is true, then it's a
significant diplomatic coup for the United States and for the Trumps.  It would
allow two great families, one Russian and one American, to link their fortunes.
It's a significant step forward for Russian-American diplomatic relations. It
could be the making of a dynasty."

It has also been reported that the betrothal agreement, negotiated by Trump
lawyer Michael Cohen and former Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, calls
for the transfer of somewhat more than a billion dollars from the Russian
bank Vnesheconombank, or VEB, also known  as "Putin's bank," to Trump
Industries. VEB has previously been known to be an important investor in Trump
properties.  What the Trump family offered in exchange is as yet unknown.

The rumor that the spelling of "Barron" Trump's name has been changed to "Baron"
Trump has not been confirmed.

A date for the wedding has not been announced.

Source: 2018/03/shaya-venezia-1

Title: Shaya, Venezia
Date: March 22, 2018

Many a restaurant in New Orleans; and many visited by us during our latest stay.

Two divergent experiences.  Shaya, and Venezia.

Shaya:

Slick, elegant, ultra-modern, carefully designed. Waitpersons stylishly costumed
and coiffed. Well-trained. Reservations mandatory. Customers: jacketed and tied,
or on high heels. Price: whole wallet.

The place to go if you're looking for wood roasted Brussels sprouts with black
harissa, tahini and sumac pickled onions. Or ikra made with paddlefish caviar
and shallots. Or if you want your crispy halloumi with strawberries, mint and
pistachio. Perhaps shakshoula made of tomato, Jerusalem artichokes, poached
egg, chilies and chermoula. The roasted chicken is cooked with shawarma spices,
heirloom carrots, and chickpea mujadara. Etc. Very enjoyable experience.

Source: 2018/03/hessels

Title: More Genealogical Information for my Grandchildren
Date: March 22, 2018

Dear Asher, Caleb, Luke, Lola, Ella, Oliver, Talia:

These are pictures of your great-great-great-grandparents, Leib or Louis Hessel
and Tsina Voloshen Hessel. They are the parents of Eta or Yetta Hessel, who
married Isaiah Pearlman, your great-great grandfather, in StaryConstantine,
Ukraine, sometime around 1895. I knew Eta, who died in 1962 when I was in my
early 'twenties, although our conversations were limited because we did not
share a common language.  According to my father, these pictures are copies of
drawings executed by an itinerant Ukrainian artist. Drawn when? Perhaps 1870 or
thereabouts.

I don't know much about these people. I have no idea what they did for a living
or how long they lived. I see some family resemblance in Leib's small black
eyes and abbreviated eyebrows, but otherwise, not much. What sort of hat is he
wearing? Is Tsina wearing the wig of the orthodox or is that her real hair?

He looks mild.  She looks determined.

I know that my grandmother Eta had a number of siblings. In my father's
handwriting, I have a document that hints of two of them: a brother, Morris
Hessel, who married Mary Greenberg and had a son, Paul and a grandson Merel;
 and then a sister Malka, who married one Joseph Cohen and had a son, Saris,
who was a high school principal in New York, and had a son Peter Cohen, a
physician based in Denver. I wonder why my father kept so aloof from his aunts
and uncles and cousins? Was there a story? They were not at all a part of our
life. No visits, no family celebrations, nothing.

I once met my father's "Aunt Mary," who sold tickets at the Kent Theater on
Coney Island Avenue. it must have been the only time I went to a movie with
my father; he said, "This is my Aunt Mary."  I was perhaps 8 years old, and
uncurious. That's the end of the story. I wish I had more to tell you.

Source: 2018/03/nang-yai

Title: Nang Yai
Date: March 28, 2018

Nang yai is an intriguing form of Siamese drama, a shadow play with puppets,
which, unfortunately, I have never seen performed -- in fact, never been to
Thailand, alas, or anywhere else in that part of the world.

The "puppets" are large, almost three-quarters life-size, made of painted
buffalo hide. A story, drawn from the Ramayana, is told by means of songs,
chants, music, and dance. "Nang Yai" simply means "large puppet." People who
have studied Nang Yai have traced performances back to the 1400s. Nang Yai
dramas would be performed before a large white cotton screen illuminated from
behind by fire -- the puppets supported by bamboo poles.

The puppets themselves, one of which is illustrated above, are magnificent
works of art. From what I can learn, the tradition of making Nang Yai puppets
was almost extinct but has now been revived. Nowadays, and I imagine in the
past, the hide of a young ox is bleached and cleaned to get rid of hairs and
tissue. Then it is soaked in the juice of the lamphong tree, whatever the heck
that is, and also in a tincture of lemon grass, pineapple, and orange, and
finally darkened by rubbing with burnt coconut husk. The hide is carved with
chisels, hammers, knives, and then painted. Here's a picture of a particularly
complicated puppet.

Here's a picture of a Nang Yai museum in Thailand.  It's on my list of places
to visit.

Source: 2018/03/worship

Title: Words of my Life: "Worship"
Date: March 28, 2018

There are some words which one might study and parse the dictionary definition
and yet still not understand -- words for which one has no intuitive or even
rational conception. For example, there's the word "heaven." I know that
"heaven" can mean "sky," a definition that poses no problem, but when "heaven"
is presumed to refer to a place beyond the sky in which the souls of dead people
are eternally rewarded, then I'm absolutely baffled. My brain empties out.
"Heaven" in such a sense is to me incomprehensible and meaningless nonsense.

Another such word is "worship," a word which has always puzzled me, right from
the start, when the church bells of St Rose of Lima would ring on a Sunday
morning to call parishioners to mass, leaving me and my brothers to play
stickball or punchball all by ourselves. I recognize that "worship" is a word
to which communities of English speakers give assent, and I observe that people
attend temples, mosques, and tabernacles to perform certain activities, such
as kneeling, genuflecting, singing hymns and uttering hosannas. Nevertheless,
I can't agree that such activities equal "worship" -- because "worship"
presupposes that there is an entity to which these activities are directed. And
that entity, like "heaven" in the religious sense, doesn't exist. Just as heaven
is a non-existent place, so worship posits a non-existent entity. And therefore
the word "worship" has no intelligible meaning, to me.

Perhaps I lack what Charlotte Bronte called an "organ of veneration." Or,
alternatively, worshipers are engaged in mass delusion.

On the other hand, I have an excellent grasp of the word "awe." In fact, I am a
great practitioner of awe. I'm regularly "awed" by both the achievements of my
fellow beings in art, architecture, music, literature, mathematics and science,
and also by the majesty of nature, in the form of grand canyons and in the
triumphs of evolution. Moreover, I've felt "awe," in cathedrals and once, in
the Church of the Rock in Helsinki -- a magnificent building that melds human
ingenuity with natural beauty, -- overwhelming, transcendent awe.  And I can
understand that for some people what I identify as "awe" might translate into
"worship."  But again, not me. Though I'm awed by Rembrandt and Bach, but I
don't worship them or their works. I'll stick with awe.

I may lack an "organ of veneration," but I have a highly developed organ of
wonderment.

Update on "worship."  For the first time in my life, a few weeks ago, I
attended a religious service. I was in New Orleans and friends suggested that
I join them at Vespers at Trinity Episcopal Church on Jackson Avenue. The
attraction was Ellis Marsalis, who was to play a few notes for the attendees.
A priest or whatever he's called, said a few words, read a prayer, and then
elderly, frail Mr. Marsalis sat down at the piano and improvised for a few
minutes. It was beautiful and perhaps transcendent. I suppose it was a form of
worship. And it didn't hurt a bit.

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2018/04/amnesia-on-film-crossroads

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Crossroads
Date: April 17, 2018

What a strange little movie, odd even by amnesia-on-film standards! Film amnesia
is the most malleable and flexible of illnesses, as fact free (and fact-averse)
as the EPA under Trump.

In this modest 1942 adventure, David Talbot, played by William Powell affecting
a slight now-you-hear-it-now-you-don't French accent, is either an amnesia
victim or an amnesia scammer. He either was or wasn't a criminal before the
accident in which he apparently lost his memory.

An extortionist-grifter Henri Sarrou, played by Basil Rathbone, who looks like
"two profiles glued together," is trying to squeeze him for a million francs in
exchange for not turning him over to the police for a murder that he might or
might not have committed in his former life, if he had one.

I don't think I'm giving away any secrets to say that all turns out for the
best. But what is interesting, amnesia-wise, is that there is no recovery of
memory.  Talbot's amnesia never resolves, and he comes to the end of the film
with no knowledge of three-quarter of his life. This should-be painful situation
doesn't seem to compromise or concern him the least little bit. Off he goes, at
the end, blithely, with his luminous bride Hedy Lamarr, at his side.

There are holes within holes in the plot, but what is most striking, I think,
is how casually amnesia is deployed, as if losing one's memory were no more a
challenge to selfhood and identity than a case of sniffles.

Source: 2018/04/contra-tattoos

Title: Contra Tattoos
Date: April 25, 2018

Here are some reasons, young 'uns, why you should steer clear of tattoos.

a) because tattoos are permanent and because taste, your taste, is impermanent
and will inevitably change. There's a poster on the wall of your bedroom that
you love. Five years later, you're indifferent to it, and ten years later,
you've trashed it. "How could I ever have thought that thing was beautiful?"
Same with your taste in all the visual arts. So with the tattoo. You may
think t's beautiful now, perhaps, but ten or twenty years on it has become a
permanent definition of your callow taste. Without remedy or the possibility of
amelioration. You're stuck with it.

b) because ink fades and bodies sag. That crisp tattoo is going to bend,
distort, twist and fade as your body ages. Face facts: that tattoo is going
to become uglier and uglier. Have you caught sight of someone of my age who's
tattooed?  If you have, you know what I'm talking about; if you haven't, don't
look. It ain't pretty.

c)  tattoos are expensive if they're done by someone with talent. The cheap
ones are horrid. What a waste of money! You could donate the same amount to a
useful cause and feel good about yourself.

d)  tattoos hurt in the application; sometimes they become infected.

e)  because tattoos limit your romantic options. For many a potential partner,
that pseudo clever tattoo will be a deal breaker. "You have a tattoo where?
There? Right there? Ugh?" And also, don't tattoo yourself with the name of your
present beloved. Consider the divorce rate.

f)   if the tattoo is in plain sight, it will lower your earning power. No
problem getting a job as a dishwasher, but perhaps that upscale employer is
going to think twice before hiring someone who made such a bad choice. Because
the employer doesn't want to offend potential customers.

g)  because the Bible tells you so. "Do not cut your bodies for the dead or
put tattoo marks on yourselves. I am the LORD” (Leviticus 9:28). Your body
is a temple; do not mutilate or desecrate it. And for god's sake don't tattoo
yourself with religious symbols. To do so is like throwing ashes in the face
of the Almighty. The injunction against tattoos is one of the few biblical
proscriptions that I can sincerely embrace.

h) because tattoos are an expression of vanity, like wearing show-off jewelry or
expensive designer clothes. Let us take pride in our achievements and not in our
shallow foppery.

j ) because you don't want to cause me, ME, to look askance or into the air and
wrinkle up my nose whenever I meet you.

Source: 2018/04/foody-talk-on-the-airplane

Title: "Foody" Talk on the Airplane
Date: April 30, 2018

Stewardess:  "Chicken or pasta?"

Dr. M.:  "Which do you recommend, Madam?"

Stewardess:  "It's airline food.  They both taste exactly the same."

Dr. M.:  "I'll try the chicken."

Source: 2018/05/a-most-peculiar-dream

Title: A Most Peculiar Dream
Date: May 02, 2018

The ol' dreamatorium was working overtime last night. The protagonist, who was
and who was not me was a mature, bearded gentleman, a prosperous landowner in
what seemed like the antebellum South. He, or he/I, was the target of a plot
by a younger cousin in league with a scuzzy lawyer to have him/me declared
insane -- and therefore his/my property to be confiscated and transferred to the
control of the villainous cousin. The heart of the dream was a hearing or trial
in which he/I was cross examined and every of his emotions mischaracterized
by the lawyer and the panel of mental health experts. For example, if he/I
expressed indignation and anger, it was interpreted as paranoia; if he/I
remained impassive it was understood as catatonia. Every emotion became its
parodic extreme. As a result, he/I was placed in an institution; a rather
bucolic one, but still a place of incarceration. However, after some while,
another hearing was held, and he/I was able to convince a judge that there
had been a miscarriage of justice. So he/I was set free to reclaim his
property. But, he/I said to the judge, I have no money, no clothes, no means of
transportation, so no one will believe me. The judge then offered to loan me/him
some money, but was clear that it was a loan, not a gift. In the last scene of
the dream, he/I is mounted on a horse (black and white one, like a Holstein),
wearing a Confederate uniform, and carrying, believe it or not, a shiny sword.
Then I woke up.

I cannot interpret this beaut, this honey of a dream.  It was very cinematic,
very vivid, and very long. But it doesn't apply to my life in any obvious way.
I've never been accused of insanity, never lost any property, don't know any
corrupt lawyers, never been institutionalized, never even been on a horse,
and certainly don't carry a sword.  Moreover, it was an undreamlike dream:
no fantastic elements or objects morphing into other objects. It seemed less
like a dream than like a lost chapter or sub-pot to Gone with the Wind. Mighty
puzzling.

Source: 2018/05/cliche-of-the-decade

Title: Cliche of the Decade
Date: May 02, 2018

There's this woman of a certain age, good looking, usually blonde. Generally,
she's a detective but she could be reporter or a spy -- some sort of
investigator. She has an instinct for her work, an unusual insight or gift.
There's a murderer or villain out there and she's determined to get him; it's
personal with her and often she has to violate procedures in order to bring
this character to justice. She regularly confronts her superior, an older man
who is a stickler for the rules and wants to shut down the investigation.
As a last resort, she'll ask for 24 hours, or more rarely 48 hours, to
bring the villain in. And guess what -- it turns out that her instinct was
right all along and after a brief struggle, in which her life is in danger
(often there's an attempted assassination, usually by speeding vehicle), the
criminal/mastermind/murderer is handcuffed (British version) or shot (American
version).

Source: 2018/06/side-effects

Title: Side Effects
Date: June 24, 2018

LENFERA is generally safe to use, but possible side effects include stuffy
or runny nose, headaches, goosebumps, hiccups, cramps, sensitivity to bright
lights or glare, shingles, gingivitis, numbness of lips or upper palate, dry
scalp, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), acid reflux, dizziness, hair loss,
hearing loss, kidney stones, constipation and/or diarrhea, sudden loss or gain
of weight, inability to swallow, drooling, desiccation, macular degeneration,
bunions, uncontrollable twitching or muscle spasms, rectal itch, toenail fungus,
nausea, abdominal pain, difficulty with breathing, edema, fistula, halitosis,
absence of libido, tachycardia, swelling in knees or other joints, scabiosa,
bots, flatulence, loss of insight, roseola, Osceola, bloat, priapism, Purim,
bowel obstructions, failure to thrive, scoliosis, creeping phlox, aggression,
acne, increased facial or body hair, world-weariness, dyspepsia, rash,
fatigue, agoraphobia, lycanthropy, fever, tremors, blurred vision or sudden
blindness, frostbite, ringworm, procrastination, irritability, hot flashes,
mange, barnacles, pellagra, night sweats, bladderwort, paranoia, clumsiness,
thrush, zeugma, migraine, feelings of humiliation, heart arrest, tuatara,
memory loss, white nose, rapture, paralysis, stage fright, bioluminescence,
scurvy, hallucinations, chancre, catarrh, pink eye, red eye, rabies, insomnia,
nightmares, spontaneous combustion, Coggins, blurring of gender identity,
wasting disease, aphasia, blackouts, suicidal ideation, nosebleeds, woe,
catatonia, gangrene, acute pain, multiple organ failure, death.

If symptoms persist, consult your physician.

LENFERA has been approved by the FDA.

Source: 2018/07/mr-mitchell

Title: Mr. Mitchell
Date: July 12, 2018

I don't know why, but after 66 years I found myself thinking about my first
English teacher at EHHS, Mr. Stephen Mitchell . Here's what I can recall. Mr.
Mitchell was a lazy guy. I remember that on many a day he would give us busy
work assignments, take up his New York Times, rest his feet in the lower drawer
of his desk, and read, while the class occupied itself doing who knows what. 
In retrospect, Mr. Mitchell was probably a classic burnt-out case.  Perhaps he
had been young and enthusiastic at one time, but in 1952, he needed desperately
to retire.

I remember also that in his class we read "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner." 
His instructional technique: he taught us some vocabulary, such as
"onomatopoeia" and "personification." Then one student after another was asked
to take a stanza and search it for examples of onomatopoeia or personification
or perhaps metaphor and also to identify iambic tetrameter or iambic trimeter.

Of the romance of the Rime, we knew nothing and learned nothing.

All the while, Mr. Mitchell's feet never left the drawer.

In retrospect, I wonder whether he might not have been a WW2 veteran, not quite
recovered from the trauma.

Source: 2018/09/year-of-the-rooster

Title: Year of the Rooster
Date: September 10, 2018

The rooster came to our attention about a month ago. We heard him before we saw
him. He was living at the edge of the forest, about one hundred yards from the
house. After a few days he became bolder and we were able to catch a glimpse now
and then. He's a Barred Rock, fully mature, with a bright red comb and superior
wattles, but with woeful tail feathers. We don't know from where he came. We
asked around but none of the neighbors is missing a rooster. We guessed: he's
an escapee, or, perhaps his owner became tired of him and kicked him out of the
truck, or (my favorite theory) he was in a rooster fight, lost his tail feathers
and retired to the woods in shame. But in fact, we have no idea how he came to
settle on our property.

Little by little he started to become more comfortable with us. He would spend
his day in the flower garden, furtively eating insects. He was especially fond
of earwigs. A good occupation, I thought. No harm except to the bugs. Eventually
he came to tolerate our presence. He would sit a few yards away, studying me
while I weeded. He gained our respect, because he managed to survive even though
the forest is filled with foxes and fisher cats and weasels and coyotes and
the air is patrolled by hawks. He liked to visit the donkeys and peck around
their manure piles.  When he started to roost not in the forest but in the
blueberry bushes close to the house I became concerned -- this may be more of a
rooster guest than I need. And then he took up the habit of cock-a-doodle-do-ing
at dawn just outside our bedroom window. And during afternoon nap time. And
familiarizing himself with the vegetable garden, where he snacks on cucumbers.
(He loves cucumbers.) He became ever more bold -- a few days ago he was just
outside the kitchen, pecking on the glass door, hoping, I imagine, to be let
inside. And when I didn't let him in, he left a large retaliatory splash of
rooster dropping right at the doorway.

We looked out of the small north window of our bedroom and there he was perched
on the railing, peering in. A peeping-Tom rooster. (Did he catch an eyeful!!)

One day a near neighbor telephoned: "Your rooster is here."  "He's not my
rooster."

And then he disappeared. For the first time in a month, there was no crowing at
dawn.  OK, we thought, some predator got him. One of these days, we'll stumble
upon a bunch of black and white feathers in the forest.

But then a friend who lives on Ira's Pinnacle told us that he had seen a pair of
chickens on Hackett Hill Road about a half a mile up the road. He couldn't be
sure, but he figured it must be "your" rooster and a hen.

So that's where he's been!! He's a gallinaceous gallant gallivanting with the
local ladies. I thought, good for him; I don't have to concern myself with him
any longer. He'll go feral and start a family. He must not know about Vermont
winters.

But not so. This morning he was back, solitary, crowing vigorously outside my
window. His romance, if it were a romance, didn't work out. I can't imagine why
because he's become quite a handsome bird. He personable, friendly and he's
grown an an impressive new set of tail feathers. He's plump and shiny; his walk,
once furtive, has become a decisive strut. There he is now, cock-a-doodling his
head off in the patch of cucumbers.

Source: 2018/09/choice-euphemism

Title: A Choice Euphemism
Date: September 29, 2018

Victorian novelists had a hard time describing bodies, especially female bodies.
Their usual practice was to sidestep such subjects entirely though the more
daring of them might resort to suggestion or innuendo.

Here's an instance in which Thomas Hardy ties himself into comical  knots
trying to tell his audience that although Tess Derbyfield (in Tess of the
D'Urbervilles, 1891) is very young and almost childish she has already developed
a large bosom: "She had an attribute which amounted to a disadvantage just now;
and it was this that caused Alec d'Urberville's eyes to rivet themselves upon
her. It was a luxuriance of aspect, a fullness of growth, which made her appear
more of a woman than she really was. She had inherited the feature from her
mother without the quality it denoted. It had troubled her mind occasionally,
till her companions had said that it was a fault which time would cure."  So
very elliptical. It's distressing that frank-minded Thomas Hardy had to resort
to such circumlocutions.

A later novelist might simply have noted that she was physically mature and that
her emotions would eventually catch up but for now she was vulnerable.

Back in Brooklyn we might have said, "Though she's only a kid, he has a pair of
gazongas on her like you wouldn't believe and they're going to get her into a
whole lot of trouble"

Source: 2018/10/for-my-grandchildren-anne-goss

Title: For My Grandchildren: Anne Goss
Date: October 09, 2018

Dear T, O, E, L, L, C, A:  This is about your great-grandmother, Anne Goss.
She was born Hannah Sarah Krull in 1912 in New Jersey, but I've forgotten which
city, although I know that as a young person she lived in Bayonne, Hackensack
and Paterson. Her parents, David and Katherine Meltzer Krull, were recent
immigrants from eastern Europe. She was the oldest of five siblings: Anne, Jacob
(Jack), Hyman, Freda, and Max (Mendy). Her father installed metal ceilings,
her mother was what was then called a "practical" (i.e. unlicensed) nurse.
The family was not wealthy. The five children shared two beds, boys in one,
girls in the other, sleeping crosswise. Anne had a bout of polio at sixteen
months which left her with a permanent limp and weakness in the left side of
her body. Because of the effects of the illness, she endured an unusually
difficult childhood -- marked by a series of surgeries on her leg which may or
may not have helped. But she was quick-witted and talented, learning to play
violin and viola and graduating as high school valedictorian. About the Jewish
religion, important to her parents, she told me, "I gave up that stuff when I
was thirteen." She was intent on a college education which her parents opposed
because the few dollars that she made as a dental assistant were crucial to
the family economy. She won a full scholarship to Barnard College but it's sad
to report that when she arrived on the first day of classes she discovered
that she had to pay for room and board, which her family could not afford. She
returned home but was admitted to Montclair State Teacher's College where she
majored in chemistry. In a world with more advantages he would have gone on
to medical school and become a distinguished physician, but such a career was
not in the cards. At Montclair she played string quartets and met your great
grandfather, Daniel Goss. There wasn't enough money to allow them to marry and
no one lived together before marriage in those days. Anne once told me that the
greatest mistake of her life was that she didn't go to bed with Dan until after
they married, which didn't happen until he was 26 and she was 24. I think those
premarital depression years must  have been hard and unsatisfying. And even
after they married, still not so good because Dan and Anne couldn't afford a
place of their own but shared an apartment with his parents (actually shared a
bedroom, with a curtain between the parents'  bed and theirs). Dan's parents
disapproved of Anne: "Why would you want to marry a cripple?" Eventually Dan was
hired as a teacher of mathematics at Paterson High School and then in 1946 moved
to Utica College in Utica, New York. Although Ann had been told that the polio
made it impossible for her to carry a child, she gave birth to three daughters
(Althea -- your grandmother --in 1939; Phyllis in 1942, and Paula in 1951).
She taught mathematics until she retired at the then-mandatory age of 65 but
continued with her tutoring business through her seventies. Meanwhile, she had
mastered the domestic arts: cooking, baking, sewing (she made all her daughters'
 clothes through their childhoods) and knitting. She was a hard-working woman,
often to be found knitting, reading a book, and watching TV at the same time.
Dan died in 1966 and so she spent many more years as widow than as a wife. Her
life was filled with pain (two dozen major surgeries) but she never complained.
She was independent, frugal, and adventurous. She was also strict, cool, not at
all affectionate, and humorless. Not exactly humorless -- she never laughed,
that I can remember, but sometimes she would respond to a joke by saying,
"That's funny."  She played bridge to win and not for fun and she liked a rough
game of Scrabble with her grandsons. She was easy to respect but difficult to
love.

She moved to Boulder at age 87 and lived to be 97, though much impaired. At her
90th birthday party, in 2002,  she was still functioning well but "looping."
 If she had died at 90 she would not have missed much. She was demented and
bedridden for the last few years of her life. The last coherent statement she
made to me, in her last month, was "I'm not afraid of this dying business."

A good memory: Anne spent most of her early life wearing a heavy metal brace on
her bad leg. But when she was in her early 90s, she acquired a brace made of a
light space-age material. I took her walking in the mountains. First time. She
was thrilled.

Here's another: she liked to help grade Althea's math exams and she liked to
talk calculus with her grandsons. I remember saying to them, "You have to
understand something. This is unusual. Your standard run-of-the-mill grandmother
does not understand calculus."

Source: 2018/10/blue-eyes

Title: A Cliffhanger
Date: October 16, 2018

I've been reading the novels of Thomas Hardy. Some of them are familiar old
friends, like Jude the Obscure and Return of the Native; some I've read so long
ago that they're new again (Mayor of Casterbridge, Far from the Madding Crowd);
 and then there are a few that I know I've never looked at before, such as The
Woodlanders, Under the Greenwood Tree, and, the one I just finished a half a
second ago, A Pair of Blue Eyes.

Blue Eyes is an early novel (1873), moderately autobiographical. In it, young
Stephen Smith is an apprentice architect of working class origins (as was Hardy)
who woos Elfrida Swancourt, a maiden of a higher station. He has a rival for
Elfrida's hand in a former teacher, elegant and prudish Henry Knight.

It's safe to say that this is a novel only for confirmed Hardy enthusiasts     .
There's little in it that Hardy doesn't do better later on                     .

On the other hand, Blue Eyes contains one rather wonderful piece of
melodramatic excess. Elfrida and Knight go hiking on a dangerous cliff and
Knight slips and gets himself into an awkward position, hanging on six hundred
and fifty feet above the ocean. His foot "was propped by a bracket of quartz
rock, balanced on the edge of the precipice." She's clinging to him and they're
both stuck. Knight is ever the gentleman. "Clamber up my body till your feet
are on my shoulders: when you are there you will, I think, be able to climb
on to level ground." "What will you do?" asks Elfrida. Knight answers that he
will wait "whilst you run for assistance." But just their bad luck, there's no
one around. And so the chapter comes to a cliffhanging close (the novel was
originally published in serial form in Tinsley's Magazine).

Several minutes and several pages of reflection pass. At last, Elfrida
reappears, her form "singularly attenuated."  She carries a bundle of white
linen.

Jumping jiminy, holy moly, I say, -- the girl has removed her underclothes.

She tears the linen into thin strips, knots them, and forms "a perfect rope,
six or seven yards long." Knight 'clambers' up the rope, and is saved.  But
by surrendering her undergarments,  Elfrida has, as Hardy delicately puts
it, "absolutely nothing between her and the weather but her exterior robe or
costume."  Goodness gracious me, the poor dear is clad only in her "outer
bodice and skirt."  So, of course, to spare everyone further embarrassment, she
runs away as fast as her little legs will carry her.

Poor struggling Thomas Hardy has wrestled Mrs. Grundy to a draw.

Good thing Elfrida was clothed in sufficient unmentionables to construct a rope
seven yards long. Suppose Knight had been down there couple more yards and she
had to remove her "upper bodice."  Would she have done so, or would she have
let Knight plummet?` Hardy arranges it so that Elfrida can defy social norms,
but not to the point of actual nudity. Hardy is bold, but not too bold.

I suspect that if Hardy had his way and wasn't enchained by the humbug prudery
against which he struggled all his life, he would have stripped Elfrida to the
skin. How would Henry Knight have responded? Probably keeled over from the
shock.

What would Elizabeth Bennet have done in the same situation?  Removed her
underclothes to save her suitor?  Probably not. The most likely answer: Jane
Austen would never have let her go out walking near a cliff with a gentleman.

Source: 2018/10/baseball-1958-2018

Title: Baseball 1958-2018
Date: October 29, 2018

1958:  First batter of the game is Smith. He's batting .278. First pitch is a
ball. Smith is 5'9", 155 pounds. Married, two children, makes his winter home in
Fort Smith, Arkansas. Sells tractors in the off-season. Good curve ball hitter.

2018:  First batter is Smith. He's batting .278. His slugging percentage is
.342. His OBP is .335. His OPS is .445. He hits .225 against right-handers and
.303 against left-handers. First pitch is a ball. On first pitches he's batting
.225. With a count of 2 and 0, he's batting .247. Second pitch is a ball. On two
strike pitches he's at .175. On fast balls in the upper right quadrant of the
strike zone, he's batting .345. On fast balls in the lower left quadrant he's
hitting .175. On two strike pitches, he strikes out 25% of the time and hits
fly balls 30% of the time. He bats .283 in his home park, .246 on the road. Day
games, .290, night games .225. His OPS in away night games against a left-handed
pitcher is .341. In this ballpark he's batting .283. He's batting only .125
against this pitcher, just two for sixteen lifetime, and one of the hits was
a double, but that was in a different ballpark and in a previous season. He's
batting .285 against fastballs, .276 against curves, .225 against four seamers,
.215 against split fingers, and .275 against change-ups. He sees an average of
4.3 pitches per at bat against right-handers and 5.1 against left-handers. He
swings and misses 38% of the time. Here's the next pitch; it's a strike. When he
connects against a left-handed split finger fastball in the lower left quadrant
the ball comes of his bat at an average velocity of 85 miles per hour to left
field, 87 to center field, and 76 to right field. His average launch angle
is 18 degrees. With men on base, he's hitting .285. With runners in scoring
position, .290; his launch angle to right field against right-handed split
finger fastballs in the lower left quadrant rises to 25 degrees, but only on
his first at bat in a game. Afterwards, it declines to 17 degrees. But that's
in April and May, on weekends. In August and September, under the lights, his
launch angle is 20 degrees against change-ups from right-handers who throw into
the upper right quadrant when there's a man on second or third and fewer than
two outs. There's ball four.

Here comes the manager out to the mound. That's all for this pitcher. We'll be
back in a moment.

Source: 2018/11/katie-elder

Title: A Truly Awful Western
Date: November 01, 2018

The Sons of Katie Elder (1965) -- another film so awful that it's utterly,
undeniably fascinating. It's packaged as a western, but underneath the arid
mountainous scenery and the garish Technicolor, it's a film noir.  What's it
about?  Well, a gang of crooks have been muscling in on the Elder ranch. Not
an unusual circumstance, but in this case the heart of the matter, it seems, is
that the four sons of frequently praised Katie Elder, proprietor of the ranch,
have neglected their mother. They should have visited more often, or written,
or at least called. The brothers are, in birth order, swaggering John Wayne,
a gunman; sniggering Dean Martin, a gambler; colorless bland Earl Holliman, a
failed businessman, and sophomoric Michael Anderson, whom the older brothers
want to send to college, but whom they should rather send to high school to
fulfill the prerequisites for Acting 101. It's all a mighty predictable -- a
string of cliches -- and, just as expected, after the climactic gunfight the
Elders get their land back from cheating Morgan Hastings and his gang of no-
goodniks. The dialogue throughout is embarrassingly wooden; no, not wooden,
harder than that, ceramic; no, not ceramic, titanium.

I blame it all on Henry Hathaway, the director, who had some good westerns and
also a series of films noirs (The House on 92nd Street, The Dark Corner, Kiss of
Death, Call Northside 777) to his credit. How could he have perpetrated this
film? And someone, I don't know who, has to take responsibility for the ugliest,
unfunniest, uncomic bit of grotesque "comic relief" ever perpetrated, in which
Dean Martin auctions off his make-believe glass eye to a passel of local yokels.
But I also think that some of the blame attaches to the producer, Hal Wallis.
This is a film utterly without a female presence except for Martha Hyer,  who
wanders into a couple of scenes without point or purpose. I couldn't figure out
what the heck she was doing in the film until I read that she was married at the
time to Wallis and that her career was on the fritz. I'm positive that Wallis
told the screen writer, "Put in something  for Martha."  Well, he did, but
it just made the whole mess a little messier, and if possible, a little less
coherent.

The Sons of Katie Elder stoked my indignation. What a waste of resources!

But hey, there's a good three minute scene of a hundred or more horses being
herded by the brothers, and there's George Kennedy as a gunslinger and Dennis
Hopper as a neurotic youngster who gets killed  by his own father. It's
something, but, sorry, not enough to dilute the indignation.

Addendum November 16.  I've just watched another western, Big Jake (1971), in
which John Wayne parodies an earlier John Wayne. Just as awful as Katie Elder.
Maybe less intelligible. You can infer a lot from the poster.

Source: 2018/11/nomenclature

Title: Nomenclature
Date: November 04, 2018

If a widow and a widower form a relationship when they're both in their
seventies, what is the proper and appropriate name for their relationship?

Legally, they're married, because here in the state of Colorado, if you live
together and represent yourself as married, you're married, even if you haven't
sought governmental sanction. Yet "husband" and "wife" don't come easily to
the lips. They seem too doggone official. And they also seem like words out
of an earlier era, especially "wife," which carries irrelevant overtones of a
dominant-submissive relationship. "Just a housewife."

But "companion" is only slightly better. To my ear, it smacks of "faithful
companion Tonto." "Partner" is even worse; are we associates in a law firm?

"Girlfriend" and "boyfriend" are clearly ludicrous and inappropriate to persons
of mature years. Such words lack seriousness and heft; they trivialize a
weighty relationship. So, similarly, does the naked "friend," which in this
context is colorless, neutral. "Ladyfriend" is a bit more serious. "Gentleman
caller" was last said without irony in Peoria sometime in the middle of the
nineteenth century. "Mistress" suggests that the friendship is merely sexual;
its counterpart, "gigolo," is even more specific, and seedy to boot. "Lover" is
also one-dimensional.

"Old lady" and "old man" are outmoded hippieisms. So is "significant other    ."
Other archaisms: "main squeeze," "stud," "pal," "steady lay," "fancy man      ."
 "Love-slave                                                                 ."

"Spouse"? No, too dry, too legalistic. "Consort"?  Disrespectful. "Odalisque"?
"Handmaiden." Sexist. "Concubine?"

It's fascinating that we've had more trouble with nomenclature than with living,
eating, working, and sleeping together.

Source: 2018/11/garum-vs-ketchup

Title: Garum vs. Ketchup
Date: November 11, 2018

The universal condiment in the ancient world, a staple of Roman, Greek and
Byzantine cuisines, was garum. Garum was manufactured in enormous quantities
and shipped in special amphorae all over the civilized, colonized universe. What
is garum? It's a fishy sauce that any sensible modern apple-pie-loving American
would avoid at all costs. Trust me, you would not want to slaver your bacon
cheeseburger with garum.

To make garum, the innards -- the guts -- of fish (whitebait, anchovies,
mackerel, tuna, etc.) were stacked between layers of salt and herbs and left in
the sun for several months. Honest to Pete!! The result, which must have been
malodorous and horrid, was then strained and bottled, or rather, poured into
amphorae for transport.

Don't believe me? Here's a direct quotation from a 10th century Byzantine
manual: "the intestines of fish are thrown into a vessel and are salted; and
small fish especially atherinae, or maenae or lycostomi are seasoned in the sun,
and frequently turned; and when they have been seasoned in the heat, the garum
is thus taken from them. A small basket of close texture is laid in the vessel
filled with the small fish already mentioned, and the garum will flow into the
basket." Sounds dreadful, you must admit. And I don't even know, and I don't
know that anyone knows, exactly what sort of monsters of the deep are designated
by the words atherinae and lycostomi.

Here's a picture of a ruined garum factory in Baelo Claudia in Spain. The
remains of such factories can be found all over the Mediterranean world. I
myself have toured one near Pompeii. Garum factories were set as far as possible
from centers of population because they, er, stunk.

Source: 2018/11/ditmasand18th

Title: East 9 Street Between Ditmas and 18th, 1939 -1955
Date: November 16, 2018

Beginning at the northwest corner and preceding south -- in the first brick
house, a family of notably obese immigrant Syrian women who spoke no English;
there were no children that I know of and no interactions with other neighbors.
The house itself was not unusual but it was fronted by a wrought iron fence and
a row of ancient stubbed catalpas which we called "umbrella trees." Next was
the house belonging to Dr. Jerry Yurkovsky, our M.D. In retrospect, he was a
kind man but a badly-trained, out-of-touch physician. He was also an immigrant
-- from Poland, I believe. My father, who rarely spoke badly of anyone, thought
that he was a decent sort but that Mrs. Yurkovsky was "a real pill." I remember
only her iridescent dyed red hair. Then came the Lampsons, Hubert and Dorothy.
He was never seen in daylight but was rumored to own a "yacht"; she was the
neighborhood grouch, known to slice in half any errant pink "spaldeens" that
that might be punched (kids played "punchball" in the street) over her tall
privet hedge and into her front yard. While I never questioned this neighborhood
orthodoxy, I never saw a sliced spaldeen either. Then came the large Victorian
house belonging until about 1950 to the Heidtmanns and then to another family
whose name I can't remember but who had an impaired daughter who screamed and
screamed at maximum volume at all hours day and night. Next came our immediate
neighbors on the south, Mr. and Mrs. Pynn, who lived in a small old wood-
shingled structure.The Pynns (did they have given names?) were extremely old,
in their 90s I would guess. He was a retired Cornish seaman, believe it or not;
she cultivated colorful gladioli in her small backyard garden. Their upstairs
tenants were the Rhodins, Thor and Pearl. He was a tall gaunt ancient austere
Norwegian whose only known activity was writing letters to local newspapers; she
was almost as tall but Jewish and "went to business." They had three children
but they were out of the house and too old for me to know them: Thor, jr, Yammie
(Hjalmar), and Margeret. Thor was a physicist at Cornell rumored to have worked
on the "bomb." I have written about the Rhodins elsewhere. Then came our house,
a three-story 1912 Victorian of which our family of five occupied the top two
floors. The first floor tenants were the Burnets (formerly Bernsteins), Albert
and Bessie. He was musician who had retreated to accountancy. There were two
sons, the older, Leonard, was troubled, and I now realize, probably gay; he
played the sax; the younger son, Henry, had a cleft palate, later corrected by
surgery, I believe, and banged on his drums incessantly. To our north were the
Carps, who owned a brickyard or building supply business somewhere not in the
neighborhood. They were a gloomy Dickensian family. Both of the daughters were
nuns who came visiting once a year in their long black robes; the son, hang-dog
Eddie, had the demeanor of a jaded funeral attendant. The Carps first act on
moving into the house was to erect a tall forbidding chain link fence around the
perimeter of their property which annoyed my father no end. Proceeding south,
the next house was occupied by the Spollens, an immigrant Irish family who
seemed to produce a new child every year. My memory is hazy about the south end
of the street, under grand old elms until they fell victim to the Dutch blight,
except that in one of the houses dwelt two tired bony sisters, perhaps twins,
who every Sunday, trudged down 9th Street and past 18th Avenue to one of our
neighborhood's numerous under-attended Protestant churches. They had a splendid
garden of hollyhocks. Also at that end of the street lived, Mr. Mennino, who
shared his personal variety of cucumbers with my father. At the very end of the
block lived the dog-faced man..

On the other side of the street was an Italian family named Cocito, pronounced
American'ly, ko-see-to. When Junior Cocito (perhaps he had a name, but everyone
called him Junior) grew up and married, he bought the house next door to his
father's. Then next, coming closer to us, were the Cunninghams. Mr. Cunningham
was a large imposing firefighter; there was at least one daughter and two sons,
Jimmy and Billy. Billy was our only celebrity; he became rich and famous as
the "Kangaroo Kid"; he also played first base on my younger brother's baseball
team. After the Cunninghams was another house of semi-mystery, occupied by
an unfriendly family whose last name was Harris. I believe my mother told me
that Mr. Harris was a school principal. There was a shapely daughter a year or
so older than I whom I admired from a distance. She (Betty) married at 16 or
17 ("shotgun," I was told), and disappeared -- as did the family. Then came
the Burkes, directly across the street from us. There were two sons, Charley,
a genuine dolt and high school dropout who became an armed guard for Wells
Fargo, and lanky John, who was studying for the priesthood. There was also an
uncle or cousin who lived with them and who spent every weekend waxing and
noisily buffing his big new DeSoto. Then came the house occupied by Mr. and Mrs.
Petranto along with their ancient father who spent all day every day watching
the traffic from the oversize glider on the porch. There was an older daughter,
Madeleine, whom I didn't know, and a son, Frankie, a bachelor, a contemporary
of my older brother Eugene, who later found work in the U.S. post office and
who, when I investigated a few years ago, still -- eighty years later -- lived
in his childhood home. Upstairs from the Petrantos dwelt the Meinekes, Charlie
and Tessie. He was a butcher; she was "at home." There was a rather sad ungainly
but harmless daughter just my age, Charlotte, who dropped out of school early.
I hope she a good life but I wonder. Next northward was another mystery house,
probably a rental; for a year it was occupied by the Tebbets family. There was
an attractive mid-twenties daughter whom my older brother and his peers admired
no end, and a son, Lee, whom twenty years later I encountered in Vermont where
he gave me an envelope of blue corn seeds (which I never planted). And then
came the Constantino household. The father was a shoemaker, I believe. There
were three children, Frankie, a terrific athlete; Regina, a beauty, and Carly,
who dyed his hair henna and moved to Greenwich Village. There were two or three
more houses at that end of the street, but I'm vague about them. Sorry, don't
remember; too far away. The name Ortner comes to mind. Mystery houses.

Even though I lived on the street for my entire childhood and until I left for
college, I never entered a single house, nor did any of the neighbors ever enter
ours. It wasn't that kind of neighborhood. Or perhaps we weren't that sort of
people.

Source: 2018/11/amnesiahighwall

Title: Amnesia on Film:  High Wall (1947)
Date: November 20, 2018

In High Wall (1947), an extremely noir-y noir, Stephen Kenet, played by an
unusually glamorless Robert Taylor, suffers from a fully credible traumatic
amnesia. Did he, or did he not kill his wife. He can't remember.

So far so good. Happens all the time in such films.

But he's cured of his affliction in a most unlikely, most unscientific  manner.
He's injected with "truth serum" --  sodium pentathol -- and what was once lost
is found. Such easy recovery of memory could ruin dozens of amnesia movies. 
Good thing the treatment never caught on.

The gimmick spoils an otherwise grainy, hard-edged film.

Here's Kenet (Taylor), and Ann Lorrison, played by Audrey Totter. They're good
as patient and doctor, but unpersuasive when they emerge as lovers in the last
scene.

Source: 2018/11/cousins

Title: Cousins
Date: November 21, 2018

Hey there, internet pilgrims, searchers, wanderers who might be googling their
own name or a relative's.  All of the following people are cousins of each
other, cousins of mine. If  you find yourself here, identify yourself on the
comments page, and I'll tell you how I think you are related. Hint: you're all
descended from Lebe Hessel (d.1910) and Tsina Voloshen (b.1854).

Talia Soglin, Oliver Soglin, Ella Pearlman-Chang, Lola Pearlman-Chang, Luke
Pearlman, Caleb Pearlman, Asher Pearlman, Hannah Kaplan, Josiah Kaplan, Leslie
Pearlman, Matthew Pearlman, Nancy Groce, Nora Groce, Susan Groce, Paul Pearlman,
Ruth Pearlman, Owen Pearlman, Clara Pearlman, Karen Hessel, Dana Hessel,
Alexander McCarthy-Hessel, Jane McCarthy Hessel, Deborah Hessel, Haley Roher,
Jenny Roher,  Michael Hessel, Victoria Hessel, Mark Hessel, Andrea Hessel,
Laurie Pearlstein, Jason Schoolsky, Rebecca Schoolsky, Allyson Schoolsky, Barry
Pearlstein, Mitchell Pearlstein, Hunter Pearlstein, Remi Pearlstein, Holly
Cooper, Alec Cooper, Elizabeth Cohen, Mateo Davis, Connor Davis, Christopher
Cohen, Jonathan Cohen, David Cohen, David Markson, Aubrey Peluso, Samuel
Markson, Zachary Markson, Nicholas Markson, Madeleine Markson, Wendy Markson,
Charlotte Riley, Joelle Riley, Zoe Riley, Samuel Riley, Steven Gross, Ellen
Gross, Edward Cohen, Terry Cohen, Joseph Cohen, Charles Cohen, Mahala Cohen,
Judith Cimochowski, Alexander Cimochowski, Erica Cimochowski, Alexander
Cimochowski, Lawrence Baizer, Judith Baizer, Sarah Baizer, Tessa Baizer, Barbara
Pearlman, Rachel Wells, Andrew Wells, Steven Pearlman, Samuel Pearlman, Maya
Terry, Nathaniel Pearlman, Benjamin Hessel Pearlman, Eve Pearlman, Nicholas
Cohen, Mollie Liliana Sand, Adaline Sand, Jay Sand, Marc Sand, Daniel Cohen,
Jonathan Cohen, Solomon Cohen, Emmanuelle Cohen, Abigail Cohen, Ella Cohen,
Phoebe Cohen, Hannah Cohen, Ayanna Gould, Aiden Gould, Cole Pearlman, Reese
Pearlman.

There will be many errors and many omissions here.  Tell me.

Source: 2018/11/nottinghillhardy

Title: Notting Hill (1990), Two on a Tower (1882)
Date: November 23, 2018

We watched Notting Hill, a cute 1999 "rom-com" or "date movie" with cute couple
Hugh Grant and Julia Roberts. (It's hard to believe that the film is almost
twenty years old. It's so slight and fluffy that I can't remember whether or
not I saw it last millennium, but frankly, it wouldn't make much difference one
way or the other.)  In Notting HIll, Julia Roberts plays a pricey celebrity
actress ($15,000,000 a film) who happens to wander into Hugh Grant's tiny
bookstore and -- a few cute scenes later -- into his tiny Notting Hill bedroom.
It's a slight, unconvincing fairy-tale of a film and I'm giving away no secrets
when I say that the cute apparently- mismatched couple not only overcome all
psychological obstacles and class anxieties in order to marry but that also, in
the cute coda scene, when she's lying in his lap on a bench in the park, she's
well along in her pregnancy. Ah love! Ah romance! Ah idealized domesticity! Ah
cuteness!

Cynic that I am, I'm curious whether she's crammed herself into his narrow
digs (and displaced his second-banana roommate) or whether she's purchased the
biggest finest mansion in the upscale Notting Hill neighborhood and moved the
new husband into it. And closed down the bookstore. The film is wise to sidestep
concerns of such dreary ordinariness.

Notting Hill is a rip-off and inversion of Pretty Woman (1990), in which Julia
Roberts was poor and Hugh Grant was Richard Gere, a mega-billionaire. Notting
Hill might just as easily have been called Pretty Man -- it's that close a
parallel. Only without the shopping.

And Notting Hill, though upscale, is no Rodeo Drive. It's a neighborhood that
has gone through a number of transformations. Once famous for its piggeries, by
the middle of the 19th century, it was on the way up. In 1862, when Thomas Hardy
left Dorchester and his Wessex homeland to apprentice himself as an architect,
he took up residence in Notting HIll's recently constructed Westbourne Park
Villas. And there in Notting Hill he wrote his first novel, never published and
now lost, called with the remarkably appropriate Hugh-and-Julia title of The
Poor Man and the Lady.

Lower class boy and upper class girl was a perennial theme in Hardy's novels. An
obsession, in fact. By coincidence, I'd just finished reading -- on the same day
as I watched Notting Hill -- one of Hardy's most thorough explorations of the
poor-rich theme -- his novel Two on a Tower (1882).

No idyllic pregnancy in the park in the Hardy universe.

In Two on a Tower, Lady Constantine falls in love with Swithin St. Cleeve, an
impoverished amateur astronomer, but Hardy strews their path with one obstacle
after another. For the Lady, a wastrel husband who is missing in deep dark
Africa, and who may or not be dead; an inadvertent pregnancy; a duped second
husband, this time a clergyman; for St. Cleeve, a badly-needed inheritance that
can only be claimed if he remains single, and an extended exile. For both of
them, misunderstandings, accidental damaging eavesdroppings, important letters
gone astray, etc. And finally, when it appears possible that the poor boy and
lady might find solace together, a sudden inexplicable spontaneous death.

Good thing that Thomas Hardy didn't write Notting Hill. Trust me, there would
have been no happy ending. Perhaps Hugh would been disfigured in the fire that
destroyed his bookstore and his livelihood, and Julia, repulsed, would have
returned to her abusive alcoholic boyfriend. But very likely something even more
arbitrary and cruel.

Source: 2018/11/canyonpassage

Title: Canyon Passage (1946)
Date: November 24, 2018

In our tour of classic western movies, we watched Canyon Passage (1946),
directed by Jacques Tourneur, who is famous for the noir masterpiece Out of the
Past (1947). Canyon Passage is a good substantial film and it's got everything a
frontier drama should have: a cabin raising, a saloon in which a poker game is
perpetually in progress, gold mines, muddy streets, Indians (unsympathetically
depicted as mere murderous savages), gun fights, bar brawls, lovely landscapes,
and Andy Devine.

At its emotional heart is a mighty curious three-way relationship between Dana
Andrews as Logan Stuart, an upstanding entrepreneur; Brian Donlevy as George
Camrose, a banker/gambler, and Susan Hayward as Susan Hayward. Hayward is
engaged to George but attracted to Logan. She doesn't seem to know what is made
obvious to us, that George is a compulsive gambler, a wastrel, an embezzler,
a serious flirt, and eventually a murderer. Why Hayward, or Lucy as she's
sometimes called, doesn't see him for what he is puzzles us. It's an even
greater mystery that Logan Stuart, who knows George's faults, remains loyal --
even, at one point, risking his life and imperiling his reputation to break his
friend out of prison.

The oddest scene is one in which George gives his fiancee Lucy a tepid kiss.
He turns to Logan and says, "Can you do better?" Logan takes the challenge
and kisses his friend's fiancee; he wins -- she clearly responds less to her
intended than to his friend. What are we to make of this?  It seems borderline
pervy. Is there a suggestion that the men are closer, more "friendly"  than the
conventions of the western film ordinarily allow?  Or are Logan and George more
than just good ol'  loyal buddies?

After George is killed, Logan and Lucy wind up together, but more for
convenience than passion, or so it seems to suspicious ol' me.

Source: 2018/12/mymitt

Title: My Mitt
Date: December 02, 2018

My most valuable possession, lifetime, was my baseball mitt. A fielder's glove,
not a catcher's or first baseman's. It was, I think, a Rawlings model, and it
was inscribed with the name "Monte Pearson." (Pearson had been a pitcher for the
Cleveland Indians.)  I remember many hours spent oiling it. I guarantee that it
was well cared for.

In the P. S. 217 neighborhood, to possess one's own baseball glove was a marker
of class. When we played, there were never enough gloves to go around, so when
our team came in to bat, those who had gloves would leave theirs on the field
for someone from the other team to use. Although I never articulated it at the
time, it felt downright prosperous to be a lender, not a borrower. I think a
good glove cost about $15.00 in those days, so it was no trivial expense.

When my brother Jonathan, who was three years younger than I, was presented with
his glove, he slept with it every night.  I recently asked him if he continued
to do so after he was married.  He says no, but....

I don't think that anyone who didn't grow up in the 40s and 50s in Brooklyn, in
the Jackie Robinson era, can appreciate the importance of baseball to us.

I've tried to think of another possession that ever meant as much to me -- a
particular book or an automobile, for instance -- but nothing compares. Not even
slightly.

Source: 2018/12/amnesia-on-film-crack-up-1946

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Crack-up (1946)
Date: December 04, 2018

Ho-hum. Another day, another amnesia movie.

Crack-up offers still another variant on this most malleable of diseases:
amnesia that is chemically-induced.

George Steele (played by too-old-for-the-part Pat O'Brien) presents a danger to
a doctor-thief played by reliable Ray Collins. To discredit  him, Steele is
kidnapped and injected with "narcosynthesis" which causes him lose his memory
and act erratically. Too many silly plot complications and a couple of murders
follow, but eventually a second injection brings Steele round.

I'm not aware of another case of chemically-induced amnesia in film, but I know
that there is such a thing in medicine. Propofol and scopolamine are frequently
mentioned and I believe that even the common sleeping pill, Ambien, may have
amnesiac properties. So there's some limited scientific underpinning for Crack-
up's apparently fantastic premise.

In noir, amnesia is as common as the common cold. In the 40s and 50s, a guy
couldn't walk down a louche shadowy city street or take a dame out dancing to
 a night spot without encountering half a dozen cases. It was a regular plague.

Source: 2018/12/billygraham1957

Title: Billy Graham and Me, 1957
Date: December 04, 2018

In 1957 (I was 18 and in my second year in college), the reverend doctor Billy
Graham led the largest revival meeting in history -- an average attendance,
in the old-old Madison Square Garden, of eighteen thousand people a night
for three months. What was his message?  It was half jingo, half Christian
fundamentalism. "Let us tell the world that Americans believe in God, that we
are morally and spiritually strong as well as militarily and economically.
Let us tell the world that we are united and ready to march under the banner
of Almighty God" -- not a sentiment that would have been dear to my heart. No
Almighty God in my upbringing or anywhere in my brain.

Graham was a fervent anti-Communist, but of a sort that left me baffled: "My own
theory about Communism," he proclaimed, "is that it is master-minded by Satan.
I think there is no other explanation for the tremendous gains of Communism
in which they seem to outwit us at every turn, unless they have supernatural
power and wisdom and intelligence given to them."  Let me try two non-Satanic
explanations for apparent Communist success: 1) "They" didn't outwit us;
 in fact, they were dumber than us, overplayed their hand, and collapsed.
2) European and American imperialism had left a mess in the "underdeveloped
countries" that was ripe for exploitation.

How was a secular partially-educated young fellow supposed to understand such a
paranoid, irrational  analysis of world politics?

With mockery, I'm afraid. Sometime in the middle of the summer of 1957, along
with a bunch of wise-ass PS 217 cronies, I took a break from my Sears, Roebuck
warehouse job and took the subway to 49th Street to take a gander and a listen
to the Crusade for Christ (it was free). What do I remember?  A chorus
(probably led by George Beverly Shea but I can't swear to it), bright lights, a
cheering, milling crowd. I remember that Billy spoke, but I have no recollection
of what he said, though the bronze gong of a voice resounded through the hall.
Did he tell us of the five ways that Americans could most effectively combat
Communism? By "old-fashioned Americanism" -- whatever that was, by "conservative
and evangelical Christianity," by prayer, by "spiritual revival," and by
"personal Christian experience." All five of which sound pretty much the same to
me. And remote from my experience or desires.

Needless to say, I wasn't his most sympathetic or susceptible auditor.

I wonder if he touched on another of his favorite topics that night: that "a
woman commits sin when she deliberately dresses in such a way as to entice a
man"; "that a wife "should keep herself attractive and give her husband a big
kiss when he comes home from the office instead of yelling at him from the
kitchen."

Except for the spectacle, it's all vague in my mind. I do remember, though, that
when leaving that Garden I accidentally and momentarily found myself on the line
of people who had made a "decision for Christ" and were heading to the podium.
That was scary. I beat a quick retreat.

I wonder how many other members of the audience were rubberneckers like me.

I'm reminded now of the great old gospel song by the Carter Family, "Something
Got a Hold of Me."  It's a parable that tells the story of a man who goes to a
revival meeting to scoff. "I says I'll go down, take a look at the crowd/  It's
just the weak-minded I feel."  But then there's a revelation: "They sing and
shout and they all clasp their hands/ And they all got down on their knees./
When the fire fell from heaven it fell upon me,/ And then I fell to the floor."
Because

Something's got a hold of me.

Yes, something's got a hold of me.

I have a spirit I'll never forget

That something's got a hold of me.Well, nothing got a hold of me. No fire from
heaven, no road to Damascus revelation. If anything, I was confirmed in my
scoffery and atheism.

What did I learn? Not much. At the most, only that if the people who inhabit
this country, my fellow Americans, are incomprehensible to me, then it is
equally likely that I am incomprehensible to them.

And frankly, the mysteries that I encountered in Madison Square Garden in 1957
are, sixty years later, still mysterious to this day. Perhaps even more so.

Source: 2018/12/539e9

Title: Where I Lived (I)
Date: December 10, 2018

From my birth in 1939 until I left for college in 1956, I lived at 539 East 9
Street in the Flatbush (now gentrified to "Kensington") section of Brooklyn.
539 was a three-story, three-family wood-frame Victorian, which my parents
had acquired in 1937 for $4500 -- a depression-era fire-sale price financed
by my generous "maiden aunt" Mollie. The house was larger and more splendid,
I believe, than my father's modest income would otherwise have justified. At
first we lived on the first floor and rented floors two and three. Much later,
substantially more prosperous, we rented the first floor apartment and lived
on the second and third floors in nine spacious rooms, only a couple of which
mattered to me.

Most mysterious was my parents'  bedroom, which was entirely off limits to me
and to my brothers Eugene and Jonathan. A forbidden zone. Absolutely taboo. I
remember that one time I played some sort of racing or hiding game with one of
my brothers and ventured into the room and -- horror of horrors  -- rumpled my
parents' neat bedspread (the bed was always carefully made). It was as if I had
robbed a bank or bitten Miss Bildersee, our formidable PS 217 principal. I was
severely rebuked and made to swear that I would never commit such an outrageous
transgression again. An overreaction by my parents, I knew even then.

Nevertheless, I used to sneak into the room when the parents were absent. In one
corner hung a picture of my deceased infant sister Susan. Placed on the floor
under the picture, was a child-size chair of wood and rush which was venerated
even more than the connubial bed. A shrine. I'm sure that the taboo against
entering the room was linked to the shrine. Yet to me, the parents' bedroom was
not so much holy as it was weird and strange.

After my mother died in 1978 my father moved downstairs, abandoning shrine, bed
and bedroom. When I visited as an adult, my wife and I would sometimes sleep in
what had formerly been the parents' bed. That was mighty creepy and inhibiting.

Equally important to me but much more pleasant was my father's small but
intensely cultivated backyard garden. He grew roses -- hybrid teas, mostly but
also a floriferous "Blaze" climber. An apple tree, not very prolific, a Bartlett
pear, and a peach tree that was damaged by the hurricane of 1946 and finished
off by borers. There was also a patch of perennial sweet peas, a weigela with
picotee  leaves, and a fragrant mock orange. But the garden was dominated by
Dad's  perfectly tended roses.

In 1948 I was allotted a square foot of space in which I planted a single
pumpkin seed. The plant transgressed its assigned borders --  which amused
me no end -- and the single pumpkin that it produced was prizeworthy huge. In
subsequent years, I was allowed room to plant and study the habits of old-
fashioned annuals: snapdragons, marigolds, zinnias. I saved their seeds over the
winter. I now grow those same plants in their modern, much-improved versions.
But I don't dare to try roses; that will always be Dad's domain.

I think my life would have been very different without the garden.

On the whole, 539 was very good to us. After my father died, it was torn down
and replaced with an undistinguished apartment house rented by families of
Hasids. My very secular father would have been appalled.

Here's a picture of 539 as it appeared in 1940.  The kid's toy in front of the
house probably belonged to my older brother.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-ii

Title: Where I Lived (II)
Date: December 12, 2018

Between 1956 and 1961, I lived in five different places in Ithaca, New York:
four bad, one good.

The first was a cinder-block dormitory room, less a home than a cell, which I
shared with a young guy from Virginia who was a not only a smoker but a classic
Southern bigot of a type that's pretty much extinct nowadays. No doubt he's
changed and matured, but our paths have not crossed these last sixty years.
We were both very young, but I was much too young. Childish, when I'm honest
with myself. The following year -- 1957-58 -- I lived in a basement apartment
in a building that was known locally as the "Indian Embassy" because the upper
three floors were all inhabited by men (no women, not a trace of them) from the
subcontinent. The odor of garam masala and turmeric, much more exotic then than
now, regularly drifted into my apartment. I remember that my kitchen, which I
rarely used, was unheated and that it was not unusual to find in midwinter a pot
or pan of water, left in the sink, frozen into a block of ice. If the city of
Ithaca had any zoning laws, and enforced them, the owner of my apartment, Miss
Emily, would have been exiled to Siberia. In my third year in Ithaca I lived in
still another beaten-down house on College Avenue. It was also unfit for adult
habitation but had a functioning kitchen -- it's there that I learned to cook
my own food. In my senior year, I lived in a real apartment -- four bedrooms,
three roommates, including one who has remained a lifelong friend. I should
have noticed, but I didn't, that the fourth floor of an ancient building made
entirely of wood, with no fire escape, was dangerous. It was a firetrap and
although I survived, the building didn't, and was demolished a few years after I
graduated -- and left the southern tier for good.

My favorite residence during the Ithaca years came during the summer of 1961,
when, fleeing graduate school in Cambridge and still attached to Ithaca, we (my
bride and I) sublet a small (very small house -- essentially a single room that
served as both living room and bedroom) -- at 148 Snyder Hill Road. It was my
first experience of living in "the country." There was a cow next door! When I
returned to Ithaca in 1992 for my daughter's graduation from Cornell, my house
had disappeared and the fields were filled with acres of rich suburban homes --
large lots, big lawns, clean, neat and prosperous.

Our 1961 house, though not more than a tumbledown cabin, gave us a good summer
and a good memory.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-iii

Title: Where I Lived (III)
Date: December 12, 2018

Some childhood summer residences.

1944: my mother had surgery (I was never informed what sort -- such things were
kept secret in those days -- but I suspect a hysterectomy) and I was sent to
live with my grandmother Sonia, who rented or owned a house near Monticello, New
York. It was a plain wood-shingled house and I believe that Sonia used it as
an informal hotel or b&b. I don't remember much at all except that she tied a
long string to a light bulb over my bed and instructed me to pull it if I needed
help during the night. Help? Though only 5, I considered myself quite self-
sufficient.

1945: my parents rented a summer home on Glen Lake in the Catskills. It was a
house without indoor plumbing. I have a vivid memory of the outhouse, which
frightened me because you could look into the hole and see your and your
parents' deposits. I remember with more pleasure the pump in the kitchen through
which we drew our water. Sometimes I was allowed to prime the pump by pouring
a glass of water down its mouth. In August, the war ended and people who owned
motor boats were zooming around the lake, shouting. I asked my father what was
going on and he said, "the war is over."

1947, 1948, 1949: the best part of my childhood. Three long idyllic summers on
Makamah Beach near Northport, N.Y. I have written about this elsewhere.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-iv

Title: Where I Lived (IV)
Date: December 13, 2018

378 Broadway in Cambridge, Massachusetts from 1960 to early in 1962. It was a two-family frame house in which the second floor had been turned into two apartments. We were in one of them, a bedroom, a living room with a kitchen and a detached bathroom down the hall. Perfectly fine for a newlywed graduate student. The newlywed neighbors, Adi and Rutty, are still friends; their daughter, Zerlina, born in April of 1961, was the first child I held in my arms (as an adult). But there was a conflict with the puritanical small-town Irish Catholic landlady because we had allowed a friend to stay in the apartment while we were away "and he brought a woman in." So we moved to a university-owned apartment house on Irving Street, between Cambridge and Kirkland, despite the fact that it raised our rent from $90 a month to $105. We bought a second or third or fourth hand bed for $25 and a rug for $10. It was a serviceable apartment that seemed like luxury after the decrepit Ithaca digs. We stayed until the summer of 1965 when we lit out for Manhattan.

Source: 2018/12/a

Title: Horrors of Hellenism
Date: December 17, 2018

I've been reading about the death of Alexander at the beginning of the
Hellenistic period. It's all new to me, and much of it is fascinating,
especially about cultural matters, but there's also page after page of
difficult-to-retain accounts of warfare and of particular battles. Here's an
example of the kind of material that takes up three-quarters or perhaps even 80%
of the book.

"The two armies faced each other quite conventionally, with the phalanx composed
mostly of Lysimachus' and Cassander's troops confronting Antigonus'  phalanx.
On their right, Seleucus and Lysimachus stationed a vast mass of Seleucus'
 light infantry; on the left was their heavy cavalry commanded by Seleucus'
son Antiochus.  Confronting Antiochus was Demetrius in command of Antigonus'
 heavy cavalry. As the battle commenced, Demetrius and his cavalry charged
Antiochus and drove the enemy cavalry off. Demetrius proceeded to commit the
worst blunder a cavalry leader can commit: he over-pursued, leaving the main
battle well behind, instead of turning to attack the enemy infantry from behind.
As soon as Demetrius had disappeared in the distance, Seleucus brought forward
four hundred war elephants and placed them as a screen between Demetrius and his
path back to the battle. Meanwhile Lysimachus' phalanx came to grips with that
of Antigonus, and Seleucus led his light cavalry in an outflanking maneuver to
attack Antigonus' infantry from behind...."  Etc.

Exactly what is at stake in this war? The historian (Richard Billows, Before and
After Alexander [New York, 2018]) leaves us rather in doubt. He puts no emphasis
on the usual economic or ideological issues; the struggle seems to be entirely
about personalities. Will the kingdom be ruled by Lysimachus or Demetrius, by
Antiochus or Antigonus?  It doesn't seem to matter, either to me or to the
historian.

But what of the soldiers?  Whether on one side or the other, they're likely to
be impaled by the dreaded Macedonian larissa, trampled by horses, or squished by
elephants. For what purpose?

I think that at one point in my life I might have been intrigued by these
dynastic struggles, but now, what I feel most strongly is sympathy for the
ordinary soldier and sorrow for the stupidity of my species.

Source: 2018/12/written-in-

Title: Written in 2009 and Republished Today, as Relevant Now as Then:  As Time Goes By
Date: December 18, 2018

Two nights ago [this would be October of 2009, of course], I watched the
Phillies trounce the Dodgers, 11-0. What a colossal drubbing! HDTV let me
appreciate Cliff Lee's southpaw masterpiece in exquisite detail. But for me
the most memorable moment of the evening wasn't Lee's artistry or 270-pound
Ryan Howard's mad-dash triple to right. Instead, it was the discovery that
the Phillies'  lanky, awkward-but-effective scraggly-bearded right fielder
Jayson Werth sports a noteworthy baseball pedigree. His grandfather was Ducky
Schofield, a good-field no-hit infielder from the 1950s -- from the days,
that is, of my golden youth. Holy jumping jiminy! I saw this young feller's
grandpappy play!

Youch!  More evidence, as if more were needed, of my long-in-the-toothedness.

Why should I be surprised?  I went to my first baseball game in 1946 (at Ebbets
Field -- Cardinals 3, Dodgers 1).  Before there was TV. I've been attending
to the game for 63 years. Close to three generations.  [Nine more years have
passed since I first wrote this;  so 72 years now.]

I've grown accustomed to father-son combos. Bobby and Barry; the Griffeys (who
once played together in the same outfield); Felipe and Moises; huge Cecil
Fielder and his even more enormous son, Prince; the Hundleys, the Stottlemyres,
and many, many others. Sometimes while I'm watching a game I lose track of time.
Eric Young, Jr. looks and runs so exactly like his father that it's easy to
fall into flashback mode. I remember a game in which Pedro Borbon came in to
relieve. Holy moly, I said to myself -- he's a right-handed pitcher. Why the
heck is he throwing with his left hand?  Then after a few seconds of complete
bafflement it came to me: Pedro Borbon, Jr. I had simply lost twenty-five years
-- a phenomenon to which your "mature" brain is occasionally and increasingly
prone.

Jayson Werth isn't even the sole grandson. Aaron Boone's father was the catcher
(and manager) Bob Boone and his grandfather was the Cleveland infielder Ray
Boone, whom I also saw play, but only on the TV. And then there's the Bell
family: grandsons David and Mike, father Buddy, and grandfather Gus, a big
hitter with Cincinnati during the Ducky Schofield years.

So here's the question. Will I hang around long enough to watch the great-
grandsons play? Is Jayson Werth fertile?  Does he have any kids?  Are there
any budding Boones or baby Bells waiting in the wings?

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-v

Title: Where I Lived (V)
Date: December 23, 2018

Source: 2018/12/broken-arrow-1

Title: Debra Paget Then and Now  -- Broken Arrow (1950)
Date: December 25, 2018

In 1951, when Broken Arrow hit the Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue, I
was just an ungrown twelve-year-old. I wasn't an assiduous movie-goer because
weekends were for basketball and softball, but when I did invest my 14 cents
in a matinee, it was for a Western  -- not for a soppy musical or scary crime
film. Last night, for the first time in 67 years, I watched Broken Arrow again.
I imagined that I would remember it clearly.

Hold on, let me be scrupulously honest here. I didn't pretend that I would
remember the entirety of the film, not even the plot. I knew only that
Sanseearah, the Indian Maiden "Morningstar" as portrayed by Debra Paget, was
incised into the deep fabric of my brain. She, Debra that is, might have been my
greatest crush or first true love. And why shouldn't she have been? Just direct
your admiring gaze to the still above. Miss Paget was young, lovely, exotic as
all get out, and yielding. I admit with chagrin that I didn't fully understand
what got me so het up about her in 1951, but het up I was.

But all is changed, now, almost three generations later. What was "hot" and
romantic then seems more than a little creepy now. Debra Paget (or DebraLee
Griffin, of Denver, Colorado) was only sixteen years old when the film was
shot. Sixteen! Moreover, she plays younger. In fact, the film devotes several
long scenes to Morningstar's  puberty rites -- so perhaps she's imagined to be
thirteen. (The head dress that she wears in the picture below as well as the
rest of the ceremony, was, I am sure, what is now called "fakelore.")

Look at her. The poor dear is barely out of childhood. Mr. Stewart (James
Stewart, her graying white mountain-man suitor) was forty-two years old, and
looks every bit of it. How can we, how did we, not notice the age difference?
Why is he attracted by a child?  I tried hard to suspend disbelief, but my
powers of suspension are not infinite. The film, I'm sorry to say, teeters into
unsavory child-molesting territory.

My pre-adolescent fascination with the film has now been altered, dampened and
dispatched.

It's a shame, too, because Broken Arrow was a self-consciously progressive
film in which the Apaches were figured not as brutal savages but as human
beings. It deserves high praise for its groundbreaking stance. The film was
written by the leftist Albert Maltz, of Brooklyn, New York, who was one of the
Hollywood Ten, and who, on the day I saw Broken Arrow for the first time, was
in jail serving a one-year sentence for refusing to cooperate with the runaway
House Un-American Activities Committee.

I therefore wish that the film hadn't been compromised by the March-October love
affair. And that Albert Maltz hadn't side-stepped the real difficulties of an
interracial marriage in the 1880s by allowing Dear Debra to be murdered.

And while I'm wishing, I wish also that the authorities at Twentieth-Century
Fox hadn't insisted that the two most important Apache roles be played not
by Apaches but by whites. Debra Paget is the one lead, while Cochise, the
Apache chief, was played in redface by Jeff Chandler, formerly Ira Grossel, a
graduate of Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn, New York. It's not as though
more appropriate actors weren't available. In fact, the character of Geronimo,
who has one brief speech, was played by an uncredited Jay Silverheels, an
accomplished actor of Cayuga and Mohawk heritage.

But would we, in 1951, have been able to empathize with real Apaches, genuine
Apaches, rather than with familiar faces in heavy makeup? Or would such Indians
have been, even for liberals, too "other," too foreign?

Source: 2018/12/the-precious-gift-of-atheism

Title: The Precious Gift of Atheism
Date: January 04, 2019

Although my parents were pure and perfect atheists, they did not advertise their
atheism or disparage the religions of others -- at least not in my hearing.
They were exactly the opposite of what is sometimes called "militant atheists."
To be militant would have been to give religion too much regard, too much
importance -- and they wouldn't have bothered. To the best of my recollection,
they were utterly indifferent. In our house, it was as if theology and worship
had never been invented, practiced, or pondered. While my parents didn't enforce
or evangelize their views upon their children, their unconcern, their lack
of interest, was eloquence enough. Of course my brothers and I grew up to be
atheists, and have remained so. Peaceful and positive atheists.

My parents were both readers. Every Tuesday my mother trundled over to the
McDonald Avenue branch of the Brooklyn Public Library and trucked home a
shopping basket full of books. There were volumes of all kinds -- mostly fiction
and mysteries for my mother and, for my curiosity-driven father, politics, law,
science, history, art, and of course, gardening. But I never saw a book on
religion. Not a one. In their bookshelves at home, I remember only one volume
that might have touched on the subject. It was a collection of essays by the
Freethinker Robert Ingersoll.

I was young boy, perhaps 10 or 11, when I overheard some friend or acquaintance
of my mother say something to her about prayer, or putting faith in the lord,
or some such platitude. She waited politely until the person departed and
then turned to me and murmured, quietly, "Well, I suppose some people need a
crutch."  I think that's the sum of all I ever heard from her on the subject of
religion. One might think that the dismissive term "crutch" hinted at disdain
or superiority (they need crutches but we don't) but it was not so. My mother's
observation was made without prejudice or judgment.

Where other households might have worshiped or wondered or discussed, for us
there was absolutely nothing. Religious education?  None, not a drop. In our
home, there was no attendance at temple, mosque or tabernacle, no religious
ceremonies, and not even a Bible. I can remember my father and me dribbling
our basketball to the schoolyard to shoot some hoops. When we passed the local
orthodox synagogue, my father said, "Bingo.They play bingo in there." But he was
not condemning the religion. It was the gambling. He disapproved of gambling
(even Bingo) and the idea that a religious institution would allow gambling
every Tuesday night offended him deeply.

When I was a questioning adolescent, out of a spirit of curiosity and perhaps
rebellion, I liberated a bible from our local public library and secreted it
under my treasured collection of Mad magazines. While others of my age cohort
were squinting at smuggled Playboys or at The Amboy Dukes under the blankets by
flashlight, I was acquainting myself with the holy scriptures. In my ignorance,
I thought of the bible as a forbidden book, one which my parents would have
disapproved. But I was wrong. They wouldn't have noticed; they wouldn't have
cared. Looking back, I'm sure that they knew about my thirst for forbidden
knowledge and probably enjoyed a giggle at my expense. Many years later, when
my father was a widower, I gave him a copy of an annotated, edited Bible that I
used as a textbook in one of my literature courses. Did he disapprove?  Not at
all. He said, "It's interesting."  But of course he read it not as an inspired
text but as history and as fiction.

To have been raised in such a household was my good fortune. My atheism was an
unearned gift. I got it free, and I'm perpetually grateful. Many of my friends,
growing up in religious families, have struggled to achieve atheism -- often
with painful inner conflicts and anger and resentments. I admire them for the
strength to break free -- especially those that live with irreparable breaches
to the family. I endured no such struggle.

Philosophically speaking, it's been an easy life. There's a clarity about
atheism. It's based in reality, not (dare I say what my parents wouldn't!)
in wish and myth and superstition. Atheists, I think, are afforded a purer
appreciation of human achievement and a clearer, less conflicted understanding
of health, disease, and death. Reason and the evidence of the senses may not
always lead to perfect understanding, but they're the best tools that we have,
and we must cherish them.