

================================================================================Source: 2015/01/susan

Title: Amnesia on Film: Desperately Seeking Susan (1985)
Date: January 09, 2015

Desperately Seeking Susan offers a cartoon version of amnesia. Pow, Roberta
is knocked into a lamppost and doesn't know who she is. And then, a day
later, pow again, she is knocked to the ground, bumps her head, and her memory
returns intact. The film isn't interested in amnesia except as a plot device to
facilitate the doppelganger relationship between Roberta and Susan. Roberta is
a downtrodden cautious Fort Lee housewife; Susan is an anarchic adventuress.
In the course of the film, each woman tries on the other's identity. Without a
memory, but wearing Susan's clothes, Roberta "becomes" Susan, and Susan in turn
invades Roberta's home and tries on her clothes, her pool, and her husband. At
the end, Roberta has absorbed enough of Susan's pizzazz to leave her stifling
husband and Susan has changed enough so that she can enjoy a moment with the
boyfriend who has been desperately seeking her. It's an easy-to-watch film.
Rosanna Arquette is lovely as a perpetual naif and Laurie Metcalf is superb as
Roberta's short-tempered know-it-all sister-in-law. And it has more than one
brilliant line of dialogue. "I thought you were dead."  "Naw, I was in New
Jersey."  And my favorite: "How do you use the bird?"  -- which you have to
have been there to understand and appreciate. An enjoyable film; unless you
approach it with the idea that it has anything to do with real-life loss of
memory.

Source: 2015/01/henotheism

Title: Henotheism
Date: January 18, 2015

As a born-and-bred third-generation atheist, I never made much of an effort to
understand theology, which is, I gather, the study of the nature and attributes
of god or gods. But no god, nothing to study. No problem. Theology will
always be for me "the subject without an object." And therefore when I read
Michael Coogan's The Ten Commandments  (Yale, 2014), I was surprised by own
ignorance. For example, I had taken it for granted that the Bible was a
document of monotheism. No god but god, Jahweh. And also  that the monotheism
of the ancient Hebrews was their gift to civilization (though why to believe in
one god was a better idea than to believe in a plethora of godlings will always
remain a mystery to me). But Coogan makes it clear that I've gotten it all
wrong. The commandment "you shall have no other gods before my face" distinctly
postulates the existence of "other gods."

These other gods appear in the Bible in a number of guises and particularly
as '"the host of heaven." Some were apparently worshipped even in the Temple
itself. It is reported in Kings that the reformer Josiah ordered "all the
vessels made for Baal, for Asherah, and for all the host of heaven" be
removed from the sacred precincts. The ancient Hebrews were therefore not
monotheists, but henotheists (a lovely word new to me), which Coogan defines as
"the recognition that while other gods may and do exist, only one is to be
worshipped" (14).

So it seems that what has been represented to naive ol' me as a case of moral
development, from polytheism to monotheism, is better understood as a kind of
religious nationalism or jingoism: our god is better than your god -- so let's
everyone pay him exclusive attention. Or perhaps, more vulgarly but just as
accurately, in the words of the spiritual leader Hank Williams, move over little
god, big god moving in -- have I quoted this exactly right? -- just as Jahweh
moved in on El Shaddai and the rest of the crowd. One of my friends says that
the essence of organized religion is "my prince of peace can beat up your prince
of peace."

Source: 2015/01/chimpanzee-alzheimer

Title: Why Don't Chimpanzees Suffer from Alzheimer's?
Date: January 19, 2015

Why Indeed?  And also, while we're considering the question, why don't
chimpanzees get atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, endometriosis,
myocardial infarction, falciparum malaria, HIV infection, or epithelial
cancers?  Chimpanzees are, after all, our closest living relatives. We
share a common ancestry and we only embarked on separate path some six or
seven million years ago --a blink of an eye in evolutionary terms. Why is
it that we human beings, so superior, as we like to think, in so many ways
from our cousins -- in our big brains and delicate hand manipulations,
for example -- are subject to an array of diseases to which our inferior
relations are immune. What's the deal?

Here's the current thinking on this important problem (which I draw from
Eugene E. Harris's informative and up-to-date monograph Ancestors in our
Genome [Oxford, 1914]). As I understand it, human beings went through a
sort of bottleneck sometime in our recent (say 200,000 years ago) history
and our effective breeding population was reduced to a mere 10,000 or so
souls. When a population becomes so small, random genetic drift dominates
over natural selection, and so moderately deleterious but not incapacitating
mutations can survive and even thrive. The defective genes that would
be weeded out in larger populations persist in our genome. Hence our many
inherited susceptibilities and disorders.

But that's not the end of the story.  Yesterday there was a report that the
Ashkenazim went through "a severe bottleneck" six or eight hundred years ago
which reduced its population to about 350 individuals. O my, what a boon to
genetic drift, what a recipe for genetic disaster or genetic success, or more
exactly, both success and failure simultaneously.

And so our talents, our deficits, our strengths and weakness, our brains and our
bodies, are determined by arbitrary aleatory long-ago events. No surprise,
really, but another event in the continuously unfolding revelation.

Source: 2015/02/amnesia-black-angel

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Black Angel (1946)
Date: February 07, 2015

Black Angel is a good, fast-paced Cornell Woolrich mystery and certainly
one of the noiriest of all noirs. It features lots of grimy black-and-white
photography of seedy hotels and bars, and a nebbishy weakling who is falsely
accused of murder and who is rescued from execution by a last-second phone call
to the Governor. It also offers a blackmailing chantoosie and a hogshead of
red herrings. The plot turns on an unusual episode of amnesia. Martin Blair,
played by Cornellian Dan Duryea, has strangled his cheating ex-wife while in an
alcoholic haze but doesn't remember that he did so. He gets himself involved
with the attractive wife of a man who has been accused of the murder, abandons
alcohol for Coca-Cola and sets out the find the killer. Eventually he falls
off the wagon, and in a blackout suddenly "remembers" that he himself is the
perpetrator. "It's Korsakoff's syndrome," mumbles an authoritative doctor,
trying to add a glimmer of credibility to a doubtful turn of events.

I had never heard of Korsakoff's and I thought it was just mumbo-jumbo, but
it turns out there is such a condition: "Korsakoff's syndrome is a chronic
memory disorder caused by a severe deficiency of thiamine. It is most
commonly caused by alcohol misuse."

But Korsakoff's is not a come-and-go disease; it's a progressive deterioration.
Moreover, there's not the vaguest hint in the "literature" to suggest either
that a Korsakovian is likely to commit a murder and then forget it or that a
second bout of drinking can restore his memory.  That sort of stuff is strictly
Hollywood

Once again Hollywood amnesia proves to be the most flexible and variable of all
diseases.

Source: 2015/02/stoppers

Title: Stoppers
Date: February 17, 2015

I would have thought that I'd have had in the hopper all the senses, proper and
improper, of "'stopper."  But I've come a-cropper.

The most familiar stopper is, of course, the blocker of liquids, as for example
the cork that fits into the top of the wine bottle -- or the polished glass
stopper that used to slide into those old-fashioned ink bottles. And then
there's the stopper in baseball -- the ace pitcher, the "number one" on the
staff, who brings a  losing streak to a close. And also the show-stopper
-- the performer who freezes the show in its tracks, so excellently that he
or she earns several rounds of applause and encores. (Latterly, a supremely
attractive woman has come to be called a "show-stopper"; when she enters a room
all activities, even molecular motion itself, immediately cease).

But down here in South Florida, where I am enjoying a few days of indolent
hedonism, there's a stopper of which even the OED is ignorant. It's a plant
-- a bush or small tree. The best known stopper is the simpson, myricanthes
fragrans, demotically known to all as the nakedwood twinberry. It's a member
of the eucalyptus family and smells nutmeggy. The fruit is edible, as might
be expected of a distant cousin of the guava. Simpson stoppers are a food of
choice for Florida's state bird (not the pelican, as one might expect, but the
mockingbird). And there are other stoppers beside the aristocratic simpson: the
redberry stopper Eugenia foetida, whose leaves and flowers are foul-smelling; 
the white stopper; and the inedible Spanish stopper.

I have no clue about the etymology of "stopper" in this sense.  Neither does
anyone else.

Source: 2015/02/susanne-bier-love-is-all-you-need-the-bald-hairdresser-2013

Title: Susanne Bier:  Love is All You Need (The Bald Hairdresser) 2013
Date: February 21, 2015

There is unfortunately very little of the often superb Danish director Susanne
Bier in this darkish Hollywoodish comedy.  She's so much better when she stays
closer to her native themes.

The plot is built on an antique and hallowed cliche: northern Europeans migrate
to southern Italy to find freedom and to re-awaken love. In this case it's
Philip, a workaholic widower and Ida, the relict of a boorish unfaithful
husband, who make the journey. They (Pierce Brosnan and Tryne Dyrholm) carry
it off rather well. But the film has an incapacitating defect: three of the
supporting characters (Ida's husband Leif, Leif's mistress Thilde, and Philip's
ex sister-in-law Benedikte, played by Bier's favorite actress Paprika Steen) are
so broadly drawn and so melodramatically horrid that they don't belong in any
comedy that asks to be taken seriously. There are a few good scenes that almost
recall the director at her best: a conversation in which Philip momentarily
drops his guard and reveals his unresolved grief; another in which he tries to
make contact with this son while the Mediterranean waves lap at their feet; a
third in which mother and daughter talk about marriage. Redeeming moments these.
But for the most part Susanne Bier appears to be strait-jacketed by a plot for
which she has little empathy. The psychological complexity that should have
arisen from Ida's cancer and her breast surgery evaporates: a great opportunity
squandered, in my view.

Source: 2015/03/lost-books

Title: Lost Books
Date: March 01, 2015

If a person could rescue one of the many lost books of the Greeks and Romans,
which would it be? I think most ordinary walking-around-Americans would nominate
the lost second book of Aristotle's Poetics, about which Umberto Eco made such
a fuss, and which is presumed to be a philosophical analysis of the genre of
comedy.

I myself am not enamored of Aristotle's lit crit. I suspect that if the second
book had survived, it would only show that Aristotle had invented a vocabulary
to describe the various elements of comedy -- and as a result generations of
scholars would have felt an obligation to conduct sterile and inhibiting debates
about the precise interpretation of his various technical terms. So, therefore,
if I were interested in comedy, rather than rescuing the second book I'd prefer
to read Homer's lost Margites, famous among the ancients as a comic counterpart
to the Iliad and Odyssey. It might have been fun, and we would certainly learn a
lot more than we now know about the archaic Greek sense of humor. My suspicion
is that we moderns would find the Margites to be a trial, a puzzle, a genuine
challenge.

Not only comedies but tragedies also have perished. Anyone who has been dazzled
by the great Greeks would want to read the 60 or 70 lost plays of Aeschylus,
the hundred or so that have disappeared by Sophocles as well as the 60 or so
vanished plays of Euripides. No doubt our understanding of the great age of
Athens and Athenian religion and art and politics would have to be thoroughly
rethought. Nothing more tragic than the loss of the tragedies.

And then there is Livy's history of Rome in 142 books, of which only 35 (plus
fragments and reports) survive. How much more full would be our knowledge of the
last years of the republic with Livy as a guide.

But if I had to choose a single work of the ancients that has perished, I think
I would opt for one of the books that were written by Livy's student and friend,
the emperor Claudius. Claudius, whose first wife (and one of his better ones)
Plautia Urganilla was a native speaker of Etruscan, wrote two books about the
Etruscans: a general history, and a volume on the Etruscan language. It's this
second book that I would most want to rescue. Claudius was the last person known
to have been able to read Etruscan, a language which was becoming extinct in his
lifetime.

Etruscan was an isolate -- a language with no known relatives, like Basque. It
was written in an early (8th century) variety of Greek, so it can be recited,
but it cannot be understood. Etruscan contributed not only its alphabet but
a few words to Latin: "atrium," "histrio," "taberna," "stilus," and "cera,"
for example. Approximately 13,000 Etruscan inscriptions are in existence,
mostly on gravestones. There are also about 300 bronze mirrors with religious
or mythological scenes on one side, many with Etruscan inscriptions on the
obverse. They are found in the tombs of women who, it would seem, must have been
literate. There are no surviving Etruscan manuscripts but there is the Zagreb
mummy. Sometime around 125 in the last pre-Christian millennium, an Egyptian
technician re-used a linen Etruscan book to wrap a body. Twelve hundred legible
words survive. They seem to record prayers and invocations to the gods. Not much
else, except for a great linguistic mystery in the heart of civilized Europe.
Alas that Claudius's books did not make it through the dark age bottleneck!

Source: 2015/03/spontaneity

Title: Spontaneity
Date: March 03, 2015

A close relative has accused me of lacking spontaneity. Specifically, "I doubt
he ever did a spontaneous thing in his entire life."

I've been mulling over this attack and I can think of at least three spontaneous
actions that I have performed.  A) Frequently, in the middle of the afternoon,
without forethought or planning, I take a nap.  B) And closely related,
but certainly different, sometimes, waking up in the morning, I decide,
spontaneously, to lie in bed for another hour or so. And C), just yesterday,
when I trundled over to the Public Library to borrow the book on ancient
dead languages that I had reserved, I spontaneously pulled a second book (on
Neanderthals) off the shelf.

Now if those aren't plain and distinct instances of spontaneity I don't know
what.

Moreover, I am making a long list of spontaneous actions to perform in the near
future.

Source: 2015/03/ones-name

Title: One's Name
Date: March 11, 2015

Ludwig Wittgenstein, the renowned philosopher whose strict stringent strictures
about language inadvertently destroyed my youthful interest in philosophy, wrote
in one of his less rigorous moments that "a man's own name [should be] sacred
to him. Surely it is both the most important instrument given to him and also
something like a piece of jewelry hung round his neck at birth." Wittgenstein's
name at birth was "Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein" -- his Jewish origins
concealed behind a string of echt-German Christian names.

I've never thought that my own name was a piece of jewelry -- but if it were a
jewel, it was entirely a counterfeit.

My surname is an accident. My grandfather, according to the story, was born
into a family named Middlebank or perhaps Middlebrook. Because a sole male
child was exempted from the draft in darkest nineteenth-century Ukraine, he
was surreptitiously adopted into a childless family. As a result, the name
that he brought to America in 1895 was a merely a useful fiction. And then
there's my middle name, Hessel. The only Hessels I've ever been able to trace
are almost uniformly Danish. My grandmother on my father's side was born Eta
Hessel and it's from her that the name descended. But am I to believe that a
troop of Danes wandered into eastern Ukraine sometime before 1850 and left
progeny behind?  I doubt it. In any case, I don't feel any more Danish than I
feel anything else. And then my praenomen was borrowed out of the book of Job.
Why my atheist parents, who never ever attended religious services of any kind,
would have elected for me an obscure Hebrew name will always remain a complete
mystery. So the whole parcel is a fabrication, a construct, without integrity or
authenticity.

What name should I have had, a name I could finger like a rich jewel about my
neck. Something that would suit me?  Suggestions are welcome. I'm thinking
"Rocco" for a first name (it's so appropriate), but I'll need help on the middle
or middles and the family name.

Source: 2015/03/susanne-bier-lost-in-the-fire

Title: Susanne Bier:  Things We Lost in the Fire (2007)
Date: March 14, 2015

For the first twenty minutes or half-hour of Things We Lost in the Fire I
thought that Susanne Bier, my current favorite director, had succeeded in
transferring her wondrous Danish idiom into a big-name Hollywood production. I
loved the unusual but profound relationships, especially between Brian Burke,
the real-estate developer, and his childhood friend and heroin addict Jerry
Sunborne. It was all far-off-the-grid, but it rang true. It's not easy to make
a European movie in the American system. Nevertheless, I was disappointed when
the second half of the film fell into deep cliche and became a familiar saga of
addiction-recovery, complete with predictable confessions at the Narc-Anon shop.
Brian's wife Audrey, played by the impossibly radiant Halle Berry, dominates
the film equally as much with her acting as her beauty, but the script poses
insuperable challenges -- especially when she is asked to retain her sexual
innocence while snuggling in bed with Jerry. The direction is as might be
expected highly accomplished, but I'm concerned that Bier's fondness for extreme
close-ups, sometimes of only a single eye, has devolved into mere mannerism.
The film received passable reviews but was a box-office failure, which is,
unfortunately, not difficult to understand.

Source: 2015/03/on-the-mall

Title: On the Mall
Date: March 23, 2015

On the mall, smoking, wheels (i.e. bicycles and skateboards), and pets are
prohibited. Between forty and fifty signs and icons state the case very clearly.
Nevertheless, the rules are often flouted.

Smokers are furtive: they can't help themselves even though they show, by their
demeanor, that they are well aware that they're doing wrong. The bicyclists
are apologetic. Skateboarders are oblivious, totally. The dog-owners are
defiant. "No bureaucrat is going to tell me where I can walk my dog." The
beggars are entitled. This morning, one disheveled youth carried a sign that
read "Why lie?  I need to get fucked up." (I used occasionally to donate to
our "homeless" until I was taught that meals are readily available and that the
begged money goes to support alcohol and drug habits. Also I was taken aback
when a man to whom I gave two quarters returned them to me, saying, "I don't
take coins".)  Some of the buskers are fine musicians and earn their one or
five dollar bill but I think that there is something rather sad about their
forced cheer.

On the other hand, the strolling young folks, holding hands and radiantly in
love, are wonderful to behold, especially when there's a toddler or two trailing
them. And I also enjoy watching the strolling old folks, fifty or more years
into marriage, sometimes holding hands, sometimes wheelchairing it. Dyads of all
ages and kinds cheer and encourage me.

Source: 2015/04/olivier-truc

Title: Olivier Truc; Fiction; Age
Date: April 09, 2015

Olivier Truc's Forty Days Without Shadow came highly recommended, both by
the forty or so literary awards that it has garnered, and also by trusted
friends. It's a murder mystery -- or rather a "police procedural" -- and indeed
it is a very good "read." It's set in the northern reaches of Scandinavia
amidst tensions between the indigenous Lapps, or more properly Sami, and their
Swedish and Norwegian oppressors. It's got everything: a brutal murder, a
child molester; a budding but blighted romance between a veteran policeman
and his beautiful novice partner; a tough wise old "native" who clings to the
traditional ways; a search for an old gold mine; stolen Sami artifacts, and
enough red herrings to furnish a medium-size Stockholm restaurant. And snow,
lots of snow. Snowshoes, snowmobiles, snowstorms, snowdrifts.

And yet I had to discipline myself to keep on with the reading. Something,
perhaps age, has blighted my appetite for fiction -- not just genre fiction,
like this mystery, but all fiction. Let me confess: to read stories, rather than
to read history or biology or geology has come to seem frivolous. An indulgent
 waste of time when I could be learning something substantive.

I looked up some reviews of this novel. Let me quote one opinion: "the
background information about the Sami lifestyle will slow down the action and
readers may wish that Olivier Truc had left his documentary days behind."
Interesting, but I had exactly the opposite reaction. What kept me intrigued
and kept me plowing through the snowheaps was precisely the ethnographic and
historical detail that the reviewer deplores. I wasn't just being "entertained";
 I was learning something!

Five years ago, I reported on this very blague that in my youth I loved to
read science fiction and fantasy, but that somewhere along the line, I lost
my taste for such flights of imagination. (If anyone is interested, they can
find the relevant paragraph here.) I would say that my condition has worsened
-- my resistance to fantasy has now spread to almost all fiction. Odd that
I don't feel the same way about movies: I prefer fiction films, stories, to
documentaries.

Darwin carried his Virgil and his Milton to Tierra del Fuego and claimed
that the books sustained him throughout his Beagle days. But later, in his
autobiography, he revealed that he no longer found any pleasure in poetry.  I
can't compare myself to Darwin in any way except that we both grew older.  Yet
I wonder whether an impatience with fiction and a loss of aesthetic sensibility
isn't a characteristic of septuagenarians.

Source: 2015/04/bats

Title: Bats
Date: April 15, 2015

Bats originated approximately 50 million years ago. Although warm-blooded,
many have "thermostats" that allow body temperature to vary with ambient
temperature; they are therefore "heterothermic." There are 1300 living bat
species -- about 20% of all mammal species. The Long-tongued Fruit bat has a
wingspan of 1.5 centimeters; the Spectral Bat a wingspan of a meter. Many bats
sport "noseleaves"  --fleshy projections around the snout and nostrils -- which
aid in the transmission of sound. DNA studies have determined that the closest
living relatives of bats are not rodents but hoofed mammals and whales. There
are twenty bat families, nineteen of which employ laryngeal echolocation --
the twentieth relies on tongue clicks -- as well as ten extinct families. Bats
have five unique muscles: the occipitopollicaris connects the back of the head
to the hand and runs along the anterior edge of the wing. The coracocutaneous
anchors networks of elastic fibers to the armpit. The humeropatagialis tightens
and braces the distal parts of the wing membrane. The tensor plagiopatii
anchor the trailing edges of the wing. The depressor ossis syloformis controls
the interfemoral membrane between the hind legs. Hoary Bats can fly at 27
kilometers per hour. Migrating Silver Haired Bats fly at over fifty kilometers
per hour. The heart rate of an alert Little Brown Bat hanging in a roost at
room temperature is about 200 beats per minute but while flying the heart rate
increases to about 1000 beats per minute. The heart of a hibernating bat beats
five times a minute. Flying bats consume energy at about twelve times the rate
of resting bats. Bats can feel changes in air pressure with the skin of their
wings. Some bats' feet lock into place when hanging upside down, so no energy is
consumed except when the bat releases and drops. Common vampire bats engorged
with blood have difficulty regaining flight. They urinate copiously, then use
their long thumbs to provide extra lift leverage. Bats use echolocation (as
do toothed whales, dolphins, shrews and tenrecs). When Lazzaro Spallanzani
claimed  (in 1794) that bats could see with their ears, he was widely mocked.
"Does Signor Spallanzani also claim that bats can hear with their eyes?" 
Ultrasonic noises were not detected by scientists until 1938. Echolocation calls
cover a range of frequencies. A Little Brown Bat searching for prey usually
produces echolocations at the rate of twenty calls per second. but a Hoary Bat
will produce only five calls per second. Calls increase in frequency during
the actual attack. Bats can vary the length of the call from less than one
millisecond to over 50 milliseconds. Bats are very loud to those who can hear
them. A hunting bat can produce a sound that is twenty times more intense than
the alarm of a smoke detector. Bats, unique among mammals, can turn off their
hearing. At about two milliseconds before a vocalization is produced in the
larynx, muscles in the middle ear contract, disarticulating three bones in the
middle ear; then the ear is "reconnected" allowing it to hear the echo of the
sound it has just emitted. Bats can be insectivorous, carnivorous, frugivorous,
nectarivorous, piscivorous and sanguinovorous. Some bats eat birds, some eat
other bats. Eastern Red Bats eat both tent caterpillars and gypsy moths. They
must eat about 150 moths per night simply to retain their weight (thank you,
Eastern Red Bats). The upper incisors of vampire bats are greatly enlarged, but
since they don't chew their food, the cheek teeth are reduced to mere spicules.
More than 500 species of flowering plants are pollinated by bats. Bats may eat
up to 120% of their body weight each day. The common vampire bat can consume
about two tablespoons of blood during a single night. Tiger Moths produce clicks
that "jam" the echolocation patterns of bats. Because bats must minimize their
weight, their digestive systems are extremely efficient --  Little Brown Bats
move food through their system in twenty minutes. One million bats roost under
the Congress Avenue Bridge in Austin, Texas. Bats are capable of eating 500
mosquitoes an hour. Some bats hibernate but bats can also enter into a state of
torpor to consume less energy while roosting. Frio and Bracken caves in Texas
each house over ten million Brazilian Free-tailed Bats during the summer. Bamboo
bats roost in the hollow spaces in bamboo stems. In Borneo, Hardwicke's Wooly
Bat roosts in the leaves of Raffle's Pitcher Plant and donates its feces to the
plants nitrogen intake. Some Leaf-nosed bats bite the stems of banana and palm
leaves in order to create tents for roosting. White-throated Round-Eared bats
roost in excavated cavities of termite mounds. Hibernating Little Brown Bats
bats breathe once an hour. Most bats bear one offspring rather than twins or
multiples. Bats live surprisingly long lives. A banded Brandt's Myotis was at
least forty-four years old. Vesper Bats mate in the fall but the female stores
the sperm and does not ovulate until early spring. White nose disease is caused
by a European strain of a common soil fungus. Bat droppings can contain spores
that cause histoplasmosis in humans. Rabies, often bat-borne, kills 60,000 to
80,000 humans per year in Asia and Africa.

For more, see Bats: A World of Science and Mystery, by M. Brock Fenton and Nancy
B. Simmons (Chicago:  University Press, 2014).

Source: 2015/04/the-lobster-why

Title: The Lobster -- Why?
Date: April 18, 2015

Thomas Fairfax, a well-known nineteenth century lobster smack captain, wrote
convincingly that "lobsters are very good as an article of commerce, and pretty
enough to look at, after they're boiled, but, as to eating them, I prefer
castoff rubber shoes." George Hoag, a down-easterner, added that "if them
tourists want to come up from Boston and pay those prices, then, by Christ, let
them. Damn fools. Lobsters, hell, they're big cockroaches, that's what they are.
You won't catch me eating one, even if I could afford the damn things." Fairfax
and Hoag may be two of the most honest men in the history of American commerce.
Lobsters are loathsome, both in appearance and as culinary articles. The meat is
stringy tasteless gristle. And inaccessible to boot. And messy to attack. How
did modern "sophisticates" get themselves bamboozled into thinking that these
big bugs of the sea should be considered a gourmet item. It boggles the healthy,
balanced, sensible mind. Lobsters are hideous insect-like creatures. Who was the
first addled individual who took a look at a lobster and said, "looks good, I'll
try it." Eeew.

Then there's the practice of immersing live lobsters in boiling water. Just
remember to put your fingers in your ears while the poor creatures screech.
Human beings degrade themselves morally and aesthetically when they lower
themselves to such indifference. How can they torture a lobster and then pretend
that the poor things are palatable.

I've eaten a couple, may all the gods of the sea forgive me. Before I reached
the age of enlightenment I would go along to get along. I never pretended to
enjoy them, but, petty conformist that I was, I would participate in the horrid
feast. Now I'd rather eat kale and tofu, tasteless trendy manifestations of
liberal guilt, than violate my integrity with a severed claw or tail.

it's time for a moral revolution in America. Let's make a start by liberating
the lobster.

Source: 2015/05/-some

Title: My Favorite Suffix
Date: May 05, 2015

Not just my own, but surely every thinking person's favorite word-forming
element is "--some," perhaps because It appears in so many cheerful
formulations. If you experience a sudden, overpowering urge to transform a noun
to an adjective then  "--some's" the way to go.

Imagine yourself, for instance, writing a novel and searching for the words to
describe your ingénue heroine. She's not just "handsome" and "wholesome" but
also "blithesome," "lissome," "winsome" "toothsome," "cuddlesome" and perhaps
even "frolicsome."  Could you find a better word? Well, maybe. Perhaps "buxom?"

Most of these words are of obvious origin but a few are on the obscure side.
"Winsome," one of the language's most delightful (or delightsome) adjectives,
derives from the now defunct "wynn," meaning "joy". It's a word that apparently
hid out in illiterate northern English dialect for a couple of centuries before
it was resuscitated, to everyone's advantage, by Burns and Scott. "Lissome,"
which now means supple or graceful, comes from the old English "lithe" meaning
mild, gentle, or meek. "Buxom" is drawn from a stem meaning "bow" and for most
of the existence of the English language signified "compliant" or "obliging."
"Buxom" began to connote zaftigity only during the middle of the last century.
Here's the very best use of "buxom" in its long history.  It's by John Milton
-- the young Milton, not yet the epic Milton.

And then there's "fulsome" which for the longest time meant what it seems to
mean, then latterly acquired the learned connotation "odious," which it is now
in the process of shedding. And "awesome" which has deteriorated from "filled
with awe" to meaning "cool" -- and has become a favorite adjective of praise to
an entire cohort or generation of the vocabularially deprived.

No one can say, "unbuxom" or "unblithesome."  Yet we regularly say
"unwholesome."

For the record, the "--some" in "threesome" is an entire different "--some," 
as is the "--some" in "chromosome."

Source: 2015/05/third-and-fifith-wife

Title: Little Old Ladies
Date: May 15, 2015

I know that I'm not the only person in the world who's prone to snap judgments
and easy stereotyping.  I say this in apology, because yesterday I was guilty
of a spectacular misjudgement, a wildly incorrect speculation.  It's time to
kneel on ground glass, to scourge myself (metaphorically speaking).

One of the attendees of a support group that I attend is a "little old lady."
Elderly, gray in complexion and attire. Wizened, juiceless. She looks as though
nothing of any moment happened to her in all her eighty or eighty-five years.

Her husband, Steve, died last week. Here's the piece of her story that she
revealed.

"I was Steve's third and fifth wife. He was an airline pilot, so we traveled
together all over the world.  Steve had two children by his first wife; I had
five children by my first husband. I had so many babies because they started to
come in pairs. At his funeral I played some of the Bach preludes."

You, gentle imaginative readers, can fill in the blanks. There are many, several
novelsworth, in fact, starting with the obvious question, "who was wife number
four; tell me about her?"

Source: 2015/05/juliet-1595-2015

Title: Juliet 1595-2015
Date: May 19, 2015

Juliet 1595:  "My bounty is as boundless as the sea/ My love as deep. The more
I give to thee,/ The more I have, for both are infinite."

Juliet 2015:  "My bounty is as epic as the sea,/  My love as cool.  The more
I give to you,/ The more I have, for both are awesome."

Source: 2015/05/what-not-to-say

Title: What Not to Say
Date: May 21, 2015

Let us suppose that an old friend has just told you that his or her spouse
is suffering from Alzheimer's or some other horrible form of dementia. It's
very difficult to know what to say to your friend. You want be sympathetic and
consoling, and polite, but you just can't find the right words. Perhaps the
best you can do is to say nothing, just put your hand to your heart to indicate
compassion, or give the guy or gal a sincere hug.

And here are some sentences that you should definitely avoid  --  all of them
transcribed directly from real life.

1.  "Think of it as a growth opportunity."

2.  "My grandmother had Alzheimer's."

3.   "My spouse has celiac disease."

4.   "Everything happens for a reason."

5.   "You should have tried ginkgo."

6.   "Do you want to have a going away party when [s]he goes into the institution?"

Source: 2015/06/sleepers-1

Title: Sleepers
Date: June 07, 2015

In the catchment area of P. S. 217, as indeed in all of my home territory in
darkest Flatbush, there was very little immigration or emigration. People stayed
put, for the most part, and the students with whom you entered kindergarten were
the ones who were likely to graduate with you at the end of eighth grade.

I can think of two outsiders who came not from a near neighborhood but from the
rumored "outside world." One was Beryl McLeod, who arrived from Scotland, stayed
long enough to engender in me a most powerful and confusing pre-adolescent
crush, and then disappeared. Lovely Beryl spoke with a most exotic and
enchanting accent, Glaswegian if I remember correctly. And then there was Alan
Dean, who dropped in for a year or two from western Pennsylvania. He was a
diminutive tough boy, not very bright but competitive on the punch ball field.
He also spoke in a dialect unfamiliar to me and which I now judge to have been
country or Appalachian. One day in Miss Finsmith's crowded stuffy fifth-grade
classroom we pupils were asked to elucidate a picture that the teacher had
displayed. It was a young lad with a candle in his hand. I recall very clearly a
sentence of Alan Dean's: "you can see that it's nighttime because he's wearing
his sleepers."

Alan Dean's "sleepers" made a lifetime impression on me, not only because I had
never heard that specific term before, but because I wasn't until that moment
aware of dialectical differences in vocabulary. I knew about soda but I had
never heard of tonic; I knew about pancakes but had never heard of griddlecakes
or flapjacks, and I wore sneakers all day every day but knew nothing of tennis
shoes or tennies -- not to mention plimsolls. I was not only monolingual but
monodialectical, if there be such a word. For someone to employ the word
"sleepers" for an item of clothing that I knew only as "pajamas" was therefore a
transformational experience.

And a very sensible word, at that. Much to be preferred to other deplorable
dialectal terms for pajamas, as for example the twee diminutive "jammies,"
or worse, the lazy "pj's" (not doubt employed by the sort of people who would
call orange juice, O.J.), or even worser, the infantile reduplicative "jim-
jams."

So I was on the alert the next time that 'sleepers" swam into my imaginative
ken, which was when I first became acquainted with John Donne's clever little
love poem, "The Good Morrow," in which the poet claims that until he fell in
love, he was immature, unconscious:

Who the heck, I wondered, were these "seven sleepers?" Not, in fact, a
wardrobeful of pajamas nor (my first guess) a parody of the famous 'nine
worthies" of chivalry?  But no, inasmuch as Donne habitually and regularly
conflated religion and sex, he knew that the seven sleepers were a group of
enthusiastic early Christian converts who were imprisoned for their faith
in a cave near Ephesus, fell into miraculous sleep, and then woke up two
centuries later to discover to their delight that their city had adopted and
institutionalized their religion. Rips van Winkles of miraculous devotion.

Of other religious or literary sleepers surely the most prominent are Thoreau's.
In a poignant passage about railroads in Walden, Thoreau recalls that "sleepers"
is the demotic name for the wooden ties on which steel rails are laid. From
this suggestive bit of nomenclature, Thoreau elaborates a conceit about the
way the new industrialism favors some and crushes others. "We do not ride on
the railroad; it rides upon us. Did you ever think what those sleepers are
that underlie the railroad?  Each one is a man, an Irishman, or a Yankee man.
The rails are laid on them, and they are covered with sand, and the cars run
smoothly over them. They are sound sleepers, I assure you. And every few years a
new lot is laid down and run over; so that, if some have the pleasure of riding
on a rail, others have the misfortune to be ridden upon.” So "sleepers" live
on.

I have never heard this sense of "sleepers" in conversation, but then, I don't
talk about railroad-making all that much. Nevertheless, it is not difficult to
endorse the continued pertinence of Thoreau's witty comparison.

No doubt my regular metablogian readership has been waiting patiently for me to
mention that the "sleeper" is the first and easiest trick learned by beginners
with the yo-yo. At least, such was the case in the 1950s P. S. 217 schoolyard.
And a spy in a "sleeper cell." And a dark horse. A surprise. A film; in fact,
many films that are unexpected successes.

A lifetime of many and various "sleepers."

September 21, 2015.  Let me add that Sleepers are plentiful in the old West
Bradford cemetery, they being one of the first families to colonize the part of
Vermont in which I am now writing this paragraph. A quaker Sleeper disrupted a
church service in the 1790s, shouting at the congregational minister, 'Sir, you
preach false doctrine." There's a Sleeper farm right at the end of South Road,
just over the West Bradford line into Corinth. Never met them, don't know if
their family's historic religious enthusiasms have persisted.

Source: 2015/06/missing-mallard

Title: Missing Mallard
Date: June 08, 2015

Yesterday, and for the last week, there were two mallard in the pond: a buff-
brown female trailed incessantly by a shiny green head. Courting, if not already
nesting. But today there's just one, the female, and she's swimming round and
round, quacking, quacking. What happened to Mr. Mallard. Where is he?  Eaten by
fox or coyote or hawk?  Flown away to look for another, greener pond? Lost? On
a business trip?

I feel for her.

June 9:  This morning, no mallards. Neither the one nor the other. Modern
romance. Isn't it always the way?

Source: 2015/09/some-numbers

Title: Some Numbers
Date: September 18, 2015

Last night there was no moon and no clouds. It was so bright and clear that I
couldn't resist going out to take a gander at the stars. It was, once again, a
brilliant and dazzling spectacle.

I can never remember whether there are two hundred million or two hundred
billion stars in the Milky Way. Both numbers are so beyond my ability to grasp
that I wonder whether it even matters. But after marveling at the expanse
of stars, I returned to the computer and did the research. It's true and
astonishing: there are between 100 and 400 billion stars in our home galaxy.
(The astronomers, I have to say, give themselves quite a bit of leeway.) And
then I was reminded that there are an estimate hundred million galaxies in the
known universe.

I was feeling mighty small, mighty intimidated.

After a while, I went upstairs to dip back into the book on human anatomy that
I'm struggling to read. Here's a fact that I should have known, but didn't:
there are six trillion cells in the human body. More or less.

That's a a lot of cells. And a lot of stars. If a trillion is a thousand
billion, then there are a ten thousand times more cells in my own personal
body than there are galaxies in the universe, which is an interesting but not
particularly important statistic.

I feel as though there is some important conclusion that I should draw from
these numbers, but honestly I have nothing much to say beyond the usual awe --
that ordinary feeling of insignificance and impermanence. It's not exactly news
that I am merely a heap of cells in an obscure corner of a tiny planet of an
undistinguished star in a medium-size constellation.

And yet, sitting by the pond this sunny afternoon, watching a pair of
companionable ducks slowly swimming one after another, I have to say that this
particular transitory conglomeration of cells has been enjoying a mighty fine
day.

Source: 2015/10/my-grace

Title: My Grace
Date: October 05, 2015

I'm devoutly secular, just as I was raised. Moreover, almost all of my
friends are equally unreligious: either retired Catholics or atheist Jews or
freethinkers or lapsed UU's or never-wases. I was therefore taken aback and
a bit unsettled last week when at a friend and neighbor's dinner party, just
as the guests were starting to dig in, we all paused for a moment and held
hands while the head of the household thanked the Lord for providing. It was a
brief and inoffensive grace but still startling because so unfamiliar. I had
momentarily stepped into another world.

And then I thought, if I were preparing to deliver a "grace" before a
meal, what would I say?  Who would I thank?  For I readily confess that
I feel great gratitude every time that I lift a loaded fork to my hungry,
salivating mouth.

To begin, I wouldn't thank any god or gods, because I don't see the least
evidence or sign of the supernatural around the table. No god of the beets or
the chicken or the lasagna.

Instead, I would thank, sincerely and reverently, all the people, present and
past, who have in fact made a real and palpable contribution to the meal. Let us
think for a moment about the slice of bread. While I could not detect the real
presence of anything transcendent, yet the bread was immanent with the labor of
the farmer. And the trucker who delivered the fertilizer and the trucker who
took the wheat to market. And the guys at the John Deere factory in Moline who
made the tractor that harvested all the seven grains in my particular slice.
And the baker. Road builders. And for that matter, now that I think about it,
how about our intelligent Neolithic ancestors who first spotted the einkorn or
emmer and decided that it was a plant worth domesticating. Moreover, the butter
that I lavished on the bread did not arrive by flights of angels but through
its own particular chain of development and distribution. And then the wine,
the "merry cheerer of the heart" which wouldn't have cheered anyone's heart
if someone hadn't mastered the technology not only of wine-making, but also
of glass bottles. And I would also like to thank the furniture makers -- the
designers, the carpenters, the turners -- because there would be no sitting at
the table without their help. And therefore foresters and the manufacturers and
inventors of chain saws. I could go on and on, but I think the sitters-down at
my board would take my point. A moment's reflection reminds us that when we
collect ourselves for dinner, we profit from the efforts and endeavors of not
dozens but millions of people. Diachronic and synchronic, now and then.

It is to all of them that I offer my thanks, my gratia, my grace. And in doing
so I acknowledge my continuing connection to all members of our wonderful,
horrible species.

Source: 2015/10/rush-

Title: Liberal Water on Mars??
Date: October 18, 2015

Egregious Rush Limbaugh, who ranks number three on my list of the people who,
in the course of my lifetime, have done the most damage to the United States
of America (Dick Cheney and Antonin Scalia are one and two and Dick Nixon only
slithers in at number 6) speaks a language that is extraordinarily difficult
to parse. His sentences are shapeless, wayward, and undiagrammable, equally
indifferent to the conventions of language and the rules of logic. When you're
fact-free there's no compelling reason not to be grammar-free as well.

Now there's a new and appalling example of Limbaugh's resistance to reality.
NASA recently announced that the planet Mars must once have had flowing water
and might still have underground water. Limbaugh, if I read his tangled language
aright, not only rejects the discovery but claims that water on Mars is evidence
a "left-wing agenda"  at work. Wow, we are tempted to exclaim. Double wow.
Paranoia run amok.

How can Limbaugh present such a counter-factual notion with a straight face? 
In order to coherently present his "thoughts" on this subject, I will now
extract and re-assemble some of his phrases from the linguistic rats' nest in
which they are embedded. Here's his chain of "thought" reduced to its essence.
First of all, global warming is a myth. Secondly, NASA has been "corrupted
by the current regime" and has falsified climate data. Inasmuch as NASA is a
mendacious organization, its discoveries about flowing water must therefore also
be false. And because NASA is subject to a leftist regime, its claims must be
not only false but "a technique to advance the leftist agenda." A watery Mars is
therefore a "leftist' Mars. And so the circle is almost complete. Limbaugh knows
he's correct but hasn't quite figured out how it all works:  "I don't know what
it is, I would assume it would be something to do with global warming."  So
round and round we go.

While Limbaugh's logic is roundabout, his perspective cramped and his evidence,
how shall I say, perhaps a bit on the skimpy side -- all assertion and no fact
--  I feel that I must agree with his conclusion. Yes indeed, the discovery of
ancient flowing water on Mars is definitely "leftist"-- and is leftist in at
least two different ways.

Let us try to connect the subterranean dots inside the Limbaughian skull. What
is it that is so paranoia-inducing and threatening about Martian water? Well,
water on Mars might indicate life on Mars. If there is life on Mars, then there
might be life elsewhere in the universe. If life elsewhere in the universe,
then the creation story in Genesis is certainly incomplete and probably false.
No creation myth, no biblical absolutism. Moreover, if there is life elsewhere,
there are probably intelligent beings who are highly likely not to worship our
earthly gods and are probably not -- horror of horrors --  subscribe to Baptist
fundamentalism. Water on Mars therefore challenges his local and provincial
Truth. Limbaugh is therefore correct to see Martian water as 'leftist" in its
implications.

Watery Mars is yet another blow to conservative "thought." It's just like
evolution or the big bang -- in actuality like any truth that comes to be
discovered either by hard science or social science or by the unbiased study of
history. Truth and fact are anathema to radical conservative Limbaughians. Of
course they are repelled and confused by scientific discoveries.  Martian water
is still another manifestation of the continual drip drip drip of facts that
challenge their provincial world view and animate their paranoia.

Source: 2015/10/oil-the-women

Title: "Oil the Women"
Date: October 21, 2015

A friend recalls seeing a film, many years ago (1950s or 60s), in which a
character speaks the wonderful line, "0il the women." My friend cannot remember
the name of the movie or much about it, except that it was a desert "sword
and sandal" job in which a sheik or pasha or emir or something else very
"Orientalist," preparing for a lubricious but acceptable-to-the-League-of-
Decency orgy, utters the fabulous phrase.

I can't identify the film and the words don't google. Does anyone out there
in blaguelandia know where such an inspired bit of dialogue occurred. Who
said it?  And more importantly, what genius wrote it?

In the absence of real information, I'm free to create my own scenario. It's
got to be a 1950s film in now-faded Technicolor, and really cheesy. It's not a
real desert but a sound stage with minimal sand and and a few plastic rocks. The
inferior lighting allows you to see shadows on the stained backcloth that passes
for a vista. The costumes are off the rack and every once in a while there's a
visible zipper. A microphone appears briefly and intermittently at the top of
the screen. The part of the sheik is played not by Steve Cochran but by one of
his less-accomplished imitators. The dialogue is in pseudo-archaic phony-middle-
Eastern-accented English.

News comes of a victory in battle and the bejeweled and beturbaned emir, whose
heavy eyebrows dance above his too-heavily-kohled eyes, turns to his muscular
bodyguards and shouts, "bring out the food, bring out the drink, oil the women."

Anyway, that's the way I imagine it. But it's also possible that the line comes
from a parody of such a film. Could it be tucked away somewhere in a Marx
brothers movie? Or somewhere in one of Mel Brooks' historical skits. It's Monte
Pythonish but alas before their time.

Please help, friends of Vivian de St. Vrain. Who oiled what women?

Source: 2015/10/boobs

Title: Words of My Life -- Boobs
Date: October 22, 2015

When I was a boy, the word boob denoted a simpleton, a nincompoop-- what
Shakespeare calls a mooncalf and what in an earlier life I might have called
a schmuck or a schmendrick. "Boobs" was an everyday expression; so common and
pervasive that The Three Stooges might just as easily have been called the The
Three Boobs. There were other related uses of the word; "booby hatch" -- a semi-
humorous appellation for what was formerly called an insane asylum, and also
the "boob-tube" -- though whether the boob in that doublet denoted the machine
itself or the schmendricks who stared at it was never clear to me. But at some
point in my linguistic career the word "boob" re-emerged with a new primary
signification. It now seems to have become the most common word for the female
breast.

I do not like it when a breast is called a boob. It is disrespectful. A
breast is soft and nurturing but also erotic and enticing. A boob is
neither; it is a denatured object, stripped of its warm associations and
joined instead to foolishness and boobery. "Boob" is a deliberately
unsexual and undignified term. It is also, as Shakespeare says in a different
context, "base, vulgar and popular."

And available. If a person should happen to google the word "boob," perhaps
searching for information of an etymological kind, the first, second, third and
perhaps hundredth entry that he or she will encounter is for "boob selfies."
A "boob selfie," for readers equally as naïve as me, is a photograph which a
woman takes of her boobs and posts on the internet.

Jane Austen did not do this. Neither did George Eliot. I can't demonstrate
that the word "boob' is responsible for such a decadent display of immodesty,
but I do note that phrases such as "breast selfies" or "bosom selfies" are
inconceivable.

Nor did suicidal Cleopatra, when bringing the venomous asp to her breast, say
"Peace, peace/ Dost thou not see my baby at my boob/ That sucks the nurse
asleep."

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage.

Source: 2015/10/old-folks-show-how-its-done

Title: Old Folks Show How it's Done
Date: October 23, 2015

There are two memorable moments in Kent Haruf's competent, enjoyable and
posthumous novel, Our Souls at Night (2015). The first is the proposal that
Addie Moore make to Louis Waters that starts it all off. Addie and Louis are
long spouseless and in their seventies, solitary. Addie calls on Louis and
says, without much preparation, "I wonder if you would come and sleep in the
night with me." The second takes place after Addie and Louis have become a
couple and the local Holt, Colorado Nosey Parkers are beginning to gossip. The
lovers decide to confront the talkatives directly. "They stood at the corner
of Second and Main in the bright noon sun waiting for the light to change and
looked straight back at the people they met and greeted them and nodded and she
had her arm entwined with his and then they walked across the street to the
Holt Café where he opened the door for her followed her inside. They stood
waiting to be seated. People inside looked at them. They knew about half of
those sitting in the café, or at least knew who they were. The girl came and
said, is it the two of you?  It is, Louis said. We'd like one of those tables
out in the middle."  The forthrightness, the honesty in both of these scenes
is rather wonderful. And so it's sad that eventually the puritanism of the
Colorado plains wins out and the novel becomes a trifle ScarletLetter-y. But
good for the septuagenarians, I say, who show a lot more grit and juice than
their townsfolk and family.

Source: 2015/10/bulldogs

Title: More on Muff and Spot
Date: October 25, 2015

I enjoy good relations with animal -- respectful, sometimes even
affectionate. I remember with great fondness the many purring, playful cats
and kittens of my youth. I was once very taken with a calf named September
and, I confess, almost in love with the matriarch of a small herd of Morgans,
a lovely lady named Gillian. The twin Nigerian dwarf goats, Orville and
Wilbur, were, I think, special friends. But for some reason I've never taken to
dogs, even though I know the story about dog/human co-evolution. Doggy dogs
are moderately acceptable, but the various special breeds of dogs, dog-show
dogs, seem to me to be freaks and monstrosities. We should have left them as
wolves and not meddled.

Of all the various teratological breeds my least favorites are the ones who have
been hybridized into snoutlessness. Dogs deserve and need a snout.

I was once attacked by a snoutless ugly bulldog; its owner, who, incidentally,
had quite a snout himself, instead of apologizing profusely, made the utterly
unjustified claim that I had provoked the attack. The incident reinforced my
prejudice against bulldogs. It's not just that bulldogs are aggressive; let's
make no bones about it, it's that for some inexplicable perverse reason they've
been bred to be hideous. A travesty of a dog.

Nevertheless, I was startled to read the following paragraph in Richard C.
Francis' new book on domestication of animals (Domesticated, Evolution in a Man-
Made World, 2015):

The squashed face carries a heavy cost in and of itself. It starts with
breathing problems. The shortened snout causes the soft palate to bunch up in
front of the trachea in a way that impedes airflow. Since panting is the primary
way for dogs to cool, bulldogs are also vulnerable to death by overheating.
The mouth of a bulldog is also too small to accommodate its teeth, so they are
crowded and grow at odd angles, trapping food debris. Gum disease is rampant.
A bulldog's eyes don't seat properly In the skull and can pop out, even from
straining at a leash. Often the eyelids cannot close completely, resulting in
irritations and infection. The excessive skin folds often become infected.
Perhaps most telling, the bulldog's head has become too large to pass through
the birth canal; most births require Caesarean section.

Big mistake, the bulldog. We humans should have learned to leave well enough
alone.

Source: 2015/11/rose-zimbardo-1932-2015

Title: Rose Zimbardo (1932-2015)
Date: November 02, 2015

When I taught Shakespeare for the first time, at CCNY in the mid-60s, fresh out
of graduate school, I was mightily unprepared. I set myself the challenge of
teaching a new play every week for thirty weeks. So every weekend I would tackle
a play that I had read but not studied and then MWF try to explain it to my
unwilling cherubs. I learned a lot but I can't imagine that I was an effective
instructor, struggling, as I was, to keep my academic head above water (and, by
the way, deal with a colicky newborn at home).

But sometime during that first year I met Rose Zimbardo, who was teaching
another section of the course, and it was from Rose that I began to learn my
trade. She was a few significant years older than I, more experienced (and more
imaginative as well). Rose invited me to go for lunch with her and her great
friend Ed Quinn, who had recently completed, nominally with O. J. Campbell, but
in fact all by himself, the still useful Shakespeare Encyclopedia. Quinn knew
everything and Rose was chock full of theories about the plays, some sensible,
some borderline daft, but all provocative. Lunches for me with Ed and Rose
became a moveable seminar -- and it is not an exaggeration to say as valuable as
another Ph. D. I was challenged, inspired.

I lost that job (good fortune in the long run) and Rose moved on to Stony Brook.
I didn't meet Ed Quinn for many years, when I encountered him at Boston hotel
sometime in the 80s, and we had a moment to reminisce. I never set eyes on Rose
again. But I thought about her and Ed often and I look back with fondness and
gratitude for all they taught me.

Ed died a few years ago, a great loss. And now Rose.

Last year, through the miracle of the internet, I was able to exchange a few
emails with Rose. I hope I properly expressed my appreciation for all she had
done for me. It was my intention to visit her the next time I found myself in
California (she had retired to Davis, which she professed to loathe) as part of
my farewell tour.Too late, alas.

Rose was a fine scholar, an excellent teacher, and a great lady. Rest in peace,
old friend.

Source: 2015/11/enoughfeast

Title: Enough/ More
Date: November 11, 2015

"Enough" is a mighty peculiar looking word, but a good one nevertheless. It
frequently shows up in older texts as "enow." I don't know how the original
medieval velar fricative signified by "ough" evolved into so many different
pronunciations: e.g. although, through, hiccough, plough, rough.

My favorite enough proverb dates back to the fifteenth century, and is as
pertinent now as then: "enough is as good as a feast."  Our moralizing
ancestors knew that "the avaricious scraping together that knows no bounds" was
a vice, especially because it "renders us unfeeling to the wants of others." Yes
to a full belly, no to the excesses of the feast.

There's an oblique modern commentary on "enough is as good as a feast" in
Maxwell Anderson/John Huston's Key Largo. The dialogue is notable
and familiar, especially when we call to mind that the gangster Johnny Rocco is
played by Edward G. Robinson and the war hero Frank McCloud is Humphrey Bogart.

Johnny Rocco: There's only one Johnny Rocco.

James Temple: How do you account for it?

Frank McCloud: He knows what he wants. Don't you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Sure.

James Temple: What's that?

Frank McCloud: Tell him, Rocco.

Johnny Rocco: Well, I want uh ...

Frank McCloud: He wants more, don't you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Yeah. That's it. More. That's right! I want more!

James Temple: Will you ever get enough?

Frank McCloud: Will you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Well, I never have. No, I guess I won't.

So there it is -- a nice contrast between "enough" and "more".  And
instructive, I think, in this day and age when our one-percenters seem to want
more and more, and are incapable of grasping that "enough is enough."

Source: 2015/11/ferns

Title: Ferns
Date: November 16, 2015

It's a little late in the day for me to embark on a career in pteridology. Too
many ferns, too little time. There may be a backup option: intimate, private
pteridophilia or even pteridomania.

But in fact, empty enthusiasm is no substitute for knowledge. It's mortifying
that after all these years of treading upon, admiring and sometimes even
transplanting them, I know almost nothing about the Ophioglassales or the
Marattiales, the Equisetums (although I can identify both the scouring rush
and the horsetail), the Hymenophyllales, the lygodium (which climbs with a
twining midrib), nor the aquatic Salviniales. And then there are the twelve
thousand separate and individual species of Polypodiales. Although I could not
help being aware of polypody ferns -- they're all over the place, sparkling in
the understory and thriving in forest clearings -- I could not name the name
of a single one save the extremely distinctive and graceful maidenhair and the
undistinguished plain (and poisonous) and absolutely ineradicable bracken.

Nor, until I read Robbin Moran's enchanting A Natural History of
Ferns (Portland, OR, 2004) did I have a clear idea of how ferns reproduce. Of
course I was familiar with the folklore upon which Shakespeare drew -- that the
seed of the fern is invisible and confers invisibility. There's a micro-debate
on the truth of this imaginative idea in an early scene of The First Part of
Henry the Fourth:

Gadshill:  We steal as in a castle, cocksure; we have the receipt [i.e. recipe]
of fern-seed, we walk invisible.

To which the skeptical chamberlain replies, "Nay, by my faith, I think you are
more beholding to the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible."

Our sometimes clever but often obtuse ancestors, knowing that all plant must
have seeds, and that ferns didn't, jumped to the conclusion that fern seeds must
be invisible. Well, there's a theory. It took a surprisingly long time for the
truth to out. In fact ferns bear very small, sometimes even microscopic spores,
visible, at best, as a fine dust. It was not until 1794 that John Lindsay
noticed that the spores produced a tiny green growth, nor until 1848 that
Michael Jerome Leszczyc-Suminski deployed his microscope to determine that these
so-called prothalli produced male and female sexual parts, and that from the
union of egg and motile sperm an embryonic plant with roots, leaves, and stems
was produced.

It seems like an unnecessarily complicated way to reproduce, but let's not judge
it harshly because it's worked very successfully for 345 million years, more or
less.

Of all the many ferns of past and present, the one that I would most like to see
with my own eyes fell by the evolutionary wayside 225 million years ago and is
unlikely to be resurrected in some vegetable Jurassic Park. They're the giant
lepidodendrons of the late Carboniferous, tree-size ferns that in the form of
coal are very likely providing right now the power for your and my computer.

One oddity of some lepidodendra  was that after fertilization they took
an unusual (perhaps even unique) path. The plant's root aborted while the
burgeoning shoot produced both the usual stem and also a downward-growing
rooting organ -- not a true root though it anchored the plant, but a root-like
system called a rhizomorph. Because the plant was a monocarp --that is, a plant
that grows for many years until mature, then flowers, fruits and dies -- both
the upside and the downside of the plant were, so to speak, term-limited. And
because the stem went both up and down, above ground and below ground, it was
remarkably symmetrical along the axis of the soil.

I wonder how a forest of lepidodendra would have appeared to a modern eye. Very
exotic, I imagine. Lepidoptera differed from modern trees in many ways, but
particularly in that their trunks were green with chlorophyll rather than bark-
brown. I think that a grove of them would have been littered with many uprooted
or rather uprhizomorphed plants. Quite a jungle, I should imagine, and quite a
delicious menu for the lumbering beasts who feasted upon it.

Source: 2015/11/welders-philosophers

Title: Welders Versus Philosophers
Date: November 23, 2015

I asked some friends how they understood Senator Marco Rubio's very blunt
statement that "Welders make more money than philosophers. We need more welders
and less philosophers."  I received a variety of answers.

My linguistically conservative friends asserted that we obviously need
grammarians more than either philosophers or welders, because Rubio doesn't
respect the difference between "less" and "fewer." I admit that "less
philosophers" clanks on my sensitive inner ear; nevertheless, I don't think that
it's wise to hold presidential candidates to high standards of usage. It would
be enough for them to grasp the issues. No one I know is so very prescriptivist
that he or she will vote for the candidate who knows the difference between
less and fewer. I confess to a longing for a more perfect language from our
leadership, but traditional  grammar is too much to ask, especially since it's
evident that our electorate easily acclimated to the barbarisms of bushlingo.

Others of my friends took issue with Rubio's unabashed materialism. They
parsed his statement to mean "welders make more money than philosophers and
therefore we should have more welders than philosophers." Welding is better than
philosophizing because it makes the bucks, gathers the green. If this is what
Rubio meant, then his argument is not only crass but wrong. Data from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics proves that both graduates with a philosophy degree and
professional philosophers (meaning professors of philosophy) enjoy much larger
salaries on average than welders. But even if welders did outearn philosophers,
Rubio's argument would still be monumentally vulgar. I don't know anyone who,
if push came to shove, assigns value strictly on the basis of earnings. Do we
not value men of the cloth, social workers, nurses, small farmers, G.I's, smoke-
jumpers and sometimes teachers more than we value pornstars and slumlords?
Einsteins more than reality TV celebrities? And as much as we respect the
crafts -- electricians, plumbers, tractor and auto mechanics -- we also know
that it is not the craftsmen but the philosophers who now as in the past are
going to help us think our way out of our plight. Just as Locke and Hume got
us out of Aristotle and the Bible and into the age of reason, and Darwin laid
the foundation for all the advances of the last hundred and fifty years in
biology and medicine, so we now need someone, desperately, equipped with deep
learning and an insightful brain, to generate the ideas that will get the new
messy electronic world, bedeviled with fundamentalists/terrorists, into some
kind of intellectual order. Welders are good, especially when you want something
fastened to a steel I-beam, but philosophers have their place as well. Rubio
is just too downright short-sighted for most of us. We know that money ain't
everything and we want our statesmen to know it as well. Rubio's assertion that
welders do more valuable work than thinkers participates in bottom-line American
anti-intellectualism. We're a can-do practical people; we can see what welders
do. Who knows what the heck those airy liberal philosophers do at those lefty
universities? Can they fix a fuse? Can they meet a payroll?

Another bunch of my friends objected that there's no reason why a person can't
be both a welder and a philosopher. Why set limits on human versatility? 
As it happens, I have in my own family a fellow who makes his living with
his brain but who also builds his own furniture, can wire a house, and has,
strange but true, taken up welding. But I think he'd be the first to admit
that he's not a pro at any of these crafts. We live in a world of specialists
and it's hard to be perfectly skilled at two crafts, let alone a craft plus
metaphysics or epistemology or logic. I understand the longing for the
philosopher-welder, but I don't think it's a realistic wish. It's utopian,
prelapsarian, perhaps even Marxist. After all, it was Marx who developed the
vision of post-capitalist communist society "where nobody has one exclusive
sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes,
[where] society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible
to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in
the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, philosophize after dinner, without
ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or philosopher" (German Ideology
[1845]). This is Marx at his least practical. I suspect that his hunters
and fishermen would return empty-handed, his herdsman would find that his
cows never come home, and his part-time philosophers would boggle over some
elementary error in logic or language. So no dice to the philosopher-welder,
I'm afraid. Not a starter, Karl.

What I myself would want to ask Rubio is this: how does it happen that there
are not enough welders?  Rubio puts his faith in the perfect workings of the
free market. In theory, the market should have solved the problem of the missing
welders by raising their salaries to make the job more enticing. And similarly,
it should have lowered the wages of philosophers to dry up the supply. Wait a
sec!!  Is it possible that the free capitalist market is not doing its job.
And if I or Marco Rubio propose that we establish more community colleges and
offer potential welders training in their craft at little or no cost, are we not
interfering with the proper working of capitalism and the free market? Picking
winners and losers, in the dread phrase.  t's centralized planning, almost
socialism to do so-- certainly anathema to the wing of the party to which Rubio
belongs. Riddle me that.

Bottom line:  it's helpful for Rubio to advocate for more welders. It's not
helpful (nor a credit to his candidacy) to set up a false antagonism between
welders and philosophers. Below the bottom line:  a democratic electorate
need thoughtful voters (let us call them philosophers). Welders need to be
philosopher-enough that they don't let themselves be snookered by some demagogue
who himself is bookless and factless and history-less. It's a challenge to
identify a thoughtful candidate when one of our major parties is offering a full
slate of empty but noisy barrels.

Source: 2015/11/baseballbabydream

Title: Another Amusing Dream
Date: November 27, 2015

I hit a ball sharply to right field into the cosmos and made it safely to
second base. (By "cosmos" I do not mean that I hit the ball into the universal
void, but rather into a patch of cosmos i.e. cosmos bipinnatus, the common
herbaceous perennial that was growingly thickly against the stadium wall,
something like the ivy at Wrigley.) I was standing on second, enjoying the
applause of 80,000 spectators at the old Yankee Stadium, when my daughter-in-law
suddenly appeared with her two-year-old toddler in tow and handed him to me,
saying, "you're in charge." She disappeared, so there I was on second holding
the boy by the hand. I told him to stay put, but on the next pitch he broke for
third, running as fast as his little legs could carry him. I called out to the
shortstop, "Now you're in charge."  At which point I cannot recall anything
further, except that I tried to follow the boy to third but I could hardly run
and it felt as though I was running through mucilage.

A curious dream. Dream professionals and analysts will no doubt be attracted by
the claim to significance embodied in the word "cosmos" and by the dreamer's --
that is to say my -- transparent urge to shirk responsibility.