

================================================================================Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-now

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: January 09, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."

Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-no

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 2
Date: January 12, 2025

To begin my project of getting a fix on Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English, I attempted to read Professor Jeremy Braddock's Collecting as Modernist
Practice (Johns Hopkins, 2012).

My plan is to read these Cornell contributions to knowledge with as much empathy
and as little prejudice as I can muster.

Despite my good will, I got off to a bad start. The title of Braddock's book,
Collecting as Modernist Practice, struck me as dispiriting and uninviting. It's
an uncompromising coterie title that seems to say to me (and to every general
reader), "I don't care whether you read this book or not." And indeed the copy
that I borrowed from the university library had sat on the shelf unthumbed and
pristine for the twelve years since its publication. Perhaps it's the minuscule
typeface.

Collecting as Modernist Practice is not a page-turner. I found it rough
going, and I now confess that I read closely only the introduction and one
chapter -- and skimmed the rest.  Braddock studies the work of collecting and
anthologizing art and poetry in the modernist (mostly 1920s) period. The chapter
that I studied, The New Negro in the Field of Collections, was enlightening
and I was glad to have read it. Braddock is an indefatigable researcher.
Sentence after sentence is supported by extensive archival work and a plenty of
footnotes. I do wish that the author was as interested in the art and mystery
of literature as he is in literature's reception. Collecting as Modernist
Practice might be more at home in a department of sociology.

Braddock's prose style is awkward and forbidding. He loves long static sentences
with complex subjects and predicates that are sutured with weak verbs. In the
pages that I studied, I rarely encountered a metaphor or any other figure of
speech. Braddock is also partial to newly-coined polysyllabic abstractions that
he may think add heft to his thesis, but which in fact frustrate his readership:
minoritarian, identitarianism, anthologization, narrativizing. On the whole,
entirely too much suffixizationality.

I will always be grateful to Braddock for introducing me to Witter Bynner's 1917
Spectra hoax, of which I was ignorant, and especially for acquainting me with
the fabulous name of one of poets that Bynner invented: Anne Knish.

[January 13] Oksana Sartry writes:  "Vivian, I don't think that you're entirely
fair to Braddock. It's true that his prose style is imperfect, but remember that
the book is most likely his dissertation.  And for a diss. it's quite good. I
also think that when he writes about poetry, he's quite thoughtful and
insightful."

[January 13] Marianne Morrison, Ph. D. writes:  "Vivian, your too harsh about
Braddock's vocabulary. Those words that you poke fun at are the regular
vocabulary for people of his generation; your out of touch.

[January 14] Oksana Sartry replies: "I wonder why Johns Hopkins published this
diss. in its modernism series. Good diss., but immature book."

[January 17] Sean R. Fine writes:  "I'm interested in modernism, but frankly,
this book is absolutely unreadable. Whatever value it has is buried beneath tons
of jargon. Gives academia a bad name."

Source: 2025/01/words-of-my-life-poop

Title: Words of My Life -- Poop
Date: January 20, 2025

Nowadays, the ordinary meaning of the noun "poop" is feces. Perhaps because
"poop" is a nursery word, it is apparently less offensive than "crap" or "shit."
And yet less infantile than kaka or doodoo.

But "poop" did not refer to the work of the lavatory until about 1720. Nor do I
remember it being in general use during my childhood.

I myself first encountered the word "poop" in the escapist seagoing novels
to which I was addicted as an adolescent: the Bounty trilogy, the Hornblower
series, Treasure Island, Mr Midshipman Easy, and the buccaneering books of
Rafael Sabatini, Jeffery Farnol, and many many others whose names have been
long forgotten. In these romantic novels, it was often the case that a handsome
young midshipman and a pretty maiden, her golden hair cascading over her shapely
shoulders, would flirt while leaning against the taffrail of the "poop." Had
I known or suspected that "poop" carried stercoraceous overtones, my budding
fantasy life would have turned to dreck. Thank goodness I knew nothing.

The poop deck, I soon deduced, was the roof of the cabin built into the aft of
a sailing vessel. Why "poop?" From the French word for stern, poupe, itself
derived from the Latin puppis (also signifying stern). Wherefore puppis? No one
knows -- the word has no analogues in other ancient languages.

Shakespeare used the naval "poop" in the celebrated passage in Anthony and
Cleopatra in which Anthony was greeted by Cleopatra. It's the epitome of
classical conspicuous consumption as well as Shakespearean eloquence.

Source: 2025/01/cornell-entlish-then-and-now

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 3A
Date: January 25, 2025

I am absolutely buffaloed by Laura Brown's book, The Counterhuman
Imaginary (Cornell UP, 2023).

The title is a puzzle. Why does the adjective come after the noun? And what does
the word "counterhuman" mean?  (One hundred and forty-six pages to go and I'm
already off balance. I'm worried that if I can't understand the title I'm going
to have a heck of a difficult time with the content.)

I took a guess that the coinage "counterhuman" would signify something
monstrous or terrifying, like a vampire, troll or ogre. But I was not even
in the ballpark. "Counterhuman," I have now discovered, is a term of art in
contemporary literary criticism that refers to everything that is not human:
not only animals, natural phenomena such as storms and earthquakes, but also
"things" or objects -- anything that is constructed or manufactured. Not
"inhuman' -- just not human. (But why "counter" rather than "non" human?)

Moreover, the word "imaginary," which I have for a lifetime understood to
be an adjective signifying what is not material but rather a product of the
human mind, as for example, art and literature and dreams, has also undergone
metamorphosis. According to wiki, the adjective-turned-noun "imaginary" "is the
set of values, institutions, laws, and symbols common to a particular social
group and the corresponding society through which people imagine their social
whole.” That's a deal of territory, but I think I understand: "imaginary" is
essentially a synonym for what I might, naively, have called "culture." (Might
an alternative to The Counterhuman Imaginary be The Culture of Things? It's a
more inviting title and much less pretentious.)

But now I'm stopped in my tracks. The "imaginary, it appears, is "the work of a
particular social group." How in the world, then, do the "counterhuman," who are
incapable of thought, possibly generate "a structure of ideas?" Pots and pans
and volcanoes and marmosets don't have brains that think or speak, except when
we humans attribute such traits to them.

In a whimsical moment, Duke Senior, in As You Like It, proposed that there are
"tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones." Am I to
understand that this author takes seriously what Shakespeare regarded as an
ironic jokey extravagance? Gosh, I hope not.

I think I now get the point: Laura Brown, the prestigious Class of 1916
Professor of English at Cornell University, intends to defend a paradox. She
will explain to me how non-humans, things without an intelligence, can create
a culture. I'd better pay close attention. Or perhaps the author means to
advance the trivial but more sensible and less sensational idea that humans can
attribute culture to animals and things.

Nevertheless, I must say what's on my mind -- what a deliberately off-putting
title. It's clearly designed to repel the general reader, someone like myself,
and to speak only to coterie fellow-travelers who might understand either
or both of the words "counterhuman" and "imaginary." Not a large potential
audience.

Do I have a chip on my shoulder as I turn from the title to the Introduction   .
Yes, I believe I do                                                            .

[January 25] Marianne Morrison, Ph.D. writes:  "Vivian, you should not go on
with this. Your so prejudiced against this writer that you cant give her a fair
hearing."

[January 25] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Marianne, I'm trying my best to be
fair and honest."

[January 26] Petal Rivera writes: "Vivian, I think you're naive to suggest a
less pretentious title. I hate to say it, but the point is not to avoid
pretense, but to be pretentious. No modesty in this book."

[January 27] J C Occhiogrosso writes:  "Vivian, you're being deliberately
obtuse. C'mon, it's not so difficult."

[February 4] Vivian de St. Vrain responds:  "Ok, J C, if it's so easy, why don't
you suggest a better title."

[February 12] Winifred A. Walker writes: "Like it or not, this is typical
academic jargon. If you want to read this book, you must master the idiom."]

Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-now-3b

Title: Cornell English Then and Now: 3B
Date: January 30, 2025

I'm still trying to come to terms with Laura Brown's book, The Counterhuman
Imaginary. I've wrestled the title to a draw, and now I'm going to take a crack
at the Introduction. Is this task a good use of my limited time?

Let me quote a sentence that I take to be the very heart of the book and the
heart of the problem. It's a doozy.

"Human story telling is found to provide a subtle scenario for affirming the
other-than-human, based on an imputed commonality that replaces human priority
with cross-species inclusivity that transcends the human."

Laura Brown's prose reads as if it were first drafted in German and then
rendered into English by Google Translate.

It takes effort, but once you penetrate its peculiar idiom, it makes a kind of
sense. For those of my readers who are still with me, let me try to parse this
sentence. I suspect It may mean something like, "human beings project thoughts
and feelings onto animals and objects."

"Human story telling" [that is, literature]

"is found to provide" [the passive "is found," should be deleted even though it
functions as a compliment to the person (i.e. the author herself) to whom this
insight has been revealed.]

"a subtle scenario" [I don't know exactly what the phrase "subtle scenario"
means; nor do I think that anyone else does.]

"based on an imputed commonality " [I understand "commonality" because I know
that humans and animals share many features. I don't see the necessity for the
word 'imputed"; imputed by whom? who other than humans can "impute."]

"that replaces human priority" [i.e. there should be no preference for humans
over animals and rocks, despite the paradox that humans and not animals can
think about the equivalence.]

"with cross-species inclusivity" ["inclusivity" is implicit in the previous
rejection of "human priority." Wow, these abstract nouns do pile up
(commonality, priority, inclusivity). Suggested simplification: "that includes
other species"]

"that transcends the human.]. Transcends, in this final clause, smuggles into
the argument a new idea, because "to transcend" means "to surpass." The claim
now, as this snake of a sentence winds its weary way to conclusion, is that
the meaning that humans attach to things is greater than the humans who do the
attaching. At least I think that is what it may mean.]

So after completing this investigation, I think that the claim is that
literature projects ideas onto animals and also things. And sometimes these
projections illuminate and enhance both things and animals.

I'm exhausted. I had planned to discuss the Introduction at greater length, but
I've had enough. Instead of proceeding with the introduction, I'm going to try
to understand the chapter on Robinson Crusoe (a novel that I first read as a boy
and have read several times since, and which I feel that I understand). Stay
tuned.

[January 31]  Petal Rivera writes:  "So it seems that Brown's book is not a
novelty of ideas, but a novelty of language."

[January 31] Sean R. Fine writes: "I agree with Ms. Rivera. Simple ideas cast in
pretentious language to make them seem important. This emperor of literary
criticism has no clothes. None whatsoever,"

[February 1] Joel Salzberg writes: "Vivian, good job of unravelling that
sentence even though I still don't quite understand it."

{February 1] Viola Pilbeam writes: "Vivian, you're too kind. Why don't you
just  admit that this whole book is absurd American nonsense."

[February 4] Helena Hotchkiss-Jones replies: "This absurdity can't be blamed on
the Americans. It's as much the fault of Deleuze, Adorno, etc."]

[February 4] Joel Salzberg replied: "Who is Deleuze Adorno?"

[May 2]  Evelyn Efflandt writes: "Joel, you always were a couple of candles shy
of a menorah."

[May 3] Vivian de St.Vrain replies: "Evelyn, you always were a nasty bigot."

Source: 2025/01/cornelll-then-and-now-3-c

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 3C
Date: January 31, 2025

I'm a lifelong fan of Defoe's Robinson Crusoe. I love all the shipboard stuff,
the adventure, the exoticism, Crusoe's self-reliance, his  psychological
complexity, his religious ponderings, and especially the recapitulation of
nascent capitalism on the island. I'm as entranced as ever by the attempt to
domesticate goats, by his attempt to build a boat, by the single footprint on
the beach, by Friday's escape and the battle with the cannibals. With a little
effort, I have been able to set to one side the novel's faults: the author's
careless repetitions, his appalling colonialist racism, those last anticlimactic
adventures and the return to England, the unnatural absence of sexuality or
passion, the paranoia and the unnecessary violence. Massive defects, yes indeed,
but Robinson Crusoe is still a great eternally wonderful mishmash of a novel.

So it came as a surprise to read Laura Brown's one-sentence summary of the
novel in The Counterhuman Imaginary: "Robinson Crusoe enacts a self-creative
other- than-human vitality by setting matter in motion through the persistent
repetition of irresistible succession."

Maybe Robinson Crusoe does "enact" and "set matter in motion" -- I don't know,
can't say. But I do not plan to undergo the pain and woe of making sense out of
her ungainly and mystifying sentence. For Laura Brown, Robinson Crusoe is not
the pleasure and challenge that it has been for three hundred years -- it's just
raw material for her dry-as-dust ideological machine.

And a waste of my precious time.

[February 1] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Brown transforms the gold of literature
into the dross of criticism."

[February 1] Professor Merlon Crenelle, Southwestern Louisiana U., writes:
"Vivian, you're totally unfair. You take one sentence out of the chapter and
make fun of it. You don't even bother to see how the sentence is related to the
larger argument. You owe Professor Laura Brown an apology. You're
irresponsible."

[February 1] Marianne Morrison, Ph. D. writes: "Vivian, I agree with Mr. (Ms.?)
Crenelle. Youve not tried to understand Brown. Your lazy."

[February 2] Vivian de St. Vrain responds:  "Whether I'm lazy or not, Brown
writes in an obscure code. Why should I have to try to crack the code?  Why
can't she write in English? She's a Professor of English, for goodness sake.
It's not my job to figure out what she's trying to say; it's her job to make it
plain."

[February 2] Sean R. Fine writes: "It makes me wonder about the "imaginary" in
which Laura Brown seems to thrive. Closed, cloistered, self-congratulatory."

[February 3] Thurman Valentino (SVDGA) writes: "I think that Vivian de St. Vrain
is absolutely correct not to try to figure out what that sentence means. It's
not a reader's responsibility. My opinion is that Laura Brown is smart enough to
produce a complicated argument, but not smart enough to make complicated
argument clear."

[February 3] Michael F. Bristol writes: "Or maybe, dear Viv, you're not smart
enough to figure it all out."

[February 4] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "OK, Bristol, if you're so smart why
don't you just tell us exactly what "persistent repetition of irresistible
succession" means."

[February 4] J C Occhiogrosso suggests: "One thing regularly follows another?"

[February 7] Beulah Withee writes:  "The problem is not with just that one
sentence. It's that whole paragraphs and pages are filled with such difficult
sentences. After each of these, a reader has to pause and interpret before going
on to the next one. It puts far too much burden on the reader."

[February 9] Gabriel Cussen III writes: "I tried to read the book but I didn't
get very far. Do visitors to this blog remember the criticism of academic
articles and books: "What is new is not true and what is true is not new." This
book is even worse, because what's true is utterly trivial."

[February 9] Bernhard Starr responds: "Gabriel Cussen, I agree with you. 
There's no there there."

[February 13]. Herbert Lecovin (Cornell '61) writes: "The important question is
what is going on in her classroom. Does she lecture in this dialect and does she
expect her students to write as she does?

Source: 2025/01/on-the-mall-1

Title: On the Mall
Date: February 02, 2025

After a severe cold snap, it's a welcome warm Friday afternoon. We're on the
semi-famous mall enjoying a long-postponed promenade. A woman, in her seventies,
stops us. "Can you help me?" I'm embarrassed to confess that my first reaction
to her plea was that she must be one of our many panhandlers. But not so. She
continued: "It's my husband, he has Parkinson's, can you help me get him to
the car?" He, Bill, was standing frozen, unable to speak, unable to move, his
balance precarious. "Two years ago," she said,"he was robust. He's having a bad
day." And indeed he was. I took Bill's left arm under the shoulder, his wife
the other arm. Lynn grasped my left hand and carried Bill's useless stick, and
together we shuffled him infinitely slowly and gently to the curb. "I thought we
could go out for coffee," she said, "but I was wrong." While we stood quietly,
Bill's wife went to fetch their car which was parked only fifty feet away. She
backed it to where we stood (Lynn now supporting Bill on his right side). We
helped Bill into passenger seat. His wife buckled him in.

I asked her, "do you have help?'  "Yes, she said, "friends." "Do you have
children?" "Yes, but they don't live nearby." She thanked us generously and
drove off.

I was sad for both him and her. He, because his dreadful disease is going to
kill him very soon. And she, because her life now consists of morning-to-night
care taking -- in bed, out of bed; dressing and undressing; into a comfortable
chair for a while and then and out of it; brief awkward walks; three times a
day lifting the spoon to his lips. And what's known in the care taking trade as
"toileting."

I'm convinced that she doesn't know how bad he is. Caretakers are always behind,
always catching up. If she knew, she'd have had a wheelchair at the ready. He
needs constant care-- not just family or friends, but professional assistance.
Can they afford a place in a memory care facility or nursing home? Not everyone
can.

Afterward the incident, we went to a coffee shop -- a normalizing activity for
us. But, sitting there, I was shaken. Certainly profound sadness for the ill
husband and the encumbered wife, and in addition a touch of personal PTSD.

And then the inevitable pondering. "To this favor must we come." It's not just
Bill. We're all doomed -- even that cute infant in the next booth, rapturously
examining her fingertips. A host of diseases, some as bad as Parkinson's,
waiting at the door, waiting.

Source: 2025/02/gravestones

Title: Gravestones
Date: February 08, 2025

I've never visited my parents' graves. I don't even know where they are buried.
I've been told that my father is buried between my mother and his sister Mollie,
but I don't know where they lie. I have a paper that tells me where my sister
Susan, who died as an infant, is buried, but I've never been there. I don't know
where my brother Eugene lies.

I know exactly where Althea and Phyllis are buried -- just up the hill, under
the big maple. I visit once a year and bring a stone to place on their markers.
Phyllis's is a bronze plaque affixed to a stone; Althea's is just the capital
letter A and her dates (1939-2016). It's what she wanted.

Dan Goss is buried in Staten Island somewhere. I visited once, with Althea. A's
mother, Grandma Anne, wanted her ashes divided in half and spread, part with
Phyllis and part with Dan.  She has no gravestone, nor wanted one.

I have told my family that I want my tombstone to read, "No more insomnia,
forever." But that's a joke.

Nowadays it's the custom to scatter the ashes on a favorite place, which is
nice, but there's no place to visit. Especially no place for those buried at
sea.

Source: 2025/02/mary-antin

Title: Mary Antin, The Promised Land (1911)
Date: February 12, 2025

I have just read Mary Antin's autobiography, The Promised Land, first published
in 1911. It is a book that I should have known much earlier in my life but only
discovered a week or so ago. The larger part The Promised Land is the familiar
story of immigrant life in a new country -- the author's struggles to adapt to
an unfamiliar culture, her achievements and triumphs, and her unabashed flag-
waving patriotism. More strange and more informative, is the picture of life
"old country," as viewed through the eyes of a young woman.  Antin grew up
in provincial, impoverished Polotzk, a small city now in Belarus, but which
at various times has been administered and exploited by the ungentle hands of
Varangians, Poles, Lithuanians, and Germans. During Antin's youth (she was
born in 1881), Polotsk was a part of Russia. It was not a good time to be a
Jew in Polotsk or indeed anywhere within the Pale of Settlement. (Her story is
especially pertinent because I myself have a hunk of Belarusian-Jewish genes --
as do, therefore, my children and grandchildren.)

Antin's life in that bleak part of the world was, I think, triply suppressed.
In political freedom and standard of living, by the Russians; in domestic and
personal relations, by oppressive Hasidism and the rabbis who enforced its
demanding rules; and thirdly, because Antin had the misfortune to be born
female. She had every reason to leave Polotsk behind.

Antin recognized early that she was a "prisoner" because "the Czar" commanded
Jews to stay within the Pale. She "accepted ill usage from the Gentiles as one
accepts the weather. The world was made in a certain way and I had to live
in it." Polotsk was a place of constant ethnic strife fueled by dangerous
superstitions. "The Gentiles said that we had killed their god and that we used
the blood of murdered Christian children in the Passover." The Jewish community
of Polotsk was always under threat of violence -- "the peasants would fill
themselves with vodka, and set out to kill Jews. They attacked with knives and
clubs and scythes and axes, killed them or tortured them, and burned their
houses. This was called a pogrom." There was also the threat of the draft,
where recruits served until the age of 41. (My maternal grandfather, Joseph
(Usilewski) Green told me that he had been drafted into the Russian army for a
twenty-year term; I now understand that he must have entered the army at age
21. In 1904 Grandpa, age 26, deserted and came to America. Good move.) Some men
escaped the draft by paying crippling bribes to conscription officers. Taxation
was onerous. "Peace cost so much a year in Polotsk."

Antin also explains that as stifling as was the Czar, the rules of religion were
harsher. "Within the wall raised by the vigilance of the police, another wall,
higher, thicker, more impenetrable was the religion of  the Jews." The rabbis
favored piety (as they conceived it) to independence or freedom or prosperity
and they enforced the most minute regulations and prohibitions of all actions
day and night. Antin tells of a wife who found a blemish on the chicken she was
preparing to cook. She consulted the rabbi who pronounced the chicken traif.
That night, the family went hungry.

Polotsk seems to have had no dissenters or freethinkers, or at least none that
Antin notes. I imagine that those who challenged orthodoxy either left of their
own accord or were shunned.

Girls were offered little outside the family kitchen or nursery.  They were
expected to marry young and produce many children, especially sons who could
distinguish the family with their Torah studies. Schooling was discouraged for
girls, who were taught to pronounce but not understand Hebrew.

At its prime, Polotsk had 60,000 inhabitants, perhaps 60 per cent of whom were
Jewish. There were twenty-three synagogues. Today there are no synagogues and no
Jews.

Source: 2025/02/wisdom-from-my-father

Title: Wisdom from my Father
Date: February 13, 2025

When dealing with a child, always make your appeal to the better side of his/her
nature.

No one owns anything; the most you can say is that you have a lifetime lease on
it.

As far as I can tell, I am just a long link in a chain going from nowhere to
nowhere.

If you lose your man, go directly to the basket.

Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed
to accept a favor from a friend.  People like to help one another.

Anyone can make money if he makes it the sole business of his life to do so.

When the stock market is going up, everyone is  a genius.

The czars and the rabbis kept our family in darkness for a thousand years. It
took hundreds of years for us to fight our way out of the ghetto, and they (the
orthodox and the Hasids) want to put themselves back in it.

Don't forget to wash behind your ears.

Source: 2025/02/cornell-english-caruth

Title: Cornell English Then and Now - 4
Date: February 15, 2025

Vivian de St. Vrain writes: "Cathy Caruth is the Frank H. T. Rhodes Professor
of English at Cornell University. She has written quite a number of books but
the one that I selected for this Cornell English Department project, partly
because of its engaging title, is Literature in the Ashes of History. Alas, the
title is misleading, because Caruth doesn't concern herself with literature in
any recognizable way. Rather, the book investigates psychoanalytic theories,
especially of loss and trauma. Although in an earlier part of my life I read
and studied all of Freud's major works, I found this book to be far too subtle
and abstruse for my downright brain. I have therefore asked assistance from
my long time friend A. Barnett Langdale, Jr. Barney is a very smart medical
school graduate, a therapist, and psychologist (though not a psychoanalyst) and
a person for whose opinions I have great regard."

A. Barnett Langdale, Jr., writes: "Thanks, Viv, for entrusting me with the of
task of reading and evaluating this book. I fear that I shall disappoint you,
because I had a hard time understanding Literature in the Ashes of History. In
order to profit from reading this book, one must accept certain assumptions
about Sigmund Freud and about the art of psychoanalysis. Caruth sets out to
modify and reinterpret the famous fort-da episode in Freud's Beyond the Pleasure
Principle. This became an immediate problem for me, because I have never
agreed with Freud's analysis of his grandson's play -- perhaps because his
interpretation clashes with what I have  learned from long years of closely
observing children in my professional practice. Events such as fort-da can
generate a spectrum of meanings and a variety of interpretations equally as
valid or invalid as Freud's. As I result, I read this book with a great deal of
resistance to its assumptions and their ramifications.

Many of the arguments that Caruth creates ("suggests" is her usual verb) are
too arcane for me. She carries her readers away from common sense. She inhabits
an intellectual world in which every event or fact carries its own negation.
And that negation bears a consequent negation, and so on ad infinitum, like the
images in a pair of opposed mirrors, leading inevitably to a situation in which,
as Macbeth says, "function/ Is smothered in surmise and nothing is/ But what is
not."

Vivian de St. Vrain responds: 'Many thanks, Barney. In the course of reading
Literature in the Ashes of History, I came to think that its procedure is, in
a sense, a lot like theology. If you make certain assumptions about god and
angels and creation, you can generate a fantastically complicated superstructure
of ideas that has absolutely no relations to the world in which we dwell. This
book is not theology, it's psychoanalytic theory, but it shares a similar
procedure, because, despite its highly-elaborated complexity, its assumptions
are unprovable if not absolutely false. Intelligence and sophistication can
take you only so far. I'm afraid that in the end, there's no more heft in this
kind of study than there is in theology -- the "subject without an object."
Ultimately, it's Cloud-Cuckoo-Land."

[February 15] Walter Balletto writes: "Before you dismiss this intelligent book
out of hand, you might want to read the ecstatic review by Michael Levine in The
Undecidable Unconscious: A Journal of Deconstruction and Psychoanalysis. It's
online. Levine makes the effort to read carefully, which neither you nor your
friend Langdale do."

[February 15] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "At first I thought that Mr.
Balletto was being ironic, inventing an improbable self-parodic name for an
academic journal. Who would believe there is actually such a publication? But I
looked it up and, by golly, it's real. Moreover, it's published, mirabile dictu,
by the University of Nebraska Press!!!"

[February 16] Janet Rich asks: "You haven't said anything about Caruth's
presence in a Department of English. Shouldn't she relocate to Psychology?"

[February 16] Herbert Lecovin (Cornell '61) asks: "I wonder how many of Caruth's
colleagues can read and understand her work?"

[February 16] Anita Robillard writes: "Caruth is on an island, and instead of
welcoming friends to join her, she erects walls and barricades to keep them
out."

[February 17] Joel Salzberg writes: "What do you mean by "island." She teaches
at Cornell; Cornell's not an island."

[February 17] Anita Robillard writes: "It's a metaphor, Joel."

[February 17] Herman S. Levi writes: "I don't understand why you compare
psychoanalysis to theology. They're nothing alike."

[February 18] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Professor Levi, let me refer you to
a familiar passage in the Leviathan, where Hobbes writes of "names that signifie
nothing, but are taken up and learned by rote from the Schooles, as
hypostatical, transubstantiate, consubstantiate, eternal-Now and the like
canting of Schoolemen." Similarly, the words of psychoanalysis, such as pleasure
principle, Ego, etc. signify nothing at all. Theologians and psychoanalysts can
be very smart people, but the net practical result of their involuted
speculation is transitory, wrong, useless, specious, and false."

[April 1]  Skye Barasch writes:  So, Vivian, is there anyone on the Cornell
English faculty whose work meets your antiquated approval?  It's all bad,
according to you.

[April 1]  Vivian de St, Vrain responds: Actually, Ms/Mr Barasch, I'm just about
to add a paragraph on a member of the faculty whose book was very informative
and comprehensible. No abstruse jargon, I'm glad to say.  Stay tuned;  my
comments will appear here in a day or two. I do wonder, now that I think of it,
if I'm unconsciously picking the least approachable books to report on. I'll try
to mend my ways.

Source: 2025/02/cornell-english-then-and-now-5

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 5
Date: February 21, 2025

Elisha Cohn is an associate professor in Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English. Her Still Life, Suspended Development in the Victorian Novel (2016)
strikes me as two books in one. The first is quite lovely and filled with a
variety of splendid apercus. Cohn explores "lyric moments" in the novels
(confession: I read closely only the chapter on Thomas Hardy, the novelist
with whom I'm most familiar). She observes that Hardy (a poet as well as a
novelist) occasionally stops the progress of the story and allows his characters
to experience a moment of stasis or reflection or reverie that is more a
characteristic of lyric poetry than prose. I was much impressed by her analyses
of these moments -- and wondered why I had failed to notice such events --
or non-events -- myself. So criticism did what it's supposed to do -- widens
our understanding and appreciation of works of literature. I returned to the
Victorian novel armed with a new way of seeing. In fact, I'm now reading Little
Dorrit again for the express purpose of ascertaining whether a non-poet like
Dickens employs the same Still Life method. So far, not the case -- Dickens has
his own particular (and very successful) methods of expanding the consciousness
of his characters.

Ah, but then there's the other side of Cohn's book which attempts to develop
her useful insights within the slough of "theory." I half suspect that Cohn
felt obliged to make herself relevant or contemporary or tenure-worthy with
her tumble into this quicksand -- but perhaps I'm wrong. Perhaps she devoutly
believes in an apparatus that I find so incomprehensible and transient. In
this second part of the book, many famous names are invoked and admired; some
of these are very French and very revered; others  are merely professors at
American universities. Pages of text and footnotes defend against the horrid
possibility that Still Life might be "insufficiently theorized." And in these
speculative paragraphs Cohn discusses the deprivilegization of hierarchical
thought in favor of forms of lateralization in which individuations are
impersonal and singularities are pre-individual and which reterritorialize
along the lines of preexisting structures of power which re-consolidate into
static concepts, etc., etc. Which is when I either descend into a reverie (or
nightmare) of my own or hurl he book across the room.

[February 23  Audrey ap Howell writes:  "Vivian de St. Vrain, you've go it
wrong. The notion that there are poetic moments in the novels is well
established. The originality of this book lies in its theorizing of these
moments. You would know this if you had read carefully and not skimmed."

[February 24] J C Occhiogrosso writes: "This is a well-written book. Complicated
but not obscure."

[February 25]  Reuben Musgrave writes:  "I bet that Cohn is a delightful teacher
-- if she keeps to the events in the novels and stays away from bewildering
'theory.'"

[February 25] Savannah Courtermanche writes:  "All novelists pause the plot for
moments of reflection. Nothing new here."

[March 5]  Joy Jourgenson writes:  "This difficult monograph would have been
more useful as a series of short, insightful essays.  Too bad it had to be
expanded into a repetitive static book. Not the author's fault -- just the tune
of the times."

[March 6]  Eli Munn writes:  "Vivian, you're too old and out of it to have an
opinion worth anything. Shut it down and go back to your knitting."

[March 15] Rogers Roggen writes:  "I wonder, Vivian, how you can work yourself
up into such a snit about Cornell when the USA is going to hell in a handbasket.
Shouldn't you put your effort into more pressing matters."

[March 18] Homer vanNess writes:  "Reuben Musgrave, are you possibly the "Cousin
Rube" that I heard my parents mention? I know there's a Musgrave branch to my
family. (I found your name doing a random googlesearch). If you are Cousin Rube,
could you pm me at [email protected]. I'd love to hear from you. I think you
went to Cornell; so did I but much later."

Source: 2025/02/words-of-my-life-text

Title: Words of My Life -- Text
Date: February 28, 2025

I first encountered the word "text" -- as did everyone else of my cohort -- as
the first component of "textbook." At P S 217, textbooks were issued on the
first day of school. Then, later in the day, we ritually scissored brown paper
grocery bags and improvised protective book covers. It was not unusual for the
covers to be in better shape than the retirement-eligible books. At college,
I was surprised to find that I was required to purchase my own textbooks -- a
discovery that busted a hole in my precarious budget.

And then the word "text" sat still for a number of years until it emerged as
a term of art in critical theory. "Text" became a generic word for anything
written: novels, poems, plays, signs, advertising slogans, tattoos -- anything
that could be analyzed and discussed. I think, in retrospect, that the idea
was not to "privilege" one form of writing over another. "Text" is to poem as
"provider" is to doctor.

Nowadays, "text" has emerged from the gloom of academic criticism and has become
the most frequently used of words. Who could have predicted it? I myself,
formerly a writer of letters and postcards and until recently of emails, and for
many years at one point a user of the telephone, now send and receive multiple
"texts" in a day.

The noun has also acquired a variety of verb forms: "I'll text you"; "I texted
you";   "Text me when you arrive"; "Talk to you later.  I'm texting."

All derived, ultimately, from L. texere textus, to weave; or textor, a weaver.

The use of "text" in religious ceremony, as in a cleric's, "today's text is..."
has never been a part of my life.

Source: 2025/03/universe

Title: It's Big! We're Little!
Date: March 05, 2025

Can it possibly be true that the universe as we know it is becoming larger and
larger? The more we learn, the more it seems to expand. The scientists who
know about such things now brag that the Milky Way numbers between 200 and 300
billion stars, nearly all of which are probably circled by planets. Moreover,
these same experts now claim that there are something like one or two trillion
such configurations -- some of them small but most larger than our own personal
galaxy. And to top all that, there's a rumor circulating that our universe might
be just one of an untold, possibly infinite number of other universes. Some of
them Big Banging, some expanding, some collapsing.

These numbers are staggering and incomprehensible, at least to me. I can't even
get a hold of a million of anything, even grains of sand, let alone a billion (a
thousand million!) enormous stars.

Now they tell me that our universe began 13.8 billion years ago, more or less,
and will go on for a hundred billion more. That's another very large number for
me (or you) to assimilate.

It's all mighty perplexing. And then let me add the toughest question of all:
why is there something rather than nothing? Yes, why is that? How come?

There are some who find this sort of information dismaying because it confirms
the triviality, the meaninglessness of our individual lives. How can I possibly
worry about last night's insomnia or my latest nosebleed -- or indeed my very
own life -- in a world of a gazillion planets, stars, ultramassive black holes,
neutron stars, galaxies, and a universe which may have no discernible boundary
or beginning or ending.

Yet I myself find all this information not dismaying but comforting - maybe even
inspiring.

What are the odds that a planet might support life? Very small. And that the
planet's precarious lifeforms would evolve for a couple of billions of years
and then generate intelligent life?  And that a million years of mating and
surviving by various evolving primitive and then recognizable humans might lead
to my ancestors -- and that after thousands of lucky matings eventually resolve
into my parents Manny and Lil who happened upon the precise instant to beget Me.
And that I, in the second half of my 80s, way past my shelf life, would still be
here to enjoy these extra innings.

All this work of creation and evolution and luck to culminate in Me.

It's a miracle of cosmic proportions and should be hosannahed. Here I am,
enjoying my still functioning brain. My stomach is mellow after a full meal
and my skin is glowing from a stroll in the warm sun. At the end of the day, I
will crawl under the covers with my bedmate and ladylove. Truly the stars have
aligned to my benefit.

Nor let us not underestimate  the consummate joy of mattress and blanket.

My assemblage of molecules has had a great run -- much more than could be
reasonably anticipated.  Soon my molecules will disassemble and then reassemble
into someone else. I'm very glad to contribute to this phenomenon.

But if so -- if we are so fortunate, as I believe us to be, why don't we as
a people celebrate our good fortune? Take pleasure in our lives. What's the
need for this continuing strife and wars and enslavements and genocides? What's
the point of it? We're all sitting here, billions of us, for a second or so in
an infinitely boundless and timeless universe. Why must half of us make life
miserable for the other half? Why can't all we just get along?

Truly we are a horrid species.

I wonder whether other planets that support intelligent life have done any
better. I hope so.

Source: 2025/04/driftin1

Title: Driftin'
Date: April 01, 2025

Every once in a while, I experience something that I call a "cultural
convergence" -- perhaps an event reported in a daily newspaper that closely
resembles something on the very page of the novel that I happen to be reading. A
cross-genre overlap, let us say.

Here's in example of such a coincidence that amused me much.

Yesterday evening I watched the classic western The Magnificent Seven (1960)
and this morning I read, once again, Shakespeare's Twelfth Night. It's hard to
believe but yes, there is a very brief moment where two such very distinct works
brush against one another.

Unlike TN, The Magnificent Seven is a violent spectacle that steers clear of
humor, or subtle characterization or extensive dialogue. After the climactic
concluding battle to preserve the Mexican village has been both lost and won,
the two surviving gunmen share a moment before trotting off on their separate
ways. Chris Adams (Yul Brynner) inquires of Vin Tanner (Steve McQueen) if he
has a plan for what comes next. Laconic Vin, cowpoke and gunslinger, responds,
"driftin'.

In Twelfth Night, there's a similar question and a similar answer, but in a far
different idiom. Antonio asks Sebastian, who has survived a shipwreck, about
his plans. Sebastian's view of his future is essentially the same as Vin's, but
there is none of that "ah shucks" minimalism in his reply. Instead, Sebastian
responds, "My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy."

[While Vin's one-word answer is clear as clear can be, Sebastian's "mere
extravagancy" requires a bit of a gloss. Nowadays, "extravagancy" (usually
"extravagance") signifies a "lack of restrain in purchasing luxury goods." Not
so in 1600, when "extravagant" remained much closer to its root etymological
inheritance. The word descends from L. vagare, "to wander." Extra-vagance
therefore means something like "wander beyond." Here's a more familiar example
of the word at work: when Roderigo characterizes Othello as an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger," he does not criticize Othello for spending too many ducats
on his fancy get-up. He means that he's a rootless and wandering non-native.
(Wheeling? my dictionary glosses wheeling as "roving, wandering, drifting"). And
also: "mere" did not then connote triviality; its meaning is closer to "pure."
"Determinate" meant and still means "decided.")

Therefore Sebastian's sentence --"My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy" --
is directly equivalent to  Vin's "driftin''". Cultural convergence at its best.

It's just two ways of talkin'.

I sometimes wonder about Shakespeare's intent here. Why did he bother
to put such a difficult sentence in Sebastian's mouth? For purposes of
characterization, certainly. But at the expense of clarity. Wouldn't it have
been more economical, more transparent, for Sebastian to say something plain,
such as "I don't have a plan, I'll just wander." It's certain that some
percentage of Shakespeare's audience, perhaps most, will not grasp the meaning 
of the sentence as written and will be left puzzled. Yet as he so often does,
Shakespeare preferred eloquence to transparency.

In my opinion, Shakespeare delighted in his own fluency.  And sometimes I think
that Shakespeare wasn't just writing to be heard by his Globe or Blackfriars
audience. He was writing to be read and studied --  although I doubt he could
have imagined a future in which his sentences would be glossed with crowded
inches of small-type footnotes.

It it possible that Shakespeare also had an inkling that, as Beethoven once put
it, he was writing for "a latter age?"

Source: 2025/04/cornell-english-then-and-now-6

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 6
Date: April 03, 2025

After struggling through a run of mysterious and puzzling works, I'm cheered to
discover a book written by Cornell English faculty member that I could read with
pleasure from beginning to end. And understand. And which alerted me to books
and poems with which I was not familiar. No theory, no pretentious jargon; just
honest scholarship and intelligent stylish analysis,

It's Facing the Abyss, American Literature and Culture in the 1940s, by George
Hutchinson, who is Cornell's Farr Professor of American Culture.

Unlike Professor Hutchinson, who is a considerably younger man, I myself was
alive (although barely sentient) during the 1940s. I was too young for serious
reading, so 1940s culture didn't come to my aluminum desk until the 1950s when
I belatedly came to awareness. As a result, I read many of the books that
Hutchinson discusses a decade past their relevance. Hutchinson also mentions
many influential books that I didn't read at all and therefore came as a
surprise -- and which underlined my ignorance. For example, during the 1950s,
my high school and college years, I read many books of 1940s Jewish American
writers to whom Hutchinson devotes a long chapter: Mailer, Bellow, Malamud,
Rukeyser, Arthur Miller, etc. But my acquaintance was incomplete. I confess that
I had never heard the names of Jo Sinclair or Isaac Rosenthal, both of whom
Hutchinson scrutinizes at full. One name missing from Hutchinson's survey is J D
Salinger, who started to publish in the 40s but only became famous with Cather
in the Rye in 1951. Just as well -- I never caught Salinger fever although many
of my friends were quite infected.

Hutchinson has presented me with a reading list of books that I should have
known but didn't and that will keep me engaged for months. I'm grateful.

Hutchinson's chapter on WWII is most revelatory. Without being unduly partisan,
it exposes and corrects the "greatest generation" mythology that I had half come
to accept.

After reading Facing the Abyss, I continued my investigation of Cornell English
faculty publications by taking a couple of wild swings at Elizabeth S. Anker's
mystifying On Paradox, the Claims of Theory (Duke UP, 2022). (Anker holds a
joint appointment in Cornell's law school and its Department of Literature in
English.) I can say just two things for certain about this difficult book: a) I
didn't understand two consecutive sentences, and b) it's not about literature,
not even tangentially. In fact, I'm not sure what it's about -- as far as I can
tell, it's not about the law. I have rarely attempted anything in English prose
that I found quite so impenetrable. I never even grasped what Anker means by
paradox.

I'm sure it's mea maxima culpa, but so be it.

[April 4] PGB writes: "Every time you post something, it becomes ever clearer
that you're not the right person for this investigation. Give it up and stick to
something within your abilities, like basketball. You write well on basketball.
Do yourself a favor: stay away from the deeper issues that Anker discusses."

[April 4]  Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Perhaps you're right, PGB (whoever you
are). The shoemaker should stick to his last. This Anker book is not intended
for me, but I I wonder for whom it is intended. It's got to be an extremely
small specialized audience. Six or eight people, worldwide. I doubt anyone on
Cornell's English faculty then or now could make heads or tails of it."

[April 6]  Artie Greengroin writes: "Thanks for hanging in there.  I hope you
find other Cornell English Professors who know how to write English. I'm not
optimistic, though. BTW, I think PGB is harshing on you, but I agree that your
basketball essays are pretty good."

[April 8] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Thanks for the recommendation, Artie
and PGB. If anyone is interested, my basketball essays are here.

[April 9]  Charles Evans (Mercer College) writes: "I agree. Vivian, your notes
on basketball are quite good. But you're just not smart enough to understand
philosophy."

[April 10] Joe J. Keen (Northwest Nazarene University, Nampa, Idaho) writes: "I
agree with Charles Evans. The basketball entries are amusing. But, Vivian,
you're no philosopher."

[April 16] Vivian de St. Vrain writes: The "Artie Greengroin" who posted on
April 6 does not exist. Artie Greengroin is not a real person; he's a character
invented by the WWII novelist Harry Brown. Come on, Artie you can use your real
name. Don't be afraid. Don't hide behind a pseudonym. We're all friends here."

[April 30]. Chester Bacon writes: "Thanks for bringing the Hutchinson book to my
attention.  I've read and been enlightened by it. But following your
recommendation I'll stay away from the Anker book. And I do like your basketball
essays."

Source: 2025/04/trump-chaucer-etc

Title: Trump, Chaucer, etc.
Date: April 16, 2025

Chaucer's Pardoner, some will remember, has long blonde hair and speaks in
a high treble voice. Chaucer calls him "a gelding or a mare." A gelding is
obviously a eunuch; what Chaucer means by mare is less clear -- perhaps "female
eunuch" -- whatever that entails -- or a gay male or possibly even a woman
cross-dressed as a man. In any case, a person of ambiguous sexuality -- "gender
fluid" in modern idiom.

Update: the Naval Academy Nimitz library at Annapolis has purged from its
shelves a book by Robert S. Sturges called  "Chaucer's Pardoner: Gender
Theory." Isn't it reassuring that our national security will no longer be
endangered by a discussion of the Pardoner's identity.

The list of 381 censored books can be found at

https://media.defense.gov/2025/Apr/04/2003683009/-1/-1/0/250404-
LIST%20OF%20REMOVED%20BOOKS%20FROM%20NIMITZ%20LIBRARY.PDF

Source: 2025/04/new-old-books

Title: New Old Books from the 1940s
Date: April 22, 2025

I read George Hutchinson's Facing the Abyss, a report on the culture of the
1940. Hutchinson assesses books that were influential during that troubled
decade.

When I came of age in the 1950s, I encountered a good share of these books. I
was a curious, library-addicted lad and 1940s culture lingered in the 1950s air.
Yet Hutchinson brings to attention whole shelves of important writing of which I
was shamefully ignorant. Through the resources of Interlibrary Loan and second-
hand internet bookstores, I've now become acquainted with a bunch of new old
books. Here's some of them (with more to follow).

Hutchinson claims that Jo Sinclair's Wasteland (1946) is an important
contribution to the Jewish-American novel. Perhaps it is, by priority, but I
found it disappointing and superficial. The main man, Jacob Braunowitz changes
his name to John Brown and hides his Jewishness, but it doesn't work -- he lives
in a "wasteland" neither integrated into America nor bolstered by his inherited
religion. Along comes a Freudian psychoanalyst and in a few magical sessions
Brown is liberated to embrace his Judaism. For me, the novel was simplistic and
implausible. Harry Brown's A Walk in the Sun (1944) is the most persuasive and
realistic war novel I've ever read -- it accomplishes more in 150 pages that
Norman Mailer achieved in 600. Aldo Leopold's Sand County Almanac (1949 is a
pioneering classic of environmentalism -- though nowadays less widely known than
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring but much more learned and innovative. It's a very
good book but frankly I found the "lyrical" prose a bit too gooey for my taste.
Isaac Rosenfeld's Passage from Home is a distinguished novel of adolescent
alienation. It's kinky (about a boy's semi-sexual relationship to his deceased
mother's sister). It's a far better novel, I think, than Salinger's similar
and imitative Catcher in the Rye. What a pity that Rosenfeld died of a heart
attack at age 38!  A great loss to literature. I also read Anatole Broyard's
Kafka Was the Rage, a memoir of Greenwich Village in the 1940s although not
published until 1985. It's a noteworthy collection of short essay, able to be
much more candid about sex and sexuality than if it had appeared during the time
it chronicles. Broyard claims that 1946 was the best year ever: the war was over
and he had freedom and the G I Bill.

A pretty good for me too -- in 1946 just seven years old, sitting on the sunny
stoop eating raisins.