

================================================================================Source: 2023/01/title-your-own-film-noir

Title: Title Your Own Film Noir
Date: January 03, 2023

Here's a game. I've compiled a list of essential "film noir" nouns and
adjectives. Your job is to assemble them into the titles of noir films.

Nouns: city, death, shadow, night, fear, heat, murder, crime, kiss, street, gun,
thief, window, sidewalk, body.  Adjectives:  naked, black, evil, strange,
wrong, lonely, raw, secret, violent, sudden.

Using an adjective and a noun is good: e.g. Dark Shadow, Strange Gun, Violent
Window, Raw Heat.

Three words is better: City of Naked Death, Shadow of Evil Night.

Four words is triumphant: Secret Shadow on Crime Street, Dark Kiss at a Strange
Window.

Beware, though. Some of the combinations you assemble might already have been
used (Body Heat) -- or previously parodied (Naked Gun).

[January 5. Pearl Maneli writes:  Vivian, how could you have forgotten "blood." 
Blood on the Sidewalk, Evil Blood; Murder by Blood, etc.]

[February 5.  Elio-Per Limano writes: How about Secret Fear?]

[February 6. Amber Bernstein writes: Crooked? How about crooked?

Source: 2023/01/marcia-davenport-isobel-lennart

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: East Side, West Side, by Marcia Davenport
Date: January 16, 2023

Two weeks ago, I wrote some admiring remarks  about a little-known post-WWII
film called East Side, West Side. I said then that I was sufficiently impressed
and intrigued by the film that I intended to read the novel upon which it is
based, but that since ES,WS has evaporated into the mists of time, I would have
to wait for Interlibrary Loan to dig up a copy for me. Well, the novel has
arrived, coming haste-post-haste from Laramie, Wyoming, the flyleaf inscribed,
"To Mrs Eccleston, from Anna." Gosh, I'd love to know who Mrs. E and Anna were,
and what they (and Laramie) made of this extremely Manhattan-y book.

East Side, West Side (published in 1947), I can now report, is a big hunking
doorstop of a novel. Not a very good one, I'm afraid. It is prosy, untidy,
and crammed with too many episodes and too many undifferentiated characters.
To transform its meanderings into an economical screenplay required great
intelligence and imagination. All praise to the screenwriter, Brooklyn's own
Isobel Lennart, who condensed characters, eliminated subplots, rationalized
excesses, and to some degree toned down the book's inherent snobbery.

ES,WS can be described as an old-fashioned "woman's novel," and not in a good
way. Its female characters are, almost uniformly passive victims. Plus there's
far too much chat about makeup, dinner parties, and "fittings." There's an old
--very old-- canard that an erotic novel for women consists of 400 pages of
courtship and foreplay  followed by a proposal of marriage. I'm afraid that
ES,WS fits this unfortunate formula. Jessie Bourne, wronged and soon-to-be-
divorced wife, is wooed by gentlemanly General Mark Dwyer but o so slowly. Sex
is teased and deferred for chapter after chapter. In Isobel Lennart's alert and
improved script, women are not afraid to take charge.

There's one episode in the novel that seriously rankled me. There's a murder.
The privileged East Side aristocrats do not turn the guilty party over to the
police; instead, they suppress evidence and suborn perjury in order to keep the
scandal out of the newspapers. They succeed, though their plot couldn't have
deceived the dullest precinct flatfoot. In the film, I'm glad to say, a killer
is brought to justice.

Toward the end of the novel, Marcia Davenport introduces a long embarrassing
digression in which the General, just returned from the European theater,
lectures on the post war situation in Eastern Europe. I'm sorry to say that he
praises Soviet aggression in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, etc. I suspect that
these tortured apologetics were written before Davenport lived in Prague and was
engaged to marry the Czech foreign minister Jan Masaryk, who in 1948 was thrown
out of a window by agents of the KGB.  I hope that Davenport would have changed
her position after the defenestration.

Source: 2023/01/remarriage-repartneringe

Title: "Re-Partnering"
Date: January 22, 2023

It's shocking, is it not, that 50% of American marriages end in divorce. "Fifty
per cent" is not just a statistic; it's a reality that stands for tons of
personal distress and suffering and remorse. Alas, the rate of divorce for
second marriages is even higher -- 60%; for third marriages, according to
many sources, as much as 75%. The fact that the percentage rises with age and
experience at first seems counter-intuitive. Shouldn't second and subsequent
marriages be happier, more peaceful?  Don't people learn and improve with
experience?  Should they not know themselves better and therefore choose a
mate more wisely?  Now that they are veterans, shouldn't they have grasped the
art of marriage ? Learned how to solve problems? Learned to make a stronger
and more sensible commitment to each other? After all, they've voluntarily and
optimistically decided to take another crack at marriage. Why not bend every
effort to succeed?

But the numbers don't lie. Many of the people who have been divorced one time,
say sociologists who study marriage and the family, bring negative attitudes
to the next. Instead of assuming that marriage is a lifelong commitment, they
regard it as a flexible arrangement that can be abandoned if things get tough.
They've already survived one or two divorces and are therefore less fazed by the
prospect of another. And inasmuch as the taboo against divorce has already been
shattered, such social inhibitions that remain are the more readily overcome.

There are even simpler explanation for the failure of subsequent marriages:
some people are marriageable by nature and some are marriageable-skittish. The
population of the marriageable-skittish increases as the natively marriageable
leave the pool. Who remains to be married among the population setting out on
second or third marriages? Only those people who are not intrinsically inclined
to prosper in long term relationships. As the pool shrinks to the less and less
marriageable, the percentage of failures inevitably rises.

Divorce and the rates of divorce have been well studied. But what about second
marriages of people who are not divorced but widowed? It's curious that there
seems to be no interest in how widows and widowers (w-ws) fare when they
contract subsequent marriages. Are second marriages of the w-ws more or less
likely to succeed? Apparently, it's not a pressing problem for sociologists. Or
perhaps it's too hard to procure the data. Just who are the remarried (or "re-
partnered") w-ws's? Many "remarried" widows and widowers don't bother to inform
either church or state of their new situation. They may have financial or tax
reasons to avoid scrutiny. They may be separately domiciled. They're not talking
but they're there. Hard to find and hard to study.

My suspicion, drawn from anecdotal evidence and just looking around at people
of my own age cohort, is that the divorce rate among remarried w-ws is very
very low. Why? Well, for one thing, because w-ws are people who are among the
marriageable by nature. They've stayed together, stayed married until death did
them part. Because they succeeded at maintaining a long marriage, they very
likely entered a later marriage expecting to do so again. In addition, w-ws
are likely to be older and weathered. Because they're not scarred by a painful
divorce, they are more likely to be sound of heart rather than wary and wounded.

Re-partnered w-ws have outlived many of the tensions of more youthful marriages.
They're probably not obsessed or consumed by their careers or by worldly
success. For better or worse, their successes and failures have been long
established, long completed. If they're old enough to be retired, they may have
the leisure to talk intimately with one another.

One of the principal causes of divorce, we're told, is tension around child-
rearing, an activity in which philosophical differences between the parents can
cause all kinds of difficulties and tensions and squabbles.  But most w-ws
aren't going to have more children, and the ones that they have are likely to be
grown and gone.

Nor will there going to problems with in-laws, because the in-laws are all dead.

And older w-ws, if they're fortunate, don't have the financial problems of
earlier decades: no sudden unemployment, no need to move to a larger, more
expensive house, no college tuitions. If they're not formally remarried, they
most likely keep their resources separate and therefore don't need to negotiate
about how money is to be spent.

Older folk don't have to deal with contraceptives. While sex is probably less
urgent and imperious than in earlier decades, it might be more consoling,
especially because older partners should have a better grasp of their own
needs and how they might be fulfilled. And they are probably more accepting of
themselves and of their bodies.

It goes almost without saying that w-ws have experienced the deaths of their
previous spouse and therefore share a most important mutual experience. A bond,
a link. An important mutual consolation, one among the many experiences that
older w-ws bring to the table.  They know from living many years on the planet
that various things that seemed important years ago turned out not to matter at
all.

And most important of all: older w-ws have learned over the course of many
decades not only how to love but how to cherish and to respect a wife or
husband.

Source: 2023/01/my-life-in-vehicles

Title: Automobiles in My Life
Date: January 24, 2023

This will be a very short essay, because automobiles have never been a big part
of my life. Unlike many of my friends, I've never been one to have a romantic
relationship with a vehicle.

My parents did not own an automobile and neither of them ever learned to drive.
I was a most provincial city boy, happy with my bicycle and my subway token and
wanting no more. I did not learn to drive a car until after I was married and
left Brooklyn behind.  Nevertheless, over the course of a lifetime I've owned a
number of cars. The first one was identical to the Nash Rambler depicted in this
stock photo:

The Nash was the car I drove to California and back in the summer of 1963 (the
first time I was west of New York). I've since owned an Oldsmobile '88, a
Renault Dauphine (a dog), an underpowered Dodge station wagon, an uncomfortable
but sturdy Corolla, a Saab, a Camry, and a Volvo that lasted for twenty-one
years and which I only surrendered  because it was hard on my aching back.
I've driven perhaps a hundred other automobiles and an occasional truck, mostly
rented, but I've never felt anything like affection for a single one of them--
they take you from one place to another and I'm grateful for the mobility. I'm a
cautious driver, but I've made some bad mistakes behind the wheel and I am lucky
to have gone through life without being mangled or killed, so far.

I confess that at various times in my life I've experienced the glamor of the
open road. I'm a happy fellow when I'm driving a two-lane at dawn or twilight
in southern Missouri or rural South Dakota. I have a soft spot for Iowa's Jesse
James Cafe and for the Crete Diner in Oneonta, New York. A stop at Grandma's
Cafe in some faded downtown is to me a peak experience, however weak the coffee
or gluey the cherry pie. I treasure those glorious small-town attractions: among
many others, the corn cob palace, Carhenge, the Donna Reed Museum in Denison,
Iowa, the Jell-o Museum, the Purple Martin Tower in Griggsville, Illinois, the
world's largest ball of twine in Cawker, City, Kansas.

I don't drive long distances any more. In fact, in the last twenty years I've
probably spent more time on the John Deere "Lawn Tractor" than in any other
vehicle. Maximum of five miles per hour, my kind of speed. It may not be
glamorous but it gets the job done. I've "buried" the machine a couple of times,
but it's still in one piece and still working.

Source: 2023/02/my-life-in-telephones

Title: My Life with Telephones
Date: February 08, 2023

In the course of my lifetime, the telephone has gone from relatively rare
to ubiquitous, from wall to pocket, and from rotary dial to cell. From no
intelligence whatsoever to smart and then to very smart. Revolutionary changes.

When I was growing up in Flatbush, our family was prosperous enough to have a
telephone (not everyone did), but the device was only employed for local calls,
never for "long distance." Non-local calls were prohibitively expensive and were
only for deaths. To be called to the phone by long-distance was ominous.

Before the innovation of seven-digit dialing, we were Windsor 6-2077. Sometime
after WWII, our exchange was altered from WI 6 to GEdney 6. To me, this was an
early indication that the world was unstable and would be filled with ups and
downs. One day we were a Windsor, a royal house, and the next day we were a
Gedney, a brand of dill pickle.

Every telephone in existence looked exactly like this one.  The idea that they
would ever look otherwise was inconceivable.

For a month of so in the late 1950s, I had a job operating an old-fashioned
switchboard at the Sears warehouse on Utica Avenue -- definitely my most
satisfying telephone-related experience, lifetime. Ah that lovely click when the
plug fully entered its receptacle! A delight!  The one I sat at looked almost
exactly like this:

In my short time at the console, I became quite a proficient operator, only
cutting off important calls a handful of times. It's hard to believe that such
an antiquated-looking machine was still in use when I was a lad.

We must also recall the almost extinct telephone booth -- often out of order,
because someone wielded a crowbar to make off with nickels and dimes. And
smelly. Plus, one never had the right change when needing it most.  I do not
mourn the passing of the phone booth.

When we moved to Vermont in 1968, the Topsham Telephone Company had not yet
switched to seven digit dialing. Our home number was high-prestige 21, but we
were jealous of the family whose number was 9. Ours was a four-party line --
also a thing of the past. I wonder whether my grandchildren have ever heard the
phrase "party-line."  Or "rotary dial," for that matter.

When AT&T was deregulated and the market was thrown open to innovation, there
came a great explosion of telephone styles. Phones blossomed into many odd
colors and configurations. For a while, we owned one of these:

The Simpson phone was not my initiative but that of one of the younger members
of the family.

But more change was in the works. The prediction that there would be pocket
phones in the future seemed fantastical science fiction-y.  All phones had to
be connected with wires -- otherwise how could the sound get out of the wall and
into the handset. I scoffed.

Nowadays, everyone carries a cell phone. But it's not just a phone -- it's a
computer. It does everything -- perhaps too much. There is substance to the
frequently heard complaint that some individuals, especially young 'uns, relate
more readily to their cell than to the person sitting next to them. It's a
paradox: with more potential communication comes more loneliness. I myself must
admit that there's a fascination to the cell phone that is disarming.  I'm
trying not be allow myself to be addicted. But there is something wonderful
about a machine that lets you not only speak with but to actually see your
daughter, who is a thousand miles away. Not a trick that a rotary phone could
perform.

Not to be an alarmist or a Luddite, there's a serious downside to the cell.
It seems as though the machine  might be reorganizing youthful brains-- with
unknown consequences,

Scenes like this one have become scarily familiar:

Look up, children, look up! Please look up!

Source: 2023/02/strangest-dream-yet

Title: Strangest Dream Yet
Date: February 15, 2023

In this one, I was lying in restless sleep in my own bed, when a figure, a man,
came at me. He tried to get under my covers, and I cried out, "You can't get
into bed with me. I'm a married woman!"  Very theatrical -- and strange enough,
but the details are even more peculiar.  Of course I'm not a woman -- I'm an
octogenarian man -- but not in the dream. Secondly the man who was trying to
attack me, though identifiably male, had the face of a stereotypical witch --
long crooked nose, verrucose almost echinulate skin, etc.  In addition, my
bedmate, who in real life is a woman, was, in the dream, male. That's a heck of
a lot of gender confusion for one dream fragment.

What is most memorable, however, is my plaintive cry -- "you can't get into my
bed.  I'm a married woman."  How to interpret this sentence?  I can invent
any number of bizarre "'Freudian" theories, but in fact I have no idea, except
for the opinion that I've expressed before on this blog, that I'm a mighty dull,
conventional fellow from 7am to 11pm, but from 11pm until morning, I'm crazy
imaginative, unconventional, and possibly even interesting.

Source: 2023/02/words-of-my-life-hack

Title: Words of my Life:  Hack
Date: February 18, 2023

I cannot think of a word that has undergone greater change during the course of
my lifetime than the plain monosyllable "hack."

"Hack" entered my language, like much of my early vocabulary, through the medium
of baseball. "He took a good hack at that fastball;" "he's up there hacking
away." A hack was a hard swing, not necessarily a successful one. [There was
also Stan Hack, the great Chicago Cub third baseman whose career was just coming
to an end as I was becoming conscious.]  In the days of my youth, "hack" was
also slang for taxicab and a cab driver was a "hackie." I don't believe I've
heard that particular use of the word in decades (except in 1940s movies).
In seventh-grade "shop" class at PS 217, Mr. Kaminsky introduced me to the
"hacksaw." The hack in hacksaw derives from a medieval word meaning "cut into
pieces," but the taxi hack has an entirely dissimilar origin. It comes from
hackney, a breed of horse and later the carriage itself that the horse drew --
the name of which then migrated to our big yellow taxi.

When did I first hear the expression, a "hacking cough"?  And why hacking?
Perhaps because the noise of a cough is similar to the sound of the short sharp
blows when one hacks through a forest or the jungle with a machete. Maybe that's
how it originated-- but I'm not entirely convinced.

Hack has another older meaning -- mediocre or failing, or not good at one's
trade, as in a "hack writer," or a "political hack." This usage is probably a
shortened version of "hackneyed," meaning trite or overused. When you waste
time, you're just "hacking around." In such cases,"hack" denoted incompetence.

Nowadays "hack" has come up in the world. To hack into a computer implies not
laziness but skill. In this usage, "hack" is also malicious. Hackers may be
smart but they're also dangerous; they can cause crashes when they illegally
intrude to alter a program.

The most common contemporary use of "hack," if I'm reading the data correctly,
occurs in the recent coinage "lifehack," which is defined as "a strategy or
technique adopted in order to manage one's time and daily activities in a
more efficient way." I can't be the only person whose junk mail folder is
regularly inundated with recommended lifehacks, most of which seem mighty silly
or simplistic.

And then there's an even more specialized use. Here's one that's new to me:
"scientists announced that they had genetically hacked tobacco plants to
photosynthesize more efficiently." This usage seems to retain something of the
older meaning of cut or slash although it is a stretch to envision a genome
being attacked by a sword or a snickersnee.

Goodness gracious, it's a long road from waving at an inshoot with the old
hickory to inserting bits of DNA in the tobacco genome. But here we are.

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/boulder-violence-massacres

Title: Is Safety an Illusion?
Date: March 01, 2023

Am I just plain nuts to think that I live in a safe and secure world? All the
evidence says "perpetual vigilance" and "it can happen here" and "keep a close
watch?

Let's look at the situation.

Our state has a violent history. In the far past: at Sand Creek in 1864, several
hundred Cheyenne and Arapahos were brutally murdered. In 1914, a century or so
ago, the Pinkertons, employed by the Rockefellers, killed no-one-knows-how-many
miners when they shot randomly into the Ludlow tent colony.

More recently, killing has become the work not of army or paid professionals but
of heavily armed civilians. In 1999 there was the horrible Columbine High School
massacre in which twelve were killed and twenty-one wounded. Just thirteen years
later came the mass killing inside a Century 16 theater in Aurora, just a few
miles south of where I live, in which twelve people were killed and another
seventy injured. Then in 2015 there was a shooting at a Planned Parenthood
clinic in which three were assassinated and nine others wounded. In March of
2021, just two years ago, in the Table Mesa King Soopers, a "gunman" killed ten
-- customers, employees, a police officer. And last year, we had the nightclub
shooting in Colorado Springs where five were murdered and twenty-five others
wounded.

I didn't happen to be in any of these places, but I might have been. Although
I wasn't at the Columbine school, I was at that very moment in a different
classroom in Denver; I didn't go to the movies to see the Dark Knight, but
I do go to theaters. It wasn't "my" King Soopers that was terrorized, but
nevertheless I've bought stuff at that very store many times when I've happened
to be in south Boulder; I wasn't at the Colorado Springs bar but I've certainly
patronized bars. In any one of these cases, It could just as easily have been me
that was shot dead or maimed. I've been one lucky fellow, but people much like
me have not been so fortunate.

Two days ago, a vicious prank phone call set off a scramble and shelter-in-place
warnings at two-block away Boulder High School. BHS is where AGP and our three
children spent many a year. This scare turned out to be a case of "swatting" --
a disgusting new practice in which a nasty sociopath calls an institution to see
if he can get a reaction from a SWAT team. Deliberate malice. Such false alarms
are not mass killings, but they're still hair-raising, anxiety-provoking, and
potentially dangerous events.

It's coming close to home, isn't it. Luck of the draw, so to speak, that I'm
still whole.

When I was a teacher, I was never in real danger but, like everyone else on the
faculty, I had a few deranged students. I remember once that a particularly
odd young lady asked to make an appointment for a conference. Wary of her, I
proposed that instead of her coming to my office that we meet in the public
cafeteria. l can't remember what she wanted to talk about, but I recall vividly
that at one point she asked, "do you think I have a gun in my purse?"  I
replied "I don't know whether you do or not, but I know that this meeting is now
over." I stood up and walked away, half convinced that I was about to be shot in
the back. But I wasn't.

It's a violent world; no one has ever been truly safe. But all we can do is go
blithely about our business, hoping to be spared.

I shouldn't complain; we're not in a war zone; it's not like Ukraine, where at
any moment Russian drones and shells and missiles can drop on you from the sky.

Source: 2023/03/words-of-my-life-troll

Title: Words of my Life:  Troll
Date: March 05, 2023

"Troll" is a word that has strangely metamorphosized in the course of my
lifetime. While It once had warm associations; now, not so much.

"Troll" came into my life in the late 1940s at Makamah Beach on the Long Island
Sound. My grandmother Sonia taught me how to "troll" for bluefish or sunfish.
Here's how you do it. You paddle slowly and let your "shiner" dangle on fishing
line a few yards behind the rowboat. "Troll" is very like "trawl." Perhaps
the two words are variants; or perhaps "troll" is a distant descendent of
Latin trahere, to drag." Troll is related to "trolley," a device used to drag
things from place to place, as a trolley does its passengers. "Troll" seems to
incorporate the meaning "wander" or "wander into."

From my early interest in northern mythology (a "mythology," by the way, is
someone else's religion), I learned that a "troll" is a clumsy ugly monster who
hides out under bridges or in cemeteries. Trolls were troublesome, provocative,
perhaps even cannibalistic.

But nowadays, the older meanings of "troll" have been superseded. A 'troll'
is now a person who participates in a conversation, usually an internet
conversation, with the intention of sowing discord or causing trouble. I am not
sure about the origin of this usage, but I would like to guess or hypothesize
that it combines the sense of "wandering into" with the malevolence of the
Scandinavian figure. A troll is therefore an electronic ogre.

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/boot-booty-bootless-

Title: Words of My Life: Boot
Date: March 08, 2023

Is there another common English word that exhibits such varied meanings as
"boot?" Or one that has shown such continual transformation during my brief
years on the planet?

Like much of my early vocabulary, "boot" entered my life through the medium of
radio baseball . In my mind's ear, I can hear the voice of Red Barber announcing
that "umpire Babe Pinelli has just given the boot to Leo Durocher." "Given the
boot" does not make the claim that Durocher was presented with footwear; it
means that he was kicked out of the game as if with a metaphorically-booted
foot.

Nor was it only obstreperous managers who were "booted." "There's a two-hopper
to third, but Cox boots it" -- meaning that he bobbled it, even though the ball
never touched his foot. In baseball, curiously, you can boot a ball with your
hand, which is, logically speaking, as nonsensical as mis-gloving it with your
foot.

As everyone knows, a boot primarily protects the area from the shin down to the
toes. But there's a second common meaning to "boot": "something extra," as in
the phrase "to boot." "He's a great pitcher -- and a good hitter to boot." The
shoe-ish meaning comes through old French from a Germanic source; the profit or
use or something-extra meaning derives from an unrelated OE (Old English) word;
moreover, in latter stages of its development "boot" has also been influenced by
its phonological neighbors booty, and, I suspect, butt.

In order to gain some historical perspective, let us consider the ways in which
Shakespeare makes use of the word boot. "To boot" meaning "in addition" is
employed frequently, as, for example, when Henry IV swears "by my scepter and
my soul to boot," or when Macduff says to Malcolm that "I would not be the
villain that thou think'st/ For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp/
And the rich east to boot." A less familiar use occurs in The Winter's Tale,
when Hermione, accused of adultery, concedes that  "it shall scarce boot me/
To say 'not guilty.'" Her "boot" means that it will not be to her advantage or
profit to assert her innocence. This signification can shade over into gain or
even into a coin itself, as for example when Camillo passes money to Autolycus,
saying,"hold thee, there's some boot." Contemplating his gain, Autolycus muses,
"What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot is here with this
exchange." Just as boot is gain, so bootless means without gain or helpless, as
when Henry V explains that he will be powerless to restrain a rampage: "We may
as bootless spend our vain command/ Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil."

Shakespeare gets some punning mileage out of the multiple meanings of "boot."
Glendower boasts that "[T]hree times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head/ Against
my power; thrice from the banks of Wye/ And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent
him/ Bootless home and weather-beaten back. "Bootless" means helpless; but
sardonic Hotspur, never noted for a sophisticated sense of humor, cannot resist
the obvious pun: "Home without boots. And in foul weather too."

So a boot can be a shoe, an advantage, an addition, a reward, a help. But look
what's happened to the poor helpless word in more recent times. "Boot Hill"
is a cowboy frontier cemetery.  Across the waters, a "boot" is the trunk of
an automobile. The infamous "Denver boot" is a wheel clamp that immobilizes a
vehicle. In the army, a boot is a recruit or rookie who is sent to "boot camp."

But then, along came the computer, where one "boots" or restarts one's machine.
This use, I'm told, originated with the phrase, to "pull oneself up by one's own
bootstraps" -- i.e. perform a difficult task at one's own initiative, just as a
computer starts itself. There's also the warmboot, which sounds little too much
like the old torture device, the Spanish boot and which can also be called a
softboot (but not by me).

In Shakespeare's day, boot was not always distinguished from "booty" as in the
case of the Archbishop of Canterbury's famous bees, which "like soldiers, armed
in their stings,/ Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,/ Which pillage
they with merry march bring home." Booty as pillage survives to this day, but
is, I think, obsolescent. Nowadays, booty is more likely to be used in the
phrase "booty call" which means (and here I'm relying on the invaluable Urban
Dictionary) a "telephone call made to request a sexual encounter." Who would
ever have devised or imagined such an innovation?  Does this booty derive
from "shake your booty," meaning to move your butt or bottom in a sexually
suggestive way?  Not a meaning known to Shakespeare, or at least, not one that
the Shakespeare concordance acknowledges.

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/old-age-homes

Title: Old Age Home/ Retirement Community/ Senior Living Center
Date: March 10, 2023

We were invited for dinner at the place to which a number of my "senior" friends
have retreated. The experience was cordial and civilized, but somehow troubling.
I know one thing: I don't want to wind up there. I'm staying put as long as I
possibly can.

Too many old folks. I want to live where there are people of all ages and
varieties. Babies and toddlers and tweens and teen-agers and young adults. More
activity, fewer canes and crutches and walkers.

The place, though handsome and well-appointed, seemed to me to be inhospitable.
Supervisors at every entrance. We had to check in at a fancy kiosk where some
sort of electronic device took our official data and printed out a visitor
badge, which I pocketed. It felt much too "policed."

The dining room was hushed and mannerly. The food was institutional-plus, but
nevertheless institutional. I much prefer my own cooking; I've made a fetish of
self-sufficiency all these years and I'd like to continue so. I like to stir my
own pot.

The apartments are splendid, but the long narrow corridors between apartments
are oppressive. Too reminiscent of hospitals. Or jails.

My principal objection: friends who have moved there become subsumed into the
society of the place. They participate in the home's "activities." It's good and
healthy for them, I suppose, but my friends become lost to me. Swallowed in a
kindly maw. It's scary, to those of us who don't want to be swallowed.

I'll stay here on Walnut Street as long as I can. As in the traditional resolve,
Iplan to leave "feet-first." But we shall see what the future brings.

Source: 2023/03/outdoor-gear-shops

Title: Outdoor Gear Shops
Date: March 15, 2023

Source: 2023/03/locatives

Title: Can We Hope for a Locative Renaissance?
Date: March 18, 2023

Here on Walnut Street, we're trying to make more and better use of locatives
-- words that have long been underemployed and undervalued. We think that the
language (and therefore the world) would be richer and more commodious if others
would join with us in this endeavor. But we're not evangelizing, heck no! We
honor and respect each and every person's private and personal linguistic
choices, locatively-speaking.

Nor do we refer to the common adverbial locatives, such as homeward, downtown,
underground, or nearby.  The locatives that we wish to revive and reinvigorate
are the neglected -- even forsaken -- classics of locativity.

Everyone uses the locative where -- the point upon which you metaphorically
stand --  but how many of us remember to employ the excellent and useful "to"
form, whither, or the "from" form, whence.  It's true that whither and whence
sound a trifle obsolescent, but with frequent use the flexible ear will soon
accommodate. One might be tempted to say "wither goest thou" or "whence com'st
thou", but with a little effort, "whither do you go" and "whence do you come"
will sound perfectly natural, I'm sure.

Similarly, we regularly use the word here, but by golly, we have slighted hither
(to here) and hence (from here).

Equally neglectful is the abandonment of thither and thence ("to there" and
"from there"). Extraordinary useful words, relegated thoughtlessly to the rear
of the locative line.

And then of course, there's yon, yond and yonder, all related varieties of
"there" but further off than "there." At a distance. Shakespeare, as one would
expect, is a most skillful deployer of yons. From Hamlet: "But look, the morn in
russet mantle clad/ Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill."  From Julius
Caesar. "Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;/ He thinks too much; such men
are dangerous."  From Romeo and Juliet. "What lady's that/ Which doth enrich
the hand of yonder knight?"

A yonnish locative that is not endangered and continues to thrive is the
word beyond. Shakespeare's most remarkable and I daresay most beautiful use
of "beyond" occurs in Cymbeline, when Innogen learns that her exiled lover
Posthumus Leonatus has returned to England. She is impatient to meet him at
Milford Haven; Innogen's speech that begins with the plaintive cry, "O, for a
horse with wings" includes the most transcendent barrier-busting locative in the
entire history of the English language. Her longing to see her lover is, she
claims, "beyond beyond." A superlative locative, beyond anyone's imagination but
Will's.

Source: 2023/03/being-carded

Title: Carded at 84
Date: March 28, 2023

Wow, carded at this great advanced age! Not, of course, carded so as to be
permitted to purchase alcoholic beverages.  Those days are long since gone, and
besides, I don't drink.

It was yesterday, at the Denver Art Museum, when I asked for senior tickets (a
big $2.00 discount). "May I see your driver's license. I have to check that
you're over 65?" "Are you kidding, I'm 84!"  "No, I need to see it." Needed
to see LERM's also, although she's 79. Frankly, we were both a bit flattered,
even if it was all because of bureaucratic procedure rather than guess-your-age
eyeballing.

I remember that a score of years ago, a clerk at a some venue or other scanned
my face and without the least hesitation charged me senior fare. I was then only
65 and was slightly insulted to be taken for my full actual age. Now, a similar
but upside-down situation, and I'm mighty amused.

Source: 2023/03/shadowlands-how-to-improve-1

Title: Shadowlands (1993)
Date: March 31, 2023

Recently some much-admired old friends recommended a movie called Shadowlands
(1993). They pledged that we'd love it. But we didn't. In fact, we regarded
it as a film that lacked value and integrity. Of course, we won't mention to
our friends that we responded so negatively and that we now question their
esthetics. I'm sorry but it makes me uncomfortable to doubt people whom I
otherwise respect.

But gosh was this Shadowlands a pretentious stinker! It transformed into pure
soap opera the peculiar relationship between novelist and religious apologist C.
S. Lewis and his fan/correspondent Joy Davidman. We were not entranced by the
"white marriage" of a reserved, asexual Oxford don and a smart down-to-earth
Jewish-turned-Christian New Yorker. But the odd couple hardly had time for
an idyllic picnic on the banks of a picturesque stream before Joy developed
a terminal cancer, at which point the movie transitioned from merely dismal
to full bore lugubrious, perhaps because the director relied on the "Pause
Meaningful" (also called the "Soulful Two-Shot") for much of his effects.

Joy Davidman was played by Debra Winger, who had died of cancer ten years before
in Terms of Endearment (1983), so she was on familiar ground when pale and wan
in a hospital bed.

With such a story, a director should make every effort to avoid turning his film
into a tear-jerker. Not this director, not this movie. Shadowlands ended with a
shameless climax in which Lewis (Anthony Hopkins) indulged in prolonged tears,
sobs, and theatrical snuffling. The old manipulative formula: if you want to
make your audience cry, make your leading man weep.

Over the course of Shadowlands' static 131 minutes, I found myself longing for
old-fashioned movie action. If not a car chase, at least a mad dash --with
a couple of fender-benders -- to the hospital. Perhaps Hopkins, excluded by
a Nurse Ratchet from Winger's hospital room, might have gained entrance by
breaking a window in an adjoining room and tip-toeing across a narrow ledge,
twelve stories high.  And instead of yet another tepid scene in the college's
common room, how about letting Hopkins punch a fellow don right in the kisser.
Anything but another long shot of an o-so-green meadow and purling brook.

Source: 2023/04/roux-rue

Title: Roux/ Rue/ Rue/ Rubaboo
Date: April 07, 2023

"Roux" is word that everyone seems to know but me. To the best of my
recollection, "roux" had never crossed my personal threshold until last week
-- perhaps because I have never taken any special interest in fine cuisine.
I've now enlightened myself, but at the cost of blundering into a bewildering
etymological thicket.

"Roux," to reprise the obvious, is "a mixture of flour and fat cooked together
and used to thicken sauces.... Butter or lard are commonly used fats." But
why "roux," with its excrescent French x? Un nom étrange. Roux, if I have it
right, means brown, or more precisely, reddish brown (as opposed to "brun" or
"marron." In the case of the sauce, roux is an abbreviated version of "beurre
roux," or brown butter and, curiously, comes unbuttered into English as simply
"roux." Roux derives from Latin russus or ruber, reddish, both of which ancient
words originate in the same Indo-European root. I've now learned of a kind of
surgery called a Roux-en-Y, probably pronounced "ruin why," which is a kind of
"anastomosis"--  or gastric bypass -- in which blood or intestinal vessels
are configured into a Y shape. But although one may suspect so, this "roux"
has nothing to do with sauces, thank goodness, but is named for the Swiss 
physician who originated the surgery, César Roux. I suspect that Roux's roux
does not descend from ruber but from rufus, red-headed, as in William II, aka
William Rufus.

Source: 2023/04/idaho-travel-abortion

Title: Idaho Bill Would Restrict Female Travel
Date: April 09, 2023

Representative Clay Hawkins of Eagle Hollow has filed a bill in the Idaho
legislature that would regulate the travel of women of child-bearing age.

Hawkins' bill would prohibit fertile women (14 to 54) from leaving Idaho unless
they could present evidence that they were not pregnant. "How else," said
Hawkins, "can we prevent them from traveling to a child-murdering state like
Colorado and killing an unborn child?" The bill would require women to present a
certification from a doctor or the results of a recent pregnancy test.

The bill is expected to sail through the Republican dominated legislature.
Governor Brad Little has pledged to sign the bill "as soon as it hits my desk."
He called it "common-sense legislation."

Asked how the state plans to enforce the legislation, Representative Hawkins
replied, "roadblocks."

[April 15:  I wrote this parody of Republican foolishness a week ago, fully
confident that my readers would recognize it as a joke -- an April fool
exercise. But to my surprise, almost everyone who commented or contacted me took
it for real. Readers readily accepted the idea that an Idaho legislature and an
Idaho governor would take seriously a proposal to examine the menstrual cycles
of childbearing-age women.  It goes to show not that my readers are unusually
naive, but that the present-day Republican party is so fanatic, dictatorial, and
intrusive that it might just offer such legislation. Which tells us something
about the sorry state of our beloved country.

In truth, I do not believe it was my imitation of journalist style that deceived
my readers. I think it was the accompanying photograph. The doofus-schmendrick
in the photo is in fact a member of the Idaho House of Representatives (though
he's not Clay Hawkins, whom I invented). But the so-called Clay Hawkins has the
face of a person who would conceive of such a fascistic bill -- the foolish,
fatuous eyes, the pseudo-patriarchal beard no doubt camouflaging a receding
or slack chin, the general air of know-nothing simple-minded idiocy. It's the
picture, not the prose, that sold the satire.]

Source: 2023/04/joseph-green-genealogy

Title: Written for Descendants of Sonia and Joseph Green
Date: April 18, 2023

This is a picture of my maternal grandparents, my mother's parents, Sonia and
Joseph Green. I imagine that it was the work of a professional photographer.
I guess that the image dates from when he was about thirty years old and she
twenty-five -- so 1910 or thereabouts. I have no idea why the photograph has
faded to blue-purple; it used to be ordinary black-and-white. I believe that the
costumes that the formal young couple wear were hired for the occasion, as was
the habit in those days; I doubt that their wallets would have permitted such
fashionable dress.

They're a handsome young couple, are they not?  She very feminine, even
delicate, prominently displaying her wedding ring; he sporting a slightly rakish
mustache and a full head of youthful hair. When I knew him, forty years later,
his hair was white and very sparse.

Sonia Chafetz and Joseph Usilewski arrived at Ellis Island in August of 1904,
traveling steerage from Rotterdam. I've written about my grandmother Sonia here.

I know very little about my grandfather, Joseph Usilewski, later Green. I
was thirteen when he died, in 1952, from the last of his five heart attacks.
Although my grandparents lived just around the corner on Coney Island Avenue,
and I found myself in their presence very often, we had little to say to each
other -- mostly because I spoke only English and his English was halting at
best. We sometimes played 500 rummy and fan-tan, and I can remember him saying,
"Now I'm in a predicament" before discarding, but that's about the most intimate
we became. He was aloof and unsmiling --not in any sense "fun." But why should
he be? His life had not been easy. He was from Minsk in present-day Belarus and
was trained to be a pharmacist, but he had been drafted into the Russian army
for the usual twenty-year term. His pay, he told me, was "a ruble every other
month, when we got it." So he did the sensible thing -- deserted and ran off to
America with Sonia. The family story, which I heard from my mother, was that
both Joseph and Sonia were engaged to other people when they met and eloped.
My mother also said that when they arrived New York they had just one pair of
shoes between them and that Sonia would wait at home until Joseph came home
from work before she could leave the house. My mother also told me that when
she herself was born (June 14, 1905), her father was not allowed to visit Sonia
in the hospital because he could not prove that he was her husband (no ring, no
papers). Whether my grandparents were ever legally married, I do not know; nor
does it matter.

My grandfather was a strict father; my mother said that he raised his children
"with the belt." There was a two-year period when he wouldn't speak to my then
young-adult mother because he disapproved of her male friendships.

I don't think his was a happy marriage; he was frequently absent and it has been
supposed that there were "other women" in his life. Nor was he a great success
in the new continent; he never found a home in the world of business although
as far as I know he was always employed and never in debt. In his last years he
worked as a messenger carrying papers and money from one downtown business to
another. When I knew him, he and Sonia lived in a very modest two-room apartment
(in a third-floor "walkup").

I suppose I should mention that although born Jewish, neither Joseph nor Sonia
practiced their religion. Neither of them ever attended a synagogue or even
honored Rosh Hashanah or Pesach at home. Joseph was a socialist and an active
member of the Workmen's Circle, in his day a mutual aid society for recent
immigrants. I know nothing of his political commitments except that he had a
deep loathing for the communist government of Russia. "Worse than the czars."

Joseph had a brother, Nahum, and a sister whose name I have forgotten. Neither
of his siblings had children.

If I had been more enterprising, I might have learned from Joseph and his family
what life was like in White Russia in the nineteenth century. But I was too
young, too self-centered. Too bad.

Source: 2023/04/kitsch-or-the-epitome-of-tacky

Title: Kitsch? or the Epitome of Tacky?
Date: April 26, 2023

We visited the grandiose Americana at Brand Mall in Glendale, California. It's
gigantic, splendid, and luxurious.

I was, I gotta say, utterly transfixed by the artificial lake and its wondrous
statue. Words cannot do it justice; here's a picture:

The statue is titled, "The Spirit of American Youth Rising from the Waves."
It is 18 feet tall, weighs 2500 pounds and is covered with 23 carat gold,
which, I'm going to guess, made it expensive to construct and to install.  It
rises from the artificial lake and soars loincloth-clad above the neighboring
Cheesecake Factory.  It's shamelessly, courageously vulgar.

It is, in my opinion, the epitome of kitsch: crass, tasteless, crude, gaudy,
flashy, pretentious, showy. Banal. I think the contemporary expression is "over
the top."  No Stendhal syndrome for me.

I must say that it doesn't engage the intellect or require much in the way of
interpretation. It might even be called fake art expressing a fake emotion.
Nevertheless, it's lovable in a kind of melodramatic way. I'm glad to have
encountered it, even though it doesn't speak well for American or Californian
sensibilities. Perhaps it embodies tasteless nouveau-riche ambition. Bottom
line: it's astounding.

Source: 2023/05/more-republican-legislation

Title: More Republican Legislative Initiatives
Date: May 08, 2023

Texas Representative Trey Moody (R-Flower Mound) introduced a bill in the lower
house that would require all public school teachers, administrators, and other
personnel to bear weapons during the entire school day. Weapons must be "carried
publicly, in a visible manner" such as in a hip holster.

Moody stated that "not only would firearms discourage shooters, they would also
improve discipline and learning. An armed teacher is a respected teacher," he
declared. According to the bill, teachers who refuse to carry sidearms would be
immediately fired "for cause."

The Idaho legislature passed a bill that would reinstate the firing squad
as a method of execution. The firing squad would consist of six to eight
citizen volunteers. Anticipating great demand for the position, the law states
that members of the squad be chosen by lottery from Idaho citizens who can
demonstrate that they are proficient with 'long guns, or AK-47s" and are
certified members of the National Rifle Association.

Tennessee senator Shelby Shatzline (R-Sequatchie) has sponsored a bill that
would automatically expel professed atheists from the state legislature.

Atheists, he contended, "lack the moral bearings to serve the public. They
simply cannot tell right from wrong, inasmuch as they are not guided by a loving
and  omniscient deity." The bill is expected to pass resoundingly in the
Republican-supermajority Tennessee legislature, though its impact may be moot,
inasmuch as there are no known atheists in either house. Senator Shatzline is
also drafting a bill that would expel atheists from Tennessee.

South Carolina representative Britt Brownfields, has introduced a bill that
would penalize unmarried people who live together. It would impose a penalty of
"100% of state tax liability" upon such couples. Brownfields stated that living
"in sin" weakens the moral fibre of the nation and flouts Biblical law.

According to the draft of the bill in addition to the tax penalty, violators
would immediately be tarred and feathered and ridden out of town on a rail.
Perdue Chicken will volunteer the feathers and Koch Industries the tar.  A
donor or vendor of rails has not yet been selected.

Source: 2023/05/even-more-republican-legislative-initiative

Title: Still Another Republican Legislative Initiative
Date: May 14, 2023

Alabama representative Ernie Yarbrough has introduced a bill called the Abolish
Abortion in Alabama Act which reclassifies abortion as murder in the first
degree. Pregnant women who abort a child, either surgically or through the use
of drugs, would be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. According to the
Alabama Political Reporter, Yarbrough contends that "abortion is murder, and
justice demands that our laws treat it as such."

Representative Yarbrough has been one the nation's foremost advocates of what he
calls "medical freedom."  He has long opposed face masks and covid vaccinations
-- or in fact vaccinations of any sort. He "believe[s] that no person, entity or
government has the right to force its citizens to violate bodily autonomy. The
right, blessing and freedom as individuals to make personal medical, health and
wellness decisions ultimately rests in the hands of Alabama citizens." Abortion
is therefore an intrusion into the God-given right of every embryo (or unborn
child) to be born. "All of us, including fetuses, deserve to make these personal
decisions without threat of coercion, persecution or job loss."

Representative Randolph *Randy" Holman (R-Phenix City) has submitted a bill
that would take Yarbrough's policy position a bit further. Holman's bill
would require the "re-fertilization" of women who were guilty of abortion.
In most cases this would involve identifying the father of the unborn child
and requiring the couple to re-fertilize.  Otherwise, says, Holman, even if
a child- murdering woman is fined or jailed, she hasn't made restitution to
society. Only "re-fertilization" will do the job, Holman says. He calls it
"compensatory pregnancy."

If the father of the unborn child cannot be found, surrogates may be employed.
Surrogate fathers would include members of the legislature who voted in support
of the legislation.

Representative "Randy" Holman:

Source: 2023/08/my-summer-so-far

Title: My Summer So Far
Date: August 25, 2023

It's the end of August 2023, and what an unusual summer so far. It's all about
the rain -- constant, unremitting, monsoony.  Record-setting.  Last week
we had three dry days in a row -- first time this entire summer. I've not
once seen the stars. One of the great pleasures here is the shiny distinct
Milky Way on a clear night -- but there has not been a single cloudless
night in months. The pond, therefore, has been gloriously filled and the
waterfall, characteristically only a trickle at this season, is still a
veritable picturesque and noisy Niagara. We had a great blueberry crop this
year, but not a single edible plum, perhaps because of the late frost. The
vegetables have done well, especially the tomatoes and cucumbers. I don't know
why I haven't seen a single cabbage butterfly this summer -- but I'm glad
they've shunned us. Ditto the tomato hornworm. Is it the rain? We've had more
tomatoes than we can eat even after giving away bagsful. LERM and I have had a
great time, weather permitting, with the various flower gardens. Delphiniums
and phlox have had especially good years -- and we've planted some new shrubs
--hydrangeas and weigelas -- and extended the day lily borders. Mowing has been
a challenge, because the grass grows so rapidly and there are so few days when
it's dry enough to cut. As a result, when I do find an opportunity, the grass
comes out of the machine in wet clumps and plugs. Unsightly, to say the least.
NGP has not been impeded by the weather or by the surgery. He's out there every
day tending to the forest and expanding his course. Not many guests (my friends
are becoming too old to travel). BHP and his family were here for almost three
weeks -a great pleasure -- but the daughter never appeared,.

And to think that last summer was so droughty that the well went dry.

I've done some reading but no writing -- not even on this blague.

Source: 2023/09/at-home

Title: "At Home"
Date: September 17, 2023

"And you're still at home," observed Mr. Henry, who had arrived to repair
our on-the-fritz propane-powered clothes dryer. (Mr. Henry has been curating
our appliances for a generation; he can diagnose a problem by a glance from
several yards away, or perhaps he does it by magic. He's a kind of stove and
refrigerator genius).

"At home?" Mr. Henry had inquired about my age and I had confessed my longevity.
"Confessed" is not exactly the right word. "Bragged," perhaps. I've reached the
age when I don't mind if people ask about my years. I'm proud, I think, to have
reached 84 and 5/12s still able to do a day's work -- when many of my friends
and former colleagues have plummeted off the cliff or have moved to a "senior
living" (formerly called "old age") residence.

But Mr. Henry's comment took me aback -- took me a few seconds to grasp. "Still
at home?" Where else would I be? Ah, in an institution.

I wonder about the difference between the 84-year-old person that Mr. Henry
perceived and the 84 that I experience, internally, every day. To myself, I'm
certainly not the geezer that I catch sight of in the mirror. Gray, paunchy, a
trifle stooped. A bit unsteady on his feet. Even on my best days, I'm not as
vigorous, even middle-age vigorous, as I once was. I tire easily and rest often.
Work a bit, nap a bit. I no longer perform feats of strength, not only because
my muscles have shrunk, but because I'm afraid of injuring my always-vulnerable
back.

I don't feel seventeen, but I feel myself to be myself. I'm competent. My brain,
thanks be to all the gods and goddesses in the various pantheons, is still
functioning well, though I'm troubled by "noun loss."  I know which plant
is a delphinium and which a hyssop, but there are days when those nouns just
disappear and can't be recalled. Same with the names of people. The recall
system is as fragile as the dryer, but the storage system is working just fine
(if I'm patient).

I find that sometimes people who look only at my outside underestimate my
abilities and give me credit and even praise for actions that I think of as
routine. I find this phenomenon to be mildly insulting. It's no fun to exceed
expectations when the expectations are so low.  At the same time, I know that
the task that I can easily dispatch today, might be one that I won't be able
to perform tomorrow. And yet I don't want to allow myself to be patronized or
applauded for putting my pants on correctly,

I no longer feel immortal. In fact, I feel mortality pressing in on me. I don't
fear death, but I'm not ready for it. I'm enjoying life far too much. How I
would feel if my various twinges and aches turned into chronic pains I cannot
say. But for today the watchword is, press on!

Source: 2023/09/bottlebrush-buckeye

Title: The "bottlebrush buckeye"
Date: September 19, 2023

As a youth, I spent many a happy hour in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. One of
the plantings that I remember vividly was what I conceived of as a "wall" of
bottlebrush buckeyes. It's been many a year, but what stands in my memory is
roughly 40 or 50 linear feet of 20-foot-tall decorative shrubs in full flower.

So naturally, when I came to West Bradford, I tried to reproduce the effect. I
just happened to have a perfect spot for a wall of buckeyes -- a fertile slope
of the proper size and shape. In 1980 (plus or minus a year or so) I purchased
two such plants from White Flower Farm in Connecticut and set them 30 feet
apart, optimistically hoping that over the course of the years they would expand
to fill in the allotted space.

It did not happen. One of the plants lingered for a year or so before giving up
the ghost; the other stood still -- grew a bit, then died back over the winter.
Our Zone 3 Vermont weather proved to be too harsh for a plant that had thrived
in Zone 6 Brooklyn. I resigned my self to the fact that my experiment with the
bottlebrush buckeye was a failure.

But then perhaps 10 years ago, after decades of stagnancy, the plant began to
increase in size. Global warming?  Wetter summers? Maturity? I can't say. And
then this past summer, after forty-plus years of doing virtually nothing, the
bottlebrush buckeye produced some flowers. And there they are -- long awaited
and very welcome!

(The purplish plant in the background is Joe Pye weed, eutrochium purpureum,
which thrives and multiplies without the least bit of assistance from me. And
also a 20-year-old weeping willow and young Eastern cottonwood, which I set in
place about 5 years ago.)

This past summer, dazzled that the buckeye produced its extravagant flowers at
last, I gave it a few hours of care. Weeded it, pruned away the dead growth, 
and gave it a small optimisitc dose of 10-10-10 fertilizer. I'm very curious to
see what happens next summer. Could it be that my 40-year old experiment will
succeed at last?

Source: 2023/09/tree

Title: Cemetery struck by fallen tree
Date: September 21, 2023

I'm more or less reconciled to my anonymity. Just not a famous dude. Not an
"influencer." Haven't been covered by newspapers or reporters in a generation or
two. But now notoriety has struck.

Careful and diligent readers of this blague know that the old West Bradford
graveyard -- a couple of acres of bumpy terrain -- abuts our Vermont property.
And now they will discover that "our" cemetery has been featured in the Bradford
Journal-Opinion (formerly the United Opinion). Here's the story:

The picture is of such poor quality that it's impossible to decipher. The story
isn't that easy to read either so here's a transcription:

Cemetery struck by fallen tree

by Alex Nuti-deBiasi

BRADFORD--The Bradford Selectboard voted last week to spend $3500 to carefully
clean up the West Bradford cemetery after a tree fell last week shattering limbs
and possibly damaging headstones and gravesites.

"It looks like a bomb went off," Donnalyn Burgess Lyon told selectboard members
at the meeting on August 24. I'm beside myself."

Lyon has several generations of family members buried at the bucolic cemetery
located on Hackett Hill Road near South Road. She visited the cemetery to trim
the grass and care for the gravesites.

A reporter who visited the cemetery ahead of last week's meeting did not see any
damaged headstones, but at least one heavy limb rested on a stone.

Lyon told a reporter she visited the cemetery on a weekly basis to care for
plots and trim the grass around stones until she broke her leg. Now she makes it
every couple of weeks.

Board members said it appears that the tree was located on an abutter's property
but that the town should spend the money to clean up the municipal property
before pursuing reimbursement from the abutter. They solicited a quote from
Thomson Logging for the clean up.

"We want it taken care of and not cause more damage," board chair Meroa Benjamin
said.

Hey, we're newsworthy -- and a diligent reporter is right there on the case.
We're a little taken aback that Donnalyn's sensationalist remark that "it looks
like a bomb went off" was reported without comment.  A bomb didn't go off; a
tree fell.

Moreover, we object to the story's headline: the cemetery wasn't struck by a
fallen tree; it was struck by a "falling" tree. Once it's fallen it doesn't do
any striking.

For the record, the tree was a big tooth aspen, which folks around here call
"popple." It was huge, and it was thoroughly rotten at the base of the trunk.
The wonder is, "it hath endured so long."

And also: the "abutter" has reimbursed the town for the cost of the cleanup.

Source: 2023/09/awkward-question

Title: Awkward Question
Date: September 27, 2023

I was at the old-age home (sorry, "retirement community") last week -- a place
that gives me the creeps even though many of my friends and former colleagues
seem to live there happily. (I'm on the waiting list but I hope that I'll never
be constrained to move in.)  I was there to share lunch with a 90-year-old
friend. At the next table over (in the rather luxurious dining room) was a woman
whom I knew slightly fifty years ago -- as a neighbor and as the mother of a
Flatirons Elementary School tudent. She's 89, a widow, and still healthy, still
attractive.

She (let's call her Ms. GK) initiated the conversation with this question. "Is
your wife still alive?"

It wasn't the inquiry itself that took me aback. It was the casual way in which
it was asked, with no more emotional resonance than, say, "do you want raisins
in your cereal?" or, "is it raining outside?"

Which made me realize that Ms. GK --  and all her fellow denizens of the
facility -- live in a world of "sole-survivors" where the deaths of spouses
"were as plentie as Blackberries." Therefore, there is nothing noteworthy
or remarkable for her to inquire about the status of a long time companion,
especially when more than half of husbands and wives have already kicked the old
bucket.

Nevertheless, the lack of emotion, the cold bloodedness, the absence of
euphemism, of Ms. GK's question produced in me a "take stock" moment. Whether we
are in or out of the institution, we are in the same ninth-decade world.

But I do hope that I myself do not become quite so matter-of-fact about the
death of friends and family.

Source: 2023/09/janet-reno

Title: Our Classmate Janet Reno
Date: September 29, 2023

My first visit in four months to the new acquisitions shelf of the Boulder
Public Library turned out to be fruitful, for I discovered J. H. Stiehm's
2023 biography of Janet Reno: Janet Reno, A Life (Gainesville, Fl). Janet was
a classmate ('60) at Cornell and also proceeded with me to Harvard, where
she was one of 16 women in her law school class, and I was a undistinguished
graduate student in GSAS. I knew her slightly at Cornell; she "sat desk" at Sage
Hall, where I was a frequent caller. Our relationship never advanced beyond
superficial chat and I was surprised as all get out when she re-emerged in 1993,
having been appointed Attorney-General by President Clinton. She served in that
position for eight years and made quite a mark.

I've been on a project of reading the memoirs of members of my age-cohort,
especially of those with whom I've crossed paths, even if ever so slightly.  I
think that so far, Janet Reno is the only one of my acquaintances who's earned
not just an autobiography, but a biography of her own.

I was particularly interested in the paragraphs about Janet's Cornell and
Harvard years, but I'm sorry to report that those sections are notably thin
and superficial. Stiehm's account make Cornell seem archaic and primitive --
out of a 1930s movie. It is news to me that "freshman wore beanies, sophomores
had Cornell sweaters, juniors had blazers, and seniors had straw hats." Mere
mythology. It's true, though, that there was considerable drinking at fraternity
and apartment parties, but for what college was that not true?

Careless errors: Janet did not live at Dickinson Hall, she lived at Clara
Dickson Hall. She did not study political theory with non-existent Professor
Mario Anatti, but no doubt she did take classes with the distinguished scholar-
politician Mario Einaudi.

Stiehm passes over in silence the most egregious moment in Janet's career --
when she was suckered into allowing villainous Ken Starr to expand his probe
into Bill Clinton's sexual adventures. Either an apology or an explanation
should surely have been in order.

Source: 2023/09/in-which-i-do-a-good-deed

Title: In Which I Do a Good Deed
Date: September 30, 2023

We were sitting on a metal bench in front of the Boulder Public Library, resting
up for the half mile walk home. It was unusually peaceful; families in and
out, borrowing or returning their bags of books. Once in a while, there's a
discordant note: a homeless, drugged, or deranged person, muttering or sometimes
shouting incoherently, dragging a dirty blanket or wheeling a stolen supermarket
cart or bicycle. But yesterday there was an event. A large young man, 40ish, had
lost his child. He asked us, "have you seen a boy with a red hat." No we hadn't,
but we said we'd pay attention. The poor distressed guy ran from place to place
in the park and in the adjacent parking lot, shouting "Zack."  As he became
increasingly agitated, so did I. Is there a worse feeling of powerlessness than
when you've lost contact with your child. As he became more and more frantic,
I remembered Florence Dombey and Mrs. Brown, and Etan Patz, and Leiby Kletzky.
After a few moments, I said to LERM, "if the boy with the red hat had come out
of the library alone, we would have seen and noticed him. He's got to be inside
the library and I'm going to find him." I walked into the building and almost
immediately heard some high-pitched crying from somewhere in the stacks. In a
few seconds I located the boy (four-years-old, I would guess). I said to him, "I
know exactly where your father is and I'm going to take you to him." I took the
boy's hand and walked out of the library -- almost immediately to encounter the
crazed parent coming our way. I released the child and in a second he was in his
father's arms. Father and son consoled each other. I sat back down on our bench,
knowing that I had done a good deed. It was a very satisfying, human feeling.
After a brief while, we walked home uneventfully.

Source: 2023/10/jane-austens-emma-harriet-smiths-ancestry

Title: Jane Austen's Emma; Harriet Smith's Ancestry
Date: October 10, 2023

Both partisans and skeptics of Jane Austen's Emma will remember Harriet
Smith, the young woman who becomes the object of Emma Woodhouse's officious
matchmaking. Harriet's ancestry is explained by JA; she is "the natural daughter
of someone" -- that is, she is an illegitimate child of obscure origin.
Harriet's patronizing friend Emma imagines, without a shred of evidence, that
the poor dear must be the daughter of nobility. She therefore interferes with
Harriet's romantic prospects, first by discouraging an "attachment" to an
upright and capable farmer -- and then by promoting relationships which we
readers are taught to believe should be beyond Harriet's aspiration. JA, for all
her satirical spirit, is not one to challenge the rigid class distinctions of
rural Highbury.

But then, at the very end of the novel, other options having led to disaster,
Harriet and farmer Robert Martin are allowed to marry.  Almost as a coda -- an
afterthought -- Austen reveals to us that

Harriet''s parentage became known. She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman,
rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been her's
and decent enough to have always wished for concealment, -- such was the blood
of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch -- It was likely to
be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman, but what a connexion
had she been preparing for Mr. Knightley -- the Churchills -- or even for Mr.
Elton! The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached by nobility or wealth, would have
been a stain indeed.

It's a curious and I think distressing revelation.

There's an unpleasant sneer in the dismissive phrase, "daughter of a tradesman"
where "merchant" or even "prosperous merchant" might have been more generous.
Moreover, the pregnant phrase "illegitimacy unbleached by nobility or wealth"
neatly encapsulates the hypocrisy of a society that can condone a rich bastard
but condemn a poor one.

But what is most bothersome about the paragraph is what it omits. Although JA
pull back the curtain on Harriet Smith's father, she does not bother herself
to reveal anything about Harriet Smith's mother. Surely even an illegitimate
child had one, and surely that mother, in addition to her pregnancy and
childbirth, had a story of her own -- both before and after she surrendered her
child. If Harriet's father can be revealed (even though he is not named), why
then, why not her mother?  What is implied by this omission? That the mother
doesn't matter -- she was merely "someone's" mistress or concubine. Or perhaps
a prostitute. That Harriet's status in society has nothing to do with her
inconsequential mother.

Or perhaps that JA, raveling the loose ends of her story, preferred to avoid a
distracting complication.

My own theory is that JA just simply forgot. Because fathers matter a great deal
and mothers matter much less, it's not of any moment who was Harriet's mother.
In psychological terms, JA is guilty of a perfect parapraxis -- and unconscious
forgetting, canceling, or, in modern jargon, an erasing. Harriet's mother is not
even erased -- she's utterly non-existent.

Sometimes what is not represented can be as revealing as what is included.

Source: 2023/10/falling

Title: Falling
Date: October 18, 2023

I suppose I fell an uncountable number of times in the days of my youth, but to
these floppings I paid no mind. I started to take note during my first year in
Ithaca, when, a creature of sidewalks and "gutters," I fell splat on my face in
the slopes and snows far above Cayuga's waters at least a score of times. Lithe
and springy, I did not a whit of damage to myself.

Falling became a real issue in my life only when my father, at age 74 in
1978, took a header down a flight of basement stairs at 539 East 9. From that
moment, his life changed rapidly for the worse. Whether his  arthritis was
a consequence of the fall, as his doctors claimed (they called it "traumatic
arthritis") I cannot say, but from that time until his death eight years later
he was crippled with pain. His once athletic body wasted and shrunk, and
his lively step devolved into a sad shuffle. For me, it was a warning and a
precedent. Don't fall.

Nowadays, even though I'm older by several years than my father was when the
arthritis finally took his life, and am most definitely marooned in what he
liked to call "extra innings," I'm most aware that it is a fall that could do
me in. I take precautions: not paranoid, I hope, but sensible. Some years ago
I moved to a building with an elevator -- no more second floor bedrooms or
basement washing machines for me. For our West Bradford summers, I've put up
rope banisters where the ground is steep or irregular. I carry a stick when I
walk on the paths or in the woods. "Three legs good, two legs bad." Even so,
this past summer I fell twice. The first time, because a cemetery groundhog had
dug a burrow next to a gravestone and grass had grown to conceal his hole. I'm
glad the fall was a gentle one, because I would have hated to have gone down
in local lore as the guy who died when he cracked his head on an old, lichen-
covered tombstone. Too much irony, too much black humor.

My second fall was when a rope snapped -- so not my fault at all. The ropes
that we used for a banister on a steep path leading from the dike to the
waterfall garden had simply rotted out. I tumbled slowly and gracefully. We've
now replaced that old rope with a new one so massive that it could secure an
aircraft carrier.

Moreover, I've stopped going up on ladders -- not even kitchen step ladders.
If a ceiling light bulb needs to be changed, I'll hire someone or beg a favor
from a young person. I'm aware of the tragic story of a friend of a friend who
lived in a house with a two-story entrance foyer. Though seventyish, he climbed
a ladder to straighten a wall hanging and lost his balance. He lingered for a
few days, but never regained consciousness.

Some friends of a decade or so younger than I came visiting yesterday. In the
course of a lively conversation, I revealed that I shun step stools and ladders.
One of the guys said, "I'm not ready to give up climbing on ladders." I said,
"Why not, it's dangerous -- you can hurt yourself."  He said, "I'm too young.
It's a matter of self-respect." To which I responded, "Fuck self-respect."

I asked my cardiologist what was going to kill me. She said, at your age,
and with your state of health, the most likely cause is either an infection
or a fall. Which I take to be good news of a kind. I can be vigilant about
infections and I can be very cautious about where I set my feet. Especially
so if I remember my "mature" vulnerability and if I keep in mind my father's
history.

Nevertheless, I'm beginning to feel that I may not be immortal.

Source: 2023/10/words-of-my-life-provider

Title: Words of My Life: Provider
Date: October 20, 2023

I first encountered the word "provider" in its positive sense as a virtual
synonym for "mensch": "he was a good provider; he took care of his wife and his
kids and his aged parents and even his employees" (if he had any).

But nowadays the word has been stripped of its warm associations and has emerged
as a cool or neutral term. I encounter the word most often when I need medical
attention. A doctor is no longer a doctor; he's been renamed a "provider." I
believe this usage to be the invention of the nefarious insurance companies that
govern and distort our medical system. "Doctor" and "nurse" are praise-words,
rich in significance. "Provider" has no resonance. It reduces your doctor to an
index or reference number and is therefore of great utility to the bureaucracy.
I can't imagine that a doctor, asked what he does, would be happy to respond, 
"I'm a provider."

The word "teacher" has, for many, a positive resonance. I was a teacher; I was
not an "education provider" -- nor would I have embarked on a career with the
aim of being considered such.

I believe that nowadays the most common use of the word "provider" occurs in the
internet phrase, "content provider."  And so the word continues on its long
downward path.

Source: 2023/10/anti-bucket-list

Title: The Anti-Bucket List
Date: October 24, 2023

Here follows a list of some of the many activities that I definitely,
excruciatingly, do not wish to perform before I kick the ol' kettle. My life
is perfectly complete as it stands, and I feel no psychological pressure to
engage in any of these anxiety-ridden ventures. Nope, all the pressure is on the
side of safety, indolence and sloth. I'm mighty "fulfilled" just as I am. As
fulfilled as I want to be.

I do not yearn to explore the depths of the Marianas trench in a submersible --
nor even go down a few hundred feet to view a shipwreck. I prefer the surface
of the wine-dark sea, or better still, a quiet pond where, even if I'm a daring
distance from the edge, my feet can still touch bottom.

I do not want to take up diving into shallow rivers from rocky precipices.
I'm not interested in being death-defying or picturesque. I can defy death
just perfectly while lying on my couch. Also, no bungee-jumping, or, even more
lunatic, jumping out of airplanes with a fickle parachute on my back. No thank
you.

I have no desire to smuggle weapons or drugs across the border or into Singapore
or Iran. In fact, I don't think I'll do any smuggling at all. I consider my
career as a smuggler, never flourishing, to be absolutely finito.

I do not need to take up a late-life career as a wild-animal trainer. No lions,
tigers, bears. Though I do wish that I could do something about the broccoli-
eatiing groundhogs.

I don't wish to train for a second career as a food-taster to the mighty. I
wouldn't be good at the job; I'm chronically, almost terminally hypochondriacal.
I would probably find poison in every forkful or sip --  and then display all
sorts of bizarre symptoms. I especially don't want to be a food taster for
people on Mr. Putin's shit list. No sirree.

I do not want to go dancing with the stars. Never, never, never, never, never
(as William Shakespeare wrote in a slightly different context).  No televised
tangos in my future.

I am not going to sign up for that trip to Mars. Or to the moon. Or anywhere
that requires a pressure suit. I'm comfortable in my "relaxed fit" jeans and
shirt.

Source: 2023/10/in-a-lonely-place-bogart-grahame

Title: In a Lonely Place (1950)
Date: October 27, 2023

On this last time through, I was struck by an element of the film of which I
had not taken sufficient notice. It's a distinctly post-WWII movie. Dix Steele
(Bogart) had been a successful writer before the war; he was, we're told, a good
commanding officer; but now he's erratic, crazy jealous, his sanity at knife's
edge. The film does not offer an explanation for his decline. When he's shown
pictures of the brutally murdered Mildred Atkinson, he exhibits no emotional
response;  it's as though he's so thoroughly inured to violent death that he
lacks fellow-feeling. The audience must infer he's seen too many such deaths.
In the past, I hadn't sought a cause for his symptoms, but this time, it was
transparent to me that although the writers don't dwell on the war as a cause,
they assume that the 1950 audience will get the point. It's shell-shock or
battle fatigue or what is now called PTSD. When I came to appreciate the film's
1940s ambience, In a Lonely Place became not merely an intimate psychological
drama with noir overtones, but a trenchant commentary on WWII devastation and
disruption. And therefore a more profound and richer work of art.

I was curious enough about what is left unsaid in the film to look for a copy
of the novel from which the film is drawn. It's Dorothy B. Hughes, In a Lonely
Place, first published in 1947 and now reissued in 2017 by New York Review Books
(thanks NYRB!. Not a difficult search, because it was right there on a shelf in
the Boulder Public Library.

In a Lonely Place is a novel in the Chandler-Hammett-Gardner orbit. For those
who love the genre, it might be a great read. For me, not an aficionado of
mysteries or detective novels, it was, I'm afraid, a plod -- much marred by an
arid, graceless prose style, with many a sentence so awkward that it pained
both eye and ear. But just as I suspected, in the novel the WWII material is
front and center -- and it's PTSD all right. The shocker, however, is that
Dix Steele is not the Bogart-Steele of the film. Not even close. He's not a
disturbed  ex- officer trying to adjust to the post-war world. Instead, he's
a serial killer on the prowl for another victim. He's murdered his landlord
and a former girlfriend, and a trio or quartet of young pretty women. He's a
textbook misogynistic nutcase and therefore not nearly as interesting the film's
complicated troubled Dix Steele.

I'm in awe of the brilliant transformation from book to script. The credit goes
to two writers:  Edmund Hall North, who first "adapted" the novel, and Andrew
P. Solt (a refugee born in Hungary as Endre Strausz) who wrote the screenplay.
And of course to the director, the great Nicholas Ray.

(In the picture above, Dix's arm is around Laurel's neck. It should be an
affectionate embrace, but he's too possessive. She's justifiably wary.)

Source: 2023/11/a-brooklyn-memoir-robert-stern

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist: Robert A. M. Stern
Date: November 07, 2023

I must confess that I had never heard of architect-entrepreneur Robert Stern
until I read Martin Filler's NYRB review of Stern's recent autobiography --
which is called Between Memory and Invention: My Journey in Architecture. How
could I have been so behindhand, so ill-informed?

Filler's evaluation of the memoir is sharp-elbowed. He plainly doesn't like
Stern himself although he grudgingly grants that he was a successful dean of
architecture at Yale. His critiques of Stern's buildings are unfriendly and
a bit wicked: of Yale's two newly-constructed colleges, Filler claims that
"first- year students might imagine that they've wandered into a themed Disney
resort called Academialand." The Comcast Center in Philadelphia, he says, is
of "surpassing banality"; the George W. Bush Presidential Center in Dallas
"resembles a branch bank in a suburban shopping mall." Moreover, Filler is is
both scornful (and possibly envious) that Stern married into lavish wealth
(his wife was a Gimbel heiress). Is it wit or is it bigotry to deride Stern's
progression from a working-class Brooklyn Jewish family to a big time Manhattan
success as a typical "rugelach to riches story?"

It was when I learned that Stern was a Brooklyn boy that my interest was
provoked and I trotted over to the Boulder Public Library to procure a copy of
Memory and Invention. I doubt I would have read the book from cover to cover
except for its neighborhood relevance. Robert Stern, it turns out, was not only
a local lad but he was born in exactly my year, 1939. He attended public schools
and had hoped to attend Erasmus Hall High School, which would have made him my 
classmate, but, he claims, he lived outside of the district and so was shunted
to Manual Trades High School (famously featured in the grimy novel and film, The
Blackboard Jungle). It was a surprise to me that he grants a sentence to one of
his junior high school classmates, the "diplomat" Matthew Nimetz, whose name I
remember from my four years at Erasmus but whose person, as far as I can recall,
I never encountered. I have to doubt that Stern was districted out of Erasmus.
Manual Trades was a school that students chose, like Stuyvesant or Brooklyn
Tech. Stern misremembers. He probably decided to cast his lot with Manual Trades
because it was reputed to be a "hands-on" school. It's doesn't much matter: he
would have been just as unhappy at Erasmus. He craved Harvard and Manhattan and
notoriety and money, and none of the local schools would have filled the bill,
certainly not EHHS.

Although the lengthy accounts of Stern's buildings might enlighten and inspire
a specialized readership, I myself found the book dispiriting. There is lots of
information about commissions procured by sucking up to the mighty and a heck of
a lot more about infighting among the high-flying architects than I needed to
know. In addition, the book overflows with self-congratulation and is replete
with assiduous and triumphal name-dropping.

It's not for me to judge Stern's achievement, but I cannot disagree with his
contention that architects should be fully steeped in but not restricted by the
architecture of the past. I gather that Stern is a "neo-traditionalist' and
Filler, his reviewer-critic, a "modernist."  I cannot say how many buckets of
talent (Filler would say "none!") that Stern brought to his game, but however
many they are, they are only drops in an ocean of ambition.

Despite it all, I was intrigued by Stern's Brooklyn childhood, especially where
his history bisects (or veers away) from my own. His grandparents, like mine,
are folks of eastern European shtetl origin who struggled without much success
to adapt to the new world. They landed in Brooklyn, which Stern seems to have
resented. He yearned for "the city," Manhattan. I myself did not sufficiently
appreciate Brooklyn, and like Stern, I wanted out. Nowadays, it's embarrassing
for me to recall that the one big idea of this Brooklyn "yoot" was to leave the
old country, Flatbush, behind. Stern, on the other hand, is unembarrassed: "I
disliked Brooklyn--it was a place to be from and get out of (his italics). The
difference between us is that he knew that he wanted Manhattan; I didn't know
what I wanted, I just wanted to go somewhere else, which I have managed to do,
having spent most of my life in the mountain west and in green New England.

Stern also knows what all of us old Brooklynites know -- that our once
provincial and disrespected borough has become a bit hoity-toity. The realtors
have taken over. Stern says that his childhood neighborhood "is now alternately
called Windsor Terrace and Kensington, but at the time everyone just called it
Flatbush."  Which is exactly my recollection. If you had asked me in 1950 what
part of Brooklyn I hailed from, I would have said "Flatbush." But now the PS 217
catchment area is called Kensington or Ditmas Park, expressions that I had never
heard until the last decade or so.

One curiosity about Between Memory and Invention: unlike every other Brooklyn
reminiscence I have ever read, Stern never mentions the Dodgers. Quite a telling
omission, I think, if you think about it for a moment. Nothing about either food
or sex, either. An uncharacteristic Brooklyn childhood.

Source: 2023/11/a-few-new-words

Title: A Few Words New to Me
Date: November 09, 2023

An "ongon," frequently depicted, it turns out, in Ice Age Mongolian art, is
a type of shamanistic spirit. When a shaman dies, he becomes an ongon. My
dictionary says that the plural of ongon is ongod, but the prehistoric art book
in which I found this word prefers ongones. I doubt I'll have regular occasion
to use the plural form, but if I did I would prefer the more familiar English-
sounding version, ongones. The adjective entopic is the opposite of ectopic.
Ectopic refers to something in its usual place and entopic means that it is
its regular place, as, for example, your tongue is in your mouth. If it were
elsewhere, it would be ectopic. In an entopic pregnancy, the embryo is in the
womb, where, by golly, is just where it ought to be. A "psychopomp" (from Greek
ψυχοπομπός, meaning a 'guide of souls') is an entity who carries the
soul of a dead person to the underworld or to heaven, or wherever. I suppose
that the familiar cartoon figure of a hooded, faceless man with a scythe is
a kind of psychopomp, though I don't remember anyone ever calling it so. A
"geoglyph" is a design in the earth created by removing soil and exposing the
underlying rock. Here's a most famous geoglyph:

Source: 2023/11/another-brooklyn-memoirist-pete-hamill

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist:  Pete Hamill
Date: November 15, 2023

Half of Pete Hamill's memoir sometimes seems to have dropped down from another
universe or more precisely from an alternative civilization, while the other
half depicts events and ideas that are as familiar to me (as they say) as
the back of my hand. Although Pete and I are both Brooklynites and near-
contemporaries (he was born in 1935, and I in 1939), our lives were o so similar
and yet completely different. But that's the way things were in complex,
composite 1940s Brooklyn.

The title of Hamill's memoir establishes the differences. It's well-named --
A Drinking Life (1994) -- and it is saturated with liquor and Irish bars and
elbow-lifting and most especially with Pete's father's uncontrollable and
disabling alcoholism. Yet just a few blocks over, in my part of Brooklyn,
alcohol played no part whatsoever in my own family or my life in the
neighborhood. I would not call an autobiography of my own An Abstinent Life,
because we weren't teetotalers and there was always a glass of Scotch to offer
to guests, but we hardly ever touched the stuff ourselves. It wasn't until much
later in life that I came to realize that my father and I were genetically
incapable of digesting alcohol. I've written about this peculiar phenomenon
here.

Equally in contrast was Hamill's early education. The poor fellow was enrolled
at Holy Name of Jesus, a Catholic parochial school where one of his teachers
was the "snarling vicious Brother Jan, a thick-necked Pole with a jutting
jaw and bent nose" -- your classic sadist -- who derived his joy in life by
whipping with a thick ruler the bare hands and butts of defenseless boys. I
myself learned to read and cipher at P.S. 217, a public elementary. At 217,
we had teachers both gifted and incompetent but no deranged monsters and no
corporal punishment. I can remember being bored at school, but not terrified.
Not terrified of the teachers, that is -- among the students we had our fair
share of bullies and sociopaths.

Hamill's Park Slope family took Roman Catholicism seriously but he himself
was not an enthusiast. Although he loved the costumes and the incense and the
majestic hymns, and although he confesses that the loved the "cartoony name"
of the Holy Ghost, he was, right from the start, an instinctive atheist. My
Flatbush family proffered us nary a single drop of religious information or
indoctrination or training. I myself had never attended a single religious
service in either synagogue, church, temple, mosque or tabernacle until 2021,
and then only because it was New Orleans and we heard that Ellis Marsalis had
volunteered to improvise a few measures on the piano. Hamill was a atheist by
dissent; I was one by inheritance.

Nevertheless, Hamill and I shared a great deal -- mostly, I think, in the form
of popular culture. Ring-o-levio, spaldeens, stoop ball. Where else but in
Brooklyn was a "do-over" a "hindoo?" And baseball. Hamill remembers that an
uncle confided to him that "the Dodgers are the greatest thing in the world."
He delights in reciting a litany of familiar Dodger names: "Augie Galan, Dixie
Walker, Ralph Branca, Joe Hatten, Henk Behrman, Hugh Casey." Except to a select
few of us, these names are meaningless random syllables, but to those who were
children at a particular time and place, they are poetry in its purest and
most sublime form, each name a luscious mouthful of pure pleasure. Syllables
that will forever bond Hamill and me to the end of the chapter. Syllables that
transcend this transitory sublunary existence.

Like me, Hamill was a great lover and collector of comic books. Both of us
savored heroes such as Captain Marvel and Captain Marvel jr. and the Human Torch
and the Green Lantern and Plastic Man and the Sub-Mariner and Wonder Woman and
Invisible Scarlet O'Neill. Hard to believe but there are those who think that
Freddie Freeman is only an all-star first baseman, but Hamill and I know better.

And also like me, Hamill found his way the public library where he measured
himself against Jim Hawkins and Edmond Dantes and Sydney Carton and D'Artagnan.
Tough competition.

Sometimes, Pete Hamill leaves pop culture behind and delves into his own
personal psychology. Here's a paragraph of unusual sincerity and one that
touches at least tangentially on my own experience. It appears in a discussion
of the writings of Robert Louis Stevenson. (I should mention that I read
everything of Stevenson's that the McDonald Avenue Library possessed.)

"I sensed (says Hamill) that I was my own version of Jekyll and Hyde. In my
head, the Good Boy was constantly warring with the Bad Guy. I wanted to be the
Bad Guy, tough, physical, a prince of the streets, at the same time I was driven
to be the Good Boy: hardworking, loyal, honorable, an earner of money for the
family. The Bad Guy cursed, growled, repeated dirty jokes and resisted Brother
Jan, the Good Boy served Mass in the mornings and read novels in bed at night."

In retrospect, I realize that I shared  a bit of Hamill's doppelgangerism.
In real life, I was a conforming Jekyll; but in my heart, in my soul, I was
a fierce dissenter. Lots of anger, lots of unfocussed passion. I didn't much
act upon my Hydeness, except for the occasional adolescent pilfering and the
meaningless fights. But how else to account for the violent dreams -- especially
the regularly-repeated nightmares where I bashed in the heads of unidentifiable
adults with a heavy shovel?  And buried their bodies in my father's backyard
garden underneath the hybrid teas?

Source: 2023/11/another-brooklyn-memoirist-barry-manilow

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist:  Barry Manilow
Date: November 17, 2023

The singer and composer Barry Manilow writes that he took three arduous years
to produce his rather thin memoir (Sweet Life, Adventures on the Way to
Paradise, 1987). I'm skeptical of his claim because his book has all the outward
indications of the celebrity genre that might justly be called the "as-told-
to's. It's written as a flow of "I did this, then I did that; I was great." 
The dullest prose; I don't think there's so much as a metaphor in the entire
book.  Gosh, I searched high and low for genuine feeling, for insight or
learning, or for complexity of vision. No dice. How could such an unreflective,
shallow being have achieved so much?  Been so popular, so highly regarded, so
famous.

I can't say that I'm very familiar with Manilow's music, but I'm pleased to
learn that he produced Bette Midler's debut album, The Divine Miss M. "Delta
Dawn" and "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy" were midlife favorites that I've been
pleased to revisit today (with the assistance of officious Alexa).

Brooklyn influence? Manilow seems to be a bit ashamed of his origins. At age
20, he moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan. "As we drove away, I said to myself,
'Good- bye, Brooklyn. Thanks for everything. I'm never coming back.' And I never
did."  The only clear evidence of his Brooklynity is that he named his beloved
dog "Bagel."

Source: 2023/11/jokic-zubac-embiid

Title: Where Have All the Native-Born 7-Foot Centers Gone?
Date: November 23, 2023

Just about every NBA team now has a non-native 7-foot center on its roster.
What's wrong with America -- can't we produce sequoia-size centers any more? 
Except for Minneapolis-born Chet Holmgren, Oklahoma's incredible rookie, by
jiminy they're all furriners. The last three MVPs, mirabile dictu, all big
guys, originated elsewhere: Milwaukee's Giannis Antetokounmpo from Nigeria
by way of Greece, Philadelphia's Joel Embiid from Yaounde, Cameroon, and
Denver's Никола Јокић, more familiar to us 'Mericans as Nikola Jokic,
from Sombor, Serbia. In addition, there's also awkward but effective Jonas
Valanciunas on the New Orleans Pelicans, from Lithuania; GSW's Dario Saric from
Croatia; Rudy Gobert, now blocking shots for Minneapolis (sharing center duties
with New Jersey's big Kat) from France; Kristaps Porzingis, playing for the
Boston Celtics (an exceedling lanky guy who seems to think he's a 7'3" guard)
from Latvia; Chicago's Nikola Vučević, from Montenegro; Jusuf Nurkić, of the
Phoenix Suns, formerly one of the "itch brothers", from Bosnia; Atlanta's Clint
Capela, Swiss via Angola; Sacramento's Domantas Sabonis, who is a fine fine
player but not as dominant as his father, Arvydas, from Lithuania  -- alongside
his backup, Alex Len from Ukraine; the Clippers Ivaca Zubac, from Croatia;
Houston's multi- talented Alperen Şengün, who leads the league in unusual
diacritical marks, from Turkey; Portland's Deandre Ayton from the Bahamas;
Pascal Siakam, playing for Toronto from Cameroon; Goga Bitadze from the other
Georgia, playing for Orlando: and of course the latest teen sensation, France's
Victor Wembanyama, from France. And I've probably forgotten one or two others.

Seven foot tall American centers, where have you gone? Why and wherefore? Die t?
Environmental deterioration? Genetics? Disinteres                             t?

It's not just a passing moment. Veteran NBA fans will remember Rik Smidt, Yao
Ming, Hakeem Olajuwon, Dikembe Mutombo, Dirk Nowitzki along with such off the
beaten track performers as Romania's Georghe Muresan and Sudan's Manute Bol.

Source: 2023/12/hereditary-meritocracy

Title: "Hereditary Meritocracy"
Date: December 03, 2023

"Hereditary meritocracy" is a phrase, and a concept, that hits home.
Reluctantly, I must concede that these words characterize my small corner of the
American experience (at least in part).

"Hereditary meritocracy" is a pointed irony. It's obviously an oxymoron -- a
contradiction -- in which an adjective that goes one way is sutured to a noun
that goes another -- juxtaposing, as it does, unearned heredity to earned merit.

Heredity, as it defines an individual, comprehends the talents or defects that
happen to lie in one's genes. In the wider social sense, it refers to what is
often called "ascribed status" or "ascribed value." You can be a marquis or a
mogul because your father or grandfather was "well born" or because he made
a ton of money -- not because you yourself ever lifted a finger. But to be
a member of the meritocracy, you must have achieved something intellectual,
financial, political, artistic, or whatever. Your own abilities, your own work.

But heredity and merit are not as distinct in practice as they are in theory,
as the phrase "hereditary meritocracy" indicates. The hereditarily rich and
well- born have advantages that allow their offspring to "achieve" and prosper.
Children of the advantaged develop, it's been shown, larger cerebellums. They
attend better schools, enjoy a richer home life, have better medical care
and are coached in music and art and athletics. Of course they then perform
better on standardized tests, which is then interpreted as as a sign of merit.
It's a better forecast of "success" to be rich with mediocre genes than poor
with excellent genes and good work habits -- though it's hard for some of the
privileged to admit this obvious fact.

And now to the point. I myself and my family have during this last century made
our way into the "hereditary meritocracy." Although we're not particularly rich
in cash, we're rich in family resources and intergenerational support. I believe
that every one of my own parents' descendants, and there are now 24 of them,
has or will graduate from college. We are almost uniformly "professionals": 
accountants, lawyers, teachers, librarians, journalists. Not a one of us rolls
cigars for a living, as did my grandfather. We're prosperous.

Should we be embarrassed or ashamed that we can provide a privileged life for
our descendants. I don't think so, because we didn't step on anyone's heads to
get here. We need not apologize for our successes in this new world.

But we do have obligations. The first is to be aware of our good fortune and
to realize that our successes owe as much to opportunity as to effort. (After
all, with the same genes, we were stagnant and miserable for a thousand years in
the "old country"). And then we must also make sure that we do not put barriers
in the way of others -- or more positively, we must try to help others find
themselves in the same comfortable niche that we have reached. It's an imperfect
system, this "hereditary meritocracy," but it is far from the worst the world
has known.

Source: 2023/12/amnesia-on-film-black-angel

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Black Angel
Date: December 06, 2023

[Warning, metablogians: do not read the following paragraphs if you're planning
to see Black Angel, a curious, interesting 1946 noir. Your viewing pleasure will
be ruined by the following "all spoiler" entry.]

Once again, it's amnesia, Hollywood style -- an alcoholic blackout that
is granted a patina of respectability when a doctor calls it Korsakoff's
syndrome. The plot in brief: a whiskey-soaked amnesiac (Martin Blair, played by
Cornell's own Dan Duryea) has just plain forgotten that he murdered his bad-girl
blackmailing wife.

I must say it's a difficult premise for me to swallow -- but is nevertheless
the kind of oddity that's par for the course in the Hammett-Chandler-Woolrich
universe.

To add to the complexity, forgetful Martin sets out to find the killer, and is
hot on the trail when his memory suddenly returns -- and in a flash he realizes
that he himself is the guilty party for whom he's searching. It's a mighty
contrived and out-of-left field kind of revelation -- but I must confess that I
fell for it. I was deceived by a series of red herrings and was surprised by the
film's outcome. I rather doubt that most viewers will be as much a sucker as I
was.

Like many noirs, Black Angel gets off to a very fast start. Scarcely thirty
seconds in, Mavis Marlowe (Constance Dowling) opens a bureau drawer and
retrieves her nice ladylike pistol. I respect a movie that's thoroughly
and instantaneously loyal to its genre. I wonder, though, whether future
generations, studying those many black-and-white crime films of the 1940s and
50s, won't think that every chest of drawers, armoire, lowboy, highboy, tallboy,
dresser, and chiffonier in Los Angeles or New York City harbored an easily
accessible derringer, rod, gat, or piece.

Source: 2023/12/basketball-in-my-life

Title: Basketball in My LIfe
Date: December 13, 2023

My father, who was born in 1904, was a basketball enthusiast when the game was
in its infancy. He played guard on Eastern District High School's team and later
played as a freshman at CCNY under legendary coach Nat Holman. But Dad came
from an impoverished family and left college after one year because, he told
me once, "I couldn't see how I could stay in school when my family needed so
much." So while his formal education went by the wayside, he was able to make up
the difference by a lifetime of reading. And although he was not a complaining
sort, it was clear to me and I think to my brothers that he felt a bit grieved
that his formal athletic career had been cut so short. He kept at it, though,
on his own. Well into his forties, he was absent from family dinner one night
a week. "Wednesdays," my mother explained, long before I could understand what
the words meant, "your father goes to the gym." And Saturday mornings, in warm
weather, were reserved for tennis. Dad very much wanted his three sons to carry
on his athletic tradition, but I think, in retrospect, that in the long run we
all disappointed him. Both my brothers were fine athletes although not big or
fast enough for professional careers; I was, alack and alas, a disappointment.
Dad, who had also been a semi-pro catcher in baseball, taught Gene and Jon
how to throw an "inshoot" and an "outshoot," but he could not bring himself
to coach me because it was obvious that with my 55 mile an hour fastball and
scattershot arm, I wasn't going anywhere, pitching-wise, and although he showed
me a couple of basketball moves he was, I recognize, a bit embarrassed by my
want of athletic skill. (In my defense I must report that although I was more
academic than athletic, I was voted "class athlete" by my P. S. 217 (8-5) eighth
grade class -- a group which must have been, now that I think of it, quite a
collection of klutzes). My older brother was a good enough basketball player to
play for his college team for a year, and my younger brother was an outstanding
sandlot all-star in baseball who once struck out Joe Torre, who, it will be
remembered, finished his major league career with a .300 lifetime average. (The
second time he pitched to Torre, my brother says, the future MVP hit a ball that
"is still circling the earth.") I myself had the briefest career on the diamond.
The pinnacle of my experience was that, once, playing second base, I turned a
double play -- took the toss from the shortstop, stepped on the bag, gracefully
wheeled, and pegged the ball perfectly to the first baseman. It happened once
and once only, but it was glorious -- definitely a Hall of Fame moment. The peak
of my basketball career occurred in the slippery court (which doubled as a dance
floor) in the basement of the Flatbush Jewish Center on Coney Island Avenue and
Avenue J. I was, I estimate, thirteen years old. Wearing number 3, in black and
gold, I was steaming down the left side of the court on a fast break and was
forced away from the basket, so instead of a layup I managed a sweeping running
left-handed hook which caught nothing but net. There was modest applause. None
of my teammates guessed that I had intended to bank the ball off the backboard
and that it had slipped out of my hand and swished, entirely by accident. I only
reveal this deep secret now, very now.  Another high point in my career: I once
won a local foul shooting contest. I hit 23 of 25. One small caveat, though.
The contest was conducted in the P.S. 217 schoolyard, where the baskets were,
how shall I say this correctly, unsteady and soft. As a result, they were like
sewers -- everything flushed. I doubt that I would have made 23 on a standard
rigid rim. Nevertheless, I did win the medal and the other competitors all used
the same ball and basket as I -- so, therefore, a modest triumph. And then
playing basketball faded into the background, because I didn't get my growth
until very late and for a while I was playing at 4' 11" or 5' 1" against hairy
guys who had already reached their full mature height. But I continued to pursue
my undistinguished career -- including the most competitive activity of my life
-- three on three half court in the EHHS gym, one basket wins, and "winners
out." And then a little intramural in Ithaca; an occasional pickup game in
Cambridge. Oh, and twenty years later on, I played a bit with my own offspring,
all three of whom were more athletic than I. My last pathetic hurrah (almost a
decade ago, now) was being obliterated at h-o-r-s-e by my granddaughter Ella.

Nevertheless, I retained my interest in the sport. No longer a participant, I
became a serious spectator. I know enough about roundball to appreciate both
player and play. For thirty years or so, I had a good seat at the home games of
the CU Buffaloes -- it was high quality college basketball (although the Buffs
rarely enjoyed a winning season). One source of interest and fun for me was to
evaluate the talent and try to predict which of our guys (or the visitors') had
the skill and size to move up to the next level. Over the years, I followed
the early days of many a later NBA regular -- and even a couple of stars. I
remember in particular Jay Humphries, who played four excellent seasons for
CU and then averaged in double figures during an extended NBA career. Also
local lad Chauncey Billups, "Mr Big Shot" himself. Andre Roberson, a terrific
defender and rebounder who never lived up to his potential because he just
couldn't master the corner three; Matt Bullard, a fine outside shooter; Scott
Wedman; Alec Burks; Derrick White (still playing for Boston and getting better
each year); and Spencer Dinwiddie, whom I didn't judge to be an NBA player but
who has become a steady professional. The high point of my CU spectatorial
career occurred in 2006 when the Texas Longhorns brought to our stadium a
gangly teen- ager named Kevin Durant. One didn't have to be a sophisticated
evaluator of talent to recognize that KD had a spectacular career ahead of him;
it was grandly obvious. It took him only two years to lead the NBA in scoring.
I stopped attending CU games when the athletic department, an independent
entity with only a loose connection to the University, demanded that I make a
donation of $400 for the privilege of purchasing season tickets. I resented the
presumption, and I felt that there were many causes more worthy of my limited
philanthropy than CU basketball. Although I stay away from our local Events
Center, I'm still an occasional arena visitor. In fact, just last season, LERM
and I bought incredibly expensive tickets to watch the Cavaliers take on the
Pelicans at the Smoothie King Arena in New Orleans. The venue was up-to-date
but way too brightly lit, and crowded, and noisy. Moreover, I dislike the
theory that attendees must be continually entertained and placated with garish
novelties. I don't go to basketball games for the half-time acrobats or the
animal acts or the costumed dancers or the "kiss-cam" or the ear-popping "music"
nor to be commanded when to cheer or when to chant "DE-FENSE." I go to watch and
admire the players. Despite the distractions it was a good game, even though
Zion Williamson was out with an ankle injury. These pros, even the unheralded
ones, are fabulous athletes and they are especially impressive in person.

So for most of my life it's been the electronic medium that has kept me abreast
of the game. It all started with radio; I suspect that very few readers of this
entry will be able to recall the fast-paced narration of Marty Glickman on WHN,
but he was, let me tell you, a hoops artist who could bring the Knicks alive
with voice alone. Then came television, sometime around the early 1950s. The
thirteen inch black-and-white Dumont that my father acquired displayed an image
that seemed miraculous at the time but paleolithically primitive compared to
the 60" HDTV that entrances me nowadays. It's all present -- right there before
my astonished eyes. Incredible no-look passes and sensational blocks and three-
pointers from downtown -- and also horrid tattoos -- in brilliant color. In my
TV-basketball saturated brain is stored the entire history of the NBA from then
until now. In the 50s, Max Zaslofsky, Harry Gallatin, Sweetwater Clifton, Carl
Braun, the McGuire brothers Dick and Al, and Ernie Vandeweghe, who played only
home games because he was a full-time medical student. A team that was good but
always managed to lose to the Celtics -- who had Cousy and Sharman and later
Bill Russell, the Jones boys (Sam and KC), Havlicek and Heinsohn. I was in those
years a most loyal and enthusiastic fan of our own New York Knickerbockers --
the championship teams composed of Willis Reed, Dave DeBusschere, Bill Bradley,
Earl Monroe, and Walt Frazier, names and faces as present in my memory as
the more celebrated Dodger boys of summer. Then came the Magic-Bird era, LA
"showtime," Michael Jordan, Duncan-Ginobili-Parker-Popovich, and now LeBron
James, who, although, he is certainly the most effective player in history, is
less exciting to watch than his innovative contemporary, Steph Curry. During
this last while, I've become a devoted GSW fan; when they were at their best, a
few years ago, they played an extraordinarily beautiful game. There were nights
when they'd score 30 baskets on 25 lovely assists. It's been a great ride that's
now coming to an end, but there's another generation of players on the horizon
and perhaps I'll be around long enough to enjoy them. After all, I've been there
for the entire history of the NBA. What developments I have seen! What was once
a local, coterie sport has gone international, with many of the best players
coming from overseas or south of the border. Where once all the players, save
a few, were White and middle-class, now 75% to 80% are Black and inner-city,
bringing with them a heck of a lot of skill and flash and dazzle. Lumbering
awkward centers, with their slow roundhouse hook shots, have been superseded by
astonishingly mobile 7-footers who can protect the rim but also drift outside
to nail a three. Salaries, in the old days, were little more than nominal and
now there are marginal players making millions off the bench. The athletes have
become celebrities -- and their shoes have become almost as famous as they
are, and more lucrative. Franchises, which once went for a song, are now worth
billions.

When I'm watching a game on a Sunday afternoon, I think about my father. I wish
he could sit with me and discuss the progress of the sport. I'd like to show
him what has happened since he left us in 1985. He'd like it that the players
are bigger, faster, stronger, in better shape, and that the shooting is more
accurate and the defenses more subtle and sophisticated. He'd love the pick-and-
roll and the pick-and-pop. He'd appreciate the alley-oops and the accurate full
court passes. I also know what he wouldn't like -- the overhasty three, the
lenient interpretation of walking and palming, and the occasional showboating,
Most of all, he'd hate it that the NBA is now in cahoots with the gambling
establishment. He would see it, as I do, as a major miscalculation -- as a
scandal waiting to happen.

Every once in a while, even at this advanced age, I dream that I'm in the midst
of a game, and I rise up and with an effortless flick of the right wrist launch
a perfect 40-foot three that hardly even grazes the net. A childish fantasy,
perhaps, but still very  satisfying.

Source: 2023/12/another-brooklyn-memoirist-barry-menikoff

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Barry Menikoff
Date: December 14, 2023

I met Barry Menikoff a couple of times. The first time was at the Huntington
Library in San Marino, California and the second time when he was a visiting
professor here in Boulder. A Robert Louis Stevenson specialist, he was; I've had
a fondness for RLS from my childhood, and I've read a substantial percentage
of his voluminous works, so we had something to talk about. Menikoff was then
teaching in Hawaii and mighty anxious to find his way back to the mainland.

I knew nothing of his childhood except that like me he was a Brooklyn boy. Then,
a while ago, I heard through a mutual acquaintance that he had written a memoir
of his childhood and youth. And so he has. It's called Stone Mother, and it's
privately printed but available on Amazon, and it's a damn good book that might
with a few judicious edits have been a successful commercial publication.

I used to tell my friends that I was the most naive boy in the history of the
known universe ever to arrive on a college campus. But now I have a competitor.
Menikoff knew a lot of things -- principally how to survive the death of
his mother and the disappearance and neglect of his father, so he was not
without resources. Socially, he was behindhand, and in terms of books and
intellectual life, he was nowhere. It was quite an achievement for him to get
from Brownsville to Brooklyn College and then on to a successful career as a
teacher and scholar.

I think that what I liked best about this memoir is its honesty.  It tells the
truth and by doing so creates a strong, credible picture of Brooklyn life back
then,

Source: 2023/12/another-brooklyn-memoirist-marty-glickman

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Marty Glickman
Date: December 19, 2023

In the late 40s and 50s, Marty Glickman was the radio voice of the New York
Knicks. As a basketball announcer, he was simply the best. Most of us from that
era, especially Brooklyn guys, can still recall in our mind's ear his melodious,
accurate and rapid-fire recreation of the game. "Gallatin to Braun on the left
wing. Swish."

Until a couple of days ago, I did not know that Marty Glickman had written (in
an "as-told-to" kind of way) an autobiography called The Fastest Kid on the
Block (1996), and that, believe it or not, one copy of this book is among the
holdings of the Michener Library of the University of Northern Colorado, in
Greeley, Colorado -- and is now in my very own hands. A warm thank you to UNC
and to Interlibrary Loan.

Glickman was not only an announcer; he was also a student at fabled P S 217, my
own not-so-"alma" mater, which he attended from first through sixth grade. He
was born in 1917 so that would be in the 1920s. He was, get this, the fastest
kid on the block in my very own neighborhood.

He was not just a voice but an athlete, best known as a two-way football player
at Syracuse University. He was also a top of the class sprinter who once ran a
hundred yards in 9.5 seconds (the great Jesse Owens held the world record at
9.3). In 1936, Glickman was scheduled to run the second leg of the 4 x 100 at
the Berlin Olympics.  He was scratched at the last minute for reasons that are
still murky, but Glickman's opinion, and mine, is that Adolf Hitler didn't want
a Jew to win a medal, so he had Goebbels whisper to Avery Brundage, who was the
head of U. S. Olympic committee, that Glickman not be allowed to run. (Brundage
was a notorious racist, misogynist, and Jew-hater, known as "slavery Avery."
(There's an unverified report that Brundage spoke at the February, 1939, Nazi
rally at Madison Square Garden; it would nor have been out of character for him
to have done so.)

Glickman is philosophical about not being allowed to run in the Olympics. It
would have been good to show his grandchildren his gold medal, he says. I myself
am indignant for him.

Once, when I was still a Brooklyn yoot, a rumor swept the P S 217 schoolyard
that "Marty Glickman is going to be here this afternoon."  He appeared, but all
that I can remember is that he spoke to a knot of kids. I remember nothing more.

Source: 2023/12/books-i-read-2023

Title: Books I Read, 2023
Date: December 29, 2023

Ian McEwan, Black Dogs; Ian McEwan, Saturday; Julian Barnes, The Noise of
Time; Ian McEwan, Amsterdam; Marcia Davenport, East Side, West Side; Thomas
Halliday, Otherlands; Joseph Sassoon, The Sassoons; Jane Austen, Persuasion;
Jane Austen, Mansfield Park; Thomas Hardy, Tess of the d'Urbervilles; Jonathan
Raban, Bad Land; David Thomson, Sleeping with Strangers; Michael North, The
Baltic; Niall Williams, This is Happiness; James Vincent, Beyond Measure;
Larry McMurtry, Lonesome Dove; Andrea Wulf,The Invention of Nature; Oliver
Goldsmith, The Vicar of Wakefield; David Hone, How Fast Did T. Rex Run?; Richard
Klein, Cigarettes are Sublime; Claire Keegan, Foster; Howard Koch, Casablanca:
Screenplay and Legend; Jeremy Dauber, Jewish Comedy, a Serious History; Caroline
Pennock, On Savage Shore; The Best of Sholom Aleichem, ed. Howe and Wisse;
Richard S. Laub, Two Acres of Time; Susan Rubin Suleiman, Daughter of History; 
Rachel Brownstein, American Born; Mabee Weinstein, Ferns; Jane Austen, Emma
(2x); Margo Jefferson, Negroland; Marsha Gordon, Becoming the Ex-Wife; Judith
Hicks Stiehm, Janet Reno, A Life; Elliot Willensky, When Brooklyn was the
World; Pete Hamill, A Drinking Life; Roger Cohen, The Girl from Human Street;
Dorothy B. Hughes, In a Lonely Place; James Sturm, The Golem's Mighty Swing;
Ian Smith, Black Shakespeare; Robert A.M. Stern, Between Memory and Invention;
Paul G. Bahn, Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art; George Orwell,
Homage to Catalonia; Barry Manilow, Sweet Life; Jonathan Balcombe, Super
Fly;  Eric R. Kandel, There is Life after the Nobel Prize; Barry Menikoff,
Stone Mother; Norman Podhoretz, Making It;  David Scheel, Many Things Under
a Rock; Ernest Hemingway, The Sun Also Rises; Eric Kandel, In Search of
Memory; Timothy Garton Ash, Homelands.