

================================================================================Source: 2016/01/somnus-imago-mortis

Title: Somnus Imago Mortis
Date: January 02, 2016

Which translates as "sleep is the image of death." It's a medieval commonplace:
God has blessed us with sleep in order to prepare us for the long sleep of
death. A daily premonitory death.

I can't buy the theology. However, I believe that there's genuine truth to
somnus imago mortis.

I'm a bad sleeper, a tosser and turner. A person who's likely to read fifty
pages of a novel or watch a few innings of pre-recorded baseball between 2am and
3am. Even when I sleep I rarely fall into that deep trance-like state that I
remember from my childhood. I'm in a dream state or I'm far too aware of my
body, my surroundings, my worries.

But a few years ago, when I had the surgery, I was thoroughly anaesthetized
into a dead sleep. Nothing happened between the administration of the drug and
the moment I awakened: no dreams, no thoughts, no awareness. Nothing. I went
away and I came back, but from nowhere.

Let me tell you what happened when I returned to consciousness. I thought 
"wow, if that is what death is going to be like, then it's not so bad. It's
nothing to worry about, nothing at all to fear."

And I've held on to that insight. Perhaps ordinary somnus isn't the image of
death, but drugged sleep is unquestionably a state of being that gives real
rational secular practical meaning to ancient wisdom.

Source: 2016/01/predictions-2016

Title: Predictions -- 2016
Date: January 03, 2016

As is well known, Vivian de St. Vrain, fully accredited prophet (Senior
Fellow, American Society of Prophecy), has an unparalleled record of accurate
prognostication.  Vivian has once again retreated to the mountaintop and has
returned with a new set of predictions for the coming year.

Read and be dazzled, fit audience though few. Here's what's going to happen!

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known American or possibly European athlete will be accused of
taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be accused of taking bribes;

5)  questions will be raised about the safety of America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2016.  Let's
see whether a senior but world-class professional prophet still has enough left
in the tank to foretell the future one more time.

Source: 2016/01/beetles

Title: Beetles
Date: January 12, 2016

Evolution was inordinately fond of beetles. According to the
coleopterists, there are some 400,000 species, with many more still to be
identified. Beetles are everywhere. Every time I introduce a new plant into my
garden, along comes a species of beetle new to me.

Nevertheless, I must admit, to my shame and embarrassment, that I can call
only a handful of beetles by name. Is it failure of curiosity, failure to pay
attention, failure of memory?  As Holmes might have said, I see but I do not
observe.

Here are the few I can identify. The pestiferous, omnivorous Japanese beetle, a
pest every year and occasionally a veritable plague. The Colorado potato beetle,
voracious on potatoes and annoying on eggplants. The extremely stupid box elder
but, which comes into the house every fall to die and desiccate. Ladybugs,
supposedly eaters of aphids. Lightning bugs, beautiful in the night, helpless by
day.The heavy bomber among beetles, the June bug. The rose chafer, early spring
consumer and disfigurer of anything white, especially the white flowers of
peonies. A variety of oil beetle that  hangs out a couple of inches below the
surface in good garden soil -- what does it do there?

That's about it;  all the rest are unidentified and unidentifiable shard-born
beetles. OK, off to the library I go to bring home some beetlebooks. This
ignorance cannot stand.

Source: 2016/01/what-we-watched-in-the-fifties-shane

Title: What We Watched in the Fifties:  Shane
Date: January 17, 2016

I didn't "get" Shane when I first saw it in 1953 when I just fourteen, and I
didn't ''get" it again last night when I watched it for the fourth or fifth
time, lifetime. It's a watchable film in my considered opinion but I have no
idea why various canon-creators have ranked it third or fourth among all 
Westerns. I revere Westerns but I can't revere Shane.

Not that there aren't some splendid moments. The first scene, when little
Joey with his kid-size rifle peers through the brush at a deer while, in the
distance, and through Joey's eyes, we see the figure of Shane a-horseback is an
excellent piece of film-making. We're going to see the whole movie through the
eyes of a child, the cinematography tells us. Moreover, it's going to be a film
about guns and Joey's love of guns and gunslingers. It's a very American story
shot through with the romance of weaponry, as is made clear right from the get-
go.

But it's downhill from there. The plot is minimal, classic, and familiar. A
Stranger Comes to Town. Even when I was a dewy youth I knew that Shane was going
to intervene in the struggle between the farmers and the ranchers. And that he
would resist as long as possible getting out his gun, and that his conversion to
violence would be cast as a Higher Moral Purpose. I had seen it all before, even
as an adolescent -- you can't negotiate with the bad guys; your weapon has to be
better than their weapon.

Van Heflin is the homesteader. He's a great, unappreciated actor, in my view.
But Alan Ladd is not credible as the mysterious stranger. First of all, he's
expressionless in face and monotonous in speech. Secondly, he lacks even a tad
of the charisma that's required of him. And thirdly, he's too small and skinny
for all the bareknuckle stuff. And Jean Arthur, I'm afraid, was simply too dowdy
to attract anyone's interest. The cast can't carry it off. Too much burden on
the child actor, Brandon de Wilde.

Why does Shane ride into the sunset at the conclusion of the story?  Why is
the most famous dialogue in the film, little Joey's plaintive "Shane, come
back. Come back, Shane?" There's really no good reason; nothing inside the
film compels his departure. Shane rides off because that's what the heroes of
Westerns do. The film is saturated with myth of the unconnected guy (well, he
does have his horse and his rifle) riding off, untrammeled by home, hearth, kids
and especially wives.

It's a powerful myth. My deep resistance to the film is that it is myth-driven
rather than character- or plot-driven. Shane doesn't create a myth; the myth
creates Shane.

Source: 2016/01/sonia-green-with-an-addition

Title: Sonia Green with an Addition
Date: January 24, 2016

I published this reminiscence some years ago:

My daughter continues to urge me to write something autobiographical. To which I
reply, it’s all autobiographical. But since she wants hard news, not indirect
revelation, I offer this account of my grandmother, born Sonia Chafetz, later,
by marriage, Sonia Usilewski and finally, after a legal name change, Sonia
Green. She was born in 1884 somewhere in darkest White Russia (now called
Belarus). I have no idea exactly where, but I know that she was a distinctly
rural girl -- she loved to fish, to pick berries, to grow plants. Of her life
in the old country, I know almost nothing -– only that she was raised in a
cottage with a dirt floor and that the family brought the cow inside in the
winter to keep the place warm. I know that she didn’t have a proper bed,
and that at least for part of her childhood she slept on the mantle over the
fireplace, which sounds mighty precarious to me. She couldn’t have had much
in the way of formal education, but she did read and write Yiddish and still
understood Russian in her old age. I know this because in the late 1940s or
early 50s I would occasionally sit with her and listen to the broadcast of
debates at the United Nations (in those days there were subsequent rather than
simultaneous translations) and she would render the Russian to me, as best she
could in her halting English. She never did become fluent in the only language
I knew so our conversations were stilted and confined to utilitarian topics.
When she was young--I’ve seen the pictures—she was dark, attractive, and
voluptuous. By the time I came to know her, when she was close to sixty, her
looks were long gone and she was disfigured by goiter and other diseases and
no doubt by the consequences of her many self-induced abortions.  The family
story was that both she and Joseph were engaged to other people when they
eloped to America (my grandfather deserting from the Russian army, where he had
been drafted for the usual twenty-year term, and where his salary was a ruble
every other month). They arrived in New York in August of 1904 from Rotterdam.
How they found their way from Minsk to Rotterdam I was never told, but the
Ellis Island records report that they came through London. My mother was born
in June of the following year, or just about ten months after her parents
arrived in this country. My mother’s story was that at first her parents had
only one pair of shoes between them, so that Sonia had to stay at home until
Joseph returned from work. The family settled in Harlem; my grandfather, who
was urban and more sophisticated than Sonia, had been trained as a pharmacist,
but never found work in his field in the new world. I don’t know what they
did for a living (was he some sort of salesman?) except that for a short time
my grandparents owned a delicatessen at the corner of 4th and 10th streets in
Greenwich Village. I’ve gone to that corner many times and tried imagine
such a restaurant, but of course not a clue remains. As far as I can guess,
their marriage was uneasy. My grandfather was frequently absent (my father once
darkly hinted, “I don’t know whether it was other women, or what”) and my
grandmother frequently ill. My father also told me that when he and mom married,
he laid down a prohibition—it was in the days when men made prohibitions--
that she wasn’t to act as intermediary between Sonia and Joseph any longer.
I know that my mother had to leave school six weeks into the ninth grade to
care for her mother and two younger brothers. But that’s about all I was
told and there are no documents. I have a few memories: Sonia trying to teach
me to play fan-tan and five hundred rummy -– I was as bad then as I am now
at card games; Sonia planting in wooden Philadelphia cream-cheese boxes every
orange or grapefruit seed that came into her house, so that her tiny apartment
had the pleasant aroma of a hot-house; Sonia growing avocados in the winter
but setting them in my father’s garden (just around the corner from her
third-floor walk up) in the summer. And I also remember her attempt to cure
my father’s sterile apple tree with an old-country remedy—rubbing the cut
half of an apple on the trunk in midwinter. I remember also stuffed cabbage,
the world's finest blintzes, and jars of apricot jam sealed with paraffin. In
her last years, Sonia lived with my parents; she had her own kitchen, a room
that had been remodeled from my former bedroom. She was weary of life and I
suspect that she died at least in part of malnutrition. I remember also that
she owned a pressed-glass ruby bowl that was always filled with hard candies. I
was allowed one candy per visit. When Sonia died in 1971, she had no money and
precious few possessions, but I inherited the bowl. It was pretty, and I’m
sorry to say that after a few years I accidentally broke it. But it was easily
replaced (it was in a popular pattern and every second-hand  store had the item
for sale) and I bought one for about $25.00. Some years afterward I broke the
second one and bought another, but by that time the price had gone up to $50.00.
So, although my inheritance in cold cash was a negative $75, I was left with
grateful appreciation and many warm memories.

Now I want to complete the story of the sterile apple tree.

My father had three fruit trees in his backyard garden on East 9 Street.  A
pear tree, which produced abundant fruit but not every year (it was a Seckel, if
I remember correctly, very sweet);  a peach tree, which was only occasionally
fruitful, probably because it was just a bit north of its proper range;  and an
apple (variety unknown) which was large and healthy, disease-free, but which for
some unknown reason never produced even a single blossom, let alone an actual
apple.  My grandmother Sonia Green explained to my father that when they had a
sterile apple in the old country, they would take a ripe apple, cut it in half,
and rub it on the trunk of the tree in mid-winter.  It always worked, claimed
grandma.  My father would have none of it.  "None of your superstition here,"
proclaimed. But one January he caught grandma apple in hand applying the folk
remedy.  He didn't say anything, but the next summer, he bought some apples and
tied them to the branches of the tree and took grandma to view them. She was
an intelligent old lady who immediately saw through the plot --but we all had a
good laugh and a good story to tell.

Source: 2016/01/squirmish

Title: Squirmish
Date: January 24, 2016

Sarah Palin, wordsmith, famous for her portmanteau "refudiate" (a blend of
refute and repudiate) has struck again with "squirmish," a coinage which
amalgamates "squirm" and "skirmish."  Here's the relevant sentence:

"Those are legitimate questions on both sides of the aisle, and another big
question that has to be asked is 'Are we at war?' I haven't heard the president
say that we are at war, and that's why I, too, am not knowing: Do we use the
term 'intervention'? Do we use 'war'? Do we use 'squirmish'? What is it?"

What, indeed?

I cherish the irony that the Governor is concerned with precision in language
and is troubled that our military actions in Libya lack proper definition.

I myself, an admirer of "squirmish," am puzzled by her use of the present
progressive "I am not knowing" where a native speaker of English would say, "I
do not know."  Is it an alaskanism with which I'm not familiar?  Did they
neglect to teach the present progressive at the University of Idaho, where Ms.
Palin earned her degree in Communication? Or is she perhaps an imperfectly-
trained foreign agent smuggled into the country by the Stasi or the KGB with the
mission of undermining the American polity?

Moreover, it is wonderful out of all hooping that "palin" means "backward" in
Greek.  As "trump" means "deceive" in French.

Source: 2016/01/weird-dreams

Title: Weird Dreams
Date: January 26, 2016

Folks who know me know that I'm not an imaginative or inventive human
being. I'm kind of dull, actually -- predictable, routinized, even humdrum.
What most people don't know is that I have an extremely vivid and creative
nighttime life. I dream big and I dream weird.

Take last night for example (an ordinary night by my standards). I was on
my way by NYC subway to Ebbets Field to see a 7:30 pm Brooklyn Dodgers night
game. I was accompanied by my elderly, arthritic father (in the dream I was
in my 20s or 30s). For some reason the train took a wrong turn and instead
of proceeding from DeKalb to Atlantic, took me and pop to Pacific Avenue. I
couldn't figure how to find a train going back to DeKalb so we went out on
the street to catch a cab. No cab would stop but a few people who were also
lost decided to rent a limousine. I was told that it would cost $50 apiece
but I agreed because my father was having trouble walking. However, when the
limousine came, he and I had lost our way and the car pulled away without
us. The next thing I knew pop and I were in a railroad car (it seemed like a
compartment in a European railroad and he was stretched out asleep and I had
in my arms a very pretty baby, whom I identified as my sister Susan who died
at age 9 months in 1938. She was sweet and gurgling until she let loose with
a tremendous flood of shit which covered my pants and even flooded over to
contaminate my father. "Who diapered this baby," I shouted. I had no equipment
to clean the child or myself. The conductor came over to help and offered to
stop the train but then the baby girl started to spew a huge quantity of vomit
all over me. I looked in her mouth and found a Band-Aid, which I removed, and
then, looking once again, found a roll of gauze, which I also removed. And then,
all of a sudden, I was no longer on the train but instead was visiting the home
of George Bush (the elder, not W) in Houston. I had been invited for dinner,
but before dinner was to be served I had to coach a grandson or great-nephew
of the former president in basketball, teaching him how to dunk. Afterward
we all sat down to dinner and I felt extremely awkward, wondering what would
have caused Mr. Bush to invite me, a Democrat. One of the guests asked me if
I ever shopped at Hill's In Bradford, Vermont and I had to report that Hill's
had closed. Then I was asked if I had ever eaten at the salad bar in the old
Greyhound station in White River Junction. I said that I had (it's true!!) and
then I woke up.

Man o' man that was something else.  Several novels worth of material for
someone with a daytime imagination, I should think.

Source: 2016/02/streetcar-conversation

Title: New Orleans Streetcar 0verheard Conversation.
Date: February 06, 2016

Cheerful, lively 70ish woman:  "I was alone for thirty years. I didn't
even have a date. He (man in a Mardi Gras green bowler hat) grew up in a
French-speaking family in Rhode Island,  We shacked up for a couple of
years. Then he wanted to get married. At our age it's all about finances, so
I said, why not?  He's funny. He's very good to me. He likes to do things. We
live six months of the year in Arizona and six months in Alaska, fifty miles
south of Fairbanks. There's good fishing. We're just here for a couple of
days. We're going on a cruise in the Caribbean. Now we're on our way to
find a restaurant that has the best hamburger in the entire south, he says."

Source: 2016/02/more-new-orleans-dialogue

Title: More New Orleans Dialogue
Date: February 06, 2016

At a restaurant at the corner of Jena and Freret, the over-tattooed waitress,
acknowledging our appreciation of the greens, fennel and kumquat salad, said,
memorably, "People do not understand the beauty of the kumquat."  An excellent
instance of found poetry. And all the more brilliant in context, because I
myself once asserted that "kumquat" is the most obscene-sounding word in the
English language.

Source: 2016/02/climates

Title: Althea Goss Pearlman (1939-2016)
Date: February 18, 2016

Althea Goss Pearlman, 76, of Boulder, died February 10, 2016 at
AltaVita Memory Care Centre in Longmont where she had resided for the last two
and a half years.

Althea was born in Paterson, New Jersey in 1939 to Daniel Goss and Anne Krull
Goss, both teachers of mathematics. She was raised in Utica, New York and
graduated as valedictorian from Utica Free Academy in 1956. She held degrees in
mathematics from Cornell University (where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa)
and Harvard University. She married Elihu Hessel Pearlman, whom she had met in a
first-semester chemistry class, in June, 1960.

Althea had many interests but her life revolved around her two passions:
teaching and family. Althea taught mathematics at Ithaca High School in Ithaca,
New York, at Warren Junior High School and Newton South High School in Newton,
Massachusetts, at the City College, CUNY, in New York City, at Platt Junior High
School in Boulder and, for twenty years, at Boulder High School. In 1991-92,
she was an Einstein Congressional Fellow in Washington, D.C, serving as an
advisor to the House of Representatives on mathematics teaching. She also spent
four years as a Clinical Professor in the School of Education at the University
of Colorado, Boulder, where she acted as a mentor and coach to prospective
teachers. For Althea, teaching was not a job or a profession, but a calling.
She was an artist whose medium was chalk and blackboard. She accumulated a
wall full of teaching awards, including, most notably, the Presidential Award
for the Teaching of Science and Mathematics (1987), but was most gratified not
by certificates but by appreciative letters from students whose lives she had
influenced.

Althea was an excellent and loving wife, mother, and grandmother. She is
survived by her husband, with whom she enjoyed a deep, spirited, and ever-
evolving love for more than half a century, by her children Nathaniel, Benjamin
and Eve, by their spouses Connie Chang, Kyla Holcomb Pearlman, and Jonathan
Soglin, by her seven grandchildren: Talia and Oliver Soglin of Alameda,
California, Ella and Lola Pearlman-Chang of Washington DC, Luke, Caleb and Asher
Pearlman of Boulder; and by her sister Paula Goss Gombas and husband Allen
Gombas of Lyman, New Hampshire. Althea's sister Phyllis Goss Murray died in
1998.

Althea's ashes will be buried in the family cemetery in West Bradford,
Vermont.  A memorial event in her honor will take place in the auditorium of
Casey Middle School, 1401 High Street, on Saturday, March 5, at 3:00 P. M.

The family would like to thank the skilled and sympathetic caregivers
at AltaVita and at New Century Hospice who made Althea's last years
as comfortable as possible.

Should anyone wish to make a gift in Althea's honor, the family recommends
the Althea Pearlman Memorial Fund at Boulder High School. Checks should be
made out to Treasurer, Boulder High School (at 1604 Arapahoe Avenue, Boulder,
Colorado 80302) and designated "Pearlman Memorial." A scholarship will be
awarded annually to an outstanding student of mathematics.

Source: 2016/02/i-love-a-tall-girl

Title: "I Love a Tall Girl"
Date: February 21, 2016

I never "got" T. S. Eliot. When I first became serious about poetry and
"intellectual" stuff, in the 50s, Eliot was the presiding grand khan of English
literature. Because Eliot liked Donne, my teachers liked Donne. Because Eliot
was down on Milton, my teachers were down on Milton. Eliot had pronounced
that "a dissociation of thought and feeling" occurred in the later seventeenth
century, and we all tried to interpret literature in the light of that putative,
imaginary divorce. Eliot discovered that Shakespeare's Hamlet was a failure
because it lacked an 'objective correlative." We were enjoined to wonder exactly
where that OC had gone. Nevertheless, I thought Hamlet was an exciting success
and still do. So do many discerning readers.

To me, Eliot's criticism was mysterious and his poetry was incomprehensible,
unmusical and occasionally repellent. "The Waste Land," his masterpiece,
was to me obscurantist, pretentious, show-offy and shallow. And yet I was
unquestionably an outlier. I studied the "Four Quartets" for weeks under the
able direction of a serious teacher and scholar, Arthur Mizener, but in the end
there was nothing there for me. My own insufficiency?  Perhaps.

I could not get around Eliot's public positions ("I am an Anglo-Catholic in
religion, a classicist in literature, and a royalist in politics"). To me,
these views were fringe, absurd, reactionary, borderline fascist. Eliot was
puritanical about sex, looked down his Brahmin nose at people not of his class
(see the Sweeney poems) and couldn't abide Jews.

When I taught a course called "History of Poetry in English," which I did for
many years, I would skip from the undeniably great poets of the World War
I generation (Brooke, Rosenberg, Sassoon, Thomas, Owen, Graves, Hardy) right to
Yeats and Frost, leaving Eliot in the deep lurch, possibly to the consternation
of my more sophisticated students.

So it gives me great pleasure to say that I've finally found a poem by the old
pretender that tickles me. It celebrates his second wife, whom he married in
1957 when he was sixty-eight and she was thirty, and remained unpublished until
it just now appeared in the second volume of the new Johns Hopkins edition. It's
not exactly juicy, but it seems to be honest and forthright:

I love a tall girl.

When we lie in bed

She on her back and I stretched upon her,

And our middle parts are busy with each other,

My toes play with her toes and my tongue with her tongue,

And all the parts are happy.

Because she is a tall girl.

To me, this brief lyric is worth forty Quartets.

Source: 2016/03/parking-garage-criminal

Title: Parking Garage Criminal;  Transients
Date: March 31, 2016

On February 11, an "intruder" was discovered in the parking garage of the
downtown condo where I now live. Actually, I found him myself. I had to run a
late night errand, unusual for me, and there he was, scruffy and dirty, hanging
out near the elevator. I said to him, "are you lost?" and he answered that he
was staying with a friend who lived in the building. It seemed fishy, but I was
in too much of a hurry to concern myself with him. But when I returned two hours
later I found him curled up in a stairwell, apparently sleeping. I notified
the police but I didn't stay around for the outcome because it was 2:30 in the
morning and I was exhausted from the night's events. It turned out that he had
stolen a bicycle and also entered a number of unlocked cars, including mine. We
know he was in my car because the police found my Volvo S70 owner's manual where
he had been sleeping. Whether he used it as reading material or as a makeshift
pillow I don't know.

Yesterday I was called by the police and told that perpetrator had been
arrested. It seems that he was recorded on a surveillance camera (I didn't
know we had one) in the garage and that his image was shown to the police who
specialize in dealing with our city's population of transients. ("Transient" is
the current term of art for people who have at various times called "homeless,"
"hobos," "bums," or "vagrants.") He was well known to the authorities and was
picked up; he readily confessed to the crimes. I asked what was going to happen
to him and whether there was any chance that he could rehabilitated. The police
lady with whom I spoke said that he would be sent to jail for a few months
and then be back on the street. "Sometimes we have someone who turns his life
around, but this guy has a history and he's not going to change. He's been in
the system for years. He had a place to live a while ago but preferred (her
word) to be out on the street. Drugs and alcohol. The shelters require that the
inhabitants be drug free and he can't stay clean."

Our fair city is popularly thought of as a mecca for transients. I don't know if
it's so, but I know that we have a very visible population of such folks. All
the downtown public institutions, such as the library, are dense with them. When
I walk the four blocks of the downtown mall, I'll be approached by 3-5 beggars.
And there will also be knot of five or six unwashed persons with backpacks and
blankets on two or three different benches. The local merchants complain, and
the transients are moved on, but they return.

I don't like the situation. I find it morally challenging. Do I give a man a
dollar, even though I know that the city and the churches provide adequate
food, and the money will go for contraband -- or do I avert my eyes?  If I
avert my eyes, am I treating the guy or gal as a non-person? But if I engage in
even the slightest conversation, I feel that I am condoning a way of life of
which I thoroughly disapprove. If it is my obligation to support the poor, am
I obligated to support the liquor and drug habits of the transient population?
How do I deal with the occasional, inconstant, but sometimes very strong feeling
of repulsion that I feel for the "houseless heads and unfed sides." Are we not
all members of the human population, of the family of man? If I ignore these
people, have I turned into a complacent, unsympathetic, hardened, unfeeling old
bourgeois, a scrooge, mouthing, "are there no prisons, are there no workhouses?"

I asked the police person, who has been dealing with the transient population
for many years, if she had any ideas about what to do. She knew of a number of
experiments in various cities which had some success, but all had ultimately
failed.

She said, "Lock your car door. Lock your apartment."

Source: 2016/04/junebug-1

Title: Junebug (2005)
Date: April 13, 2016

When I saw Junebug for the first time shortly after it appeared in 2005, I
enjoyed its gentle, affecting comedy. It's yet another "stranger comes to town"
enactment, although this time, for once, the stranger is a woman. Madeleine
Johnsen is a fortyish, worldly, sophisticated Chicago-based art-dealer. She
arrives in a small North Carolina Christian-saturated community accompanied by
her brand-new twenty-something husband, who is a native of the place. If they're
not deeply in love, they're certainly enjoying a time of sexual satisfaction,
perhaps even frenzy. As the film proceeds, a series of exquisite culture-clash
misunderstandings illuminate both city and country.

On last night's viewing, however, the film was far less amusing and more painful
than I remembered. Did I see it the first time with rose-colored glasses?

In the film's loveliest scene, the young husband George Johnsen, played
gracefully by Alessandro Nivola, is prevailed on at a church-basement social
to "give us a hymn," which he does rather beautifully, offering Will Lamartine
Thompson's ""Softly and Tenderly, Jesus Is Calling" which is an extremely
melodic but theologically naive piece of sentimentality. As he sings, obviously
very comfortable with the milieu and with the surroundings, the director's
camera focuses on his wife Madeleine's (i.e. Embeth Davidtz's) expressive face.

When I saw the film in 2005 or thereabouts, I thought Madeleine shone with
wonderment and appreciation. O, I thought, she sees and appreciates a new
dimension in her husband. This will lead to understanding between them and
help her to navigate the gulf between her and her new family. How could I have
been so undiscerning? This time, it was entirely clear that her reaction was
exactly the opposite of what I had previously attributed to her. Madeleine
doesn't get it at all. It's not appreciation, it's incomprehension, perhaps even
condescension. Madeleine, I'm sorry to say, doesn't understand her husband, his
culture, his religion, or his family. And indeed, subsequent events in the plot
confirmed my new pessimism, for every time Madeleine has to make a choice, she
does so with no accommodation to her husband's upbringing or values

She's glad to leave the place, she says at the end, but it's clear to me that
she's learned nothing and that there's trouble brewing.

Most of the attention that the film has garnered is owing to Amy Adams'
performance as George's pregnant child-like sister, which is indeed a remarkable
piece of acting. But for my money, it's the visiting husband and wife who steal
the show -- along with the intelligence and art of the director (Phil Morrison)
and the writer (Angus MacLachlan).

Source: 2016/04/de-somno

Title: De Somno
Date: April 14, 2016

I am a bad sleeper. I don't know if I'm technically an insomniac but I can say
in all honestly that for me, the nighttime is the hardest part of the day. It's
been this way for a long time. I''m good at going to sleep and I enjoy the
"first sleep" of two or three hours, but after that, say from 2 am on, it's an
adventure. Nightmares, tossing and turning, "fluff in the lung and a feverish
tongue," and mostly what I think of as "airplane sleep" -- that is, the kind of
semi-sleep, semi-awake borderline limbo which you're in when you're sitting up
in a crowded plane.

Moreover, things start to look mighty bleak in the 2-5 part of the morning.
Is that pain in my toe a bruise, or is it the beginning phase of gout or
neuropathy? Cancer of the instep? Will they want to amputate my leg at the knee?

Not so in the 1950s. Return we now to those days of yesteryear and recall
the most glorious sleepings of my life. I'm in my teens, and it's spring. A
weekend. I spend the morning at the PS 217 schoolyard, playing basketball. I'm
tireless once I get my second wind. After four or five hours, I drag myself
home for a roast beef dinner, stuff myself. Then I lie down, turn on the radio
and listen to Red Barber and Connie Desmond broadcast the Dodgers game (if it's
Sunday, perhaps a double-header). By the second inning, I'm deep in the arms of
Morpheus. Profound. Incomparable. A sleep beyond ordinary sleep. When I wake,
it's the seventh inning. I've been in sleeptopia for two hours.

Where are the sleeps of old time?

Source: 2016/04/whats-next

Title: What's Next?
Date: April 19, 2016

Our sun is halfway through its life cycle. Its luminosity increases 1% every
110 million years. Therefore the Earth ineluctably grows hotter and hotter.
In a billion years, life on its surface will be impossible. Global surface
temperatures will reach 117F and the oceans will evaporate. Water molecules in
the atmosphere will be broken apart by solar radiation and hydrogen molecules
will escape the planet. Eventually the sun will exhaust the hydrogen fuel in its
core. When it begins to exploit other material, its luminosity will increase a
thousandfold until it stabilizes with a radius about 250 times its present size.
It will consume Mercury and Venus but probably not the Earth which will become
locked into an orbit with only one side facing the sun (as the moon does to
the earth). This will mean impossibly hot temperatures on one side, impossibly
cold on the other. The moon's orbit will reduce to 11,000 miles causing it to
fracture, raining pieces of itself onto the Earth. Eventually the sun will lose
mass and gravitational pull and the earth will drift away into a remote orbit --
dark, cold, and lifeless.

(Adapted from Douglas Palmer, Earth in 100 Groundbreaking Discoveries (Firefly
Books, 2011.)

Source: 2016/04/los-angeles-uber-driver

Title: Los Angeles Uber Driver
Date: April 26, 2016

"I worked for Ethiopian Airlines in Ethiopia. I have a degree in business. One
time my wife came to America and she says she wants to stay here. I had so much
paperwork and investigation but now I am a legal immigrant. America is the land
of opportunity. I believe that one hundred per cent. I bought a house, it is my
house. In Ethiopia, I would have to bribe many big shots and one day they could
take the house anyway if someone wanted it. Here, no trouble. I had to leave
Ethiopia because I was opposed to the government. We had an election and 100% of
the people voted for the government, hah! We do not like Obama so much because
he visited Ethiopia and said it was a democracy. Our government is fighting
the terrorists in the Sudan so he pretends not to know the facts. I have two
children, they speak English but also Amharic. My wife is a nurse. It is good
here. I am an accountant at LAX but I drive for Uber on weekends and sometimes
at nights, extra money. Los Angeles is very expensive to live."

Source: 2016/04/at-the-getty-museum

Title: At the Getty Museum
Date: April 27, 2016

Dr. M.  "How long have you been a guard here?"

Guard:  "Seventeen years. You can't stand still. You have to change your
position, move around."

Dr. M.  "Has anything ever happened. Someone try to steal a painting?

Guard.  "No nothing. Nothing has ever happened."

Dr. M.  "No one descending on ropes from the ceiling, trying to snatch a
sculpture."

Guard.  "Nothing has ever happened. Wait, I forgot. Something did happen. Two
or three years ago, there was a woman, she had a can of soda in her bag. She
leaned over to look at one of the bronze sculptures, and the soda fell out of
her bag. It broke and sprayed some soda on the statue. They called a special
crew in to clean the sculpture. We closed down the entire wing."

Dr. M.  "Must have been exciting."

Guard.  "No, not really."

Source: 2016/05/a-couple-of-incomplete-stories-from-real-life

Title: A Couple of Incomplete Stories from Real Life, Embroidered and Novelized but Left Hanging
Date: May 06, 2016

1)  "My husband's niece, his sister's daughter, has been staying with us. She's
nineteen just about to turn twenty. For a couple of months now. She's working
on her English --the family is Finnish. She's also enjoying the local social
scene; she's out a lot a night, but that's not a problem. She's old enough to
be on her own. She's a nice girl, I thought, a good girl, kind of pretty in
a northern way. She helps out with the kids if I ask her. I had no complaint
until I started to notice that money was disappearing. At first, I thought I was
crazy, but I did a couple of experiments to make sure. I left my purse with the
wallet inside it  in a place where only Anniki could access it. I counted the
money carefully. Sure enough, when I came back a $20 was missing. I calculate
she must have taken about $300 so far. What should I do?  I can't ignore it. I
could hide my purse, hide the money, but either she'd find it or she'd know that
I knew. I have to tell my husband. I mean, it's his responsibility, isn't it?
 I don't care so much about the money, but I think, yes, she should reimburse
me. And she needs to know that she's on a wrong path. She's too old for this. I
think we should sent her back to Finland, tail between her legs. She needs to
learn a lesson."

2)  "I went back to South Dakota, haven't been there in a number of years,
maybe three or four. I have second cousin, he's in his sixties. A decent guy,
runs a wrecking service. Hard worker, no employees. Up all night sometimes.
Twenty years ago, his son, Jake Leath Percy married this lady from Oregon. She
got pregnant, had a baby, then skipped. No one ever saw her again. Returned to
Oregon, we speculate. Left the baby with Jake Leath. Well, Jake Leath proved to
be as incapable as his wife. On the road a lot. So my cousin Herb Percy kind of
adopted the child. He was a big kid for his age, didn't do particularly well in
school, but not a real trouble-maker. Herb did right by him. But then, and here
I'm unclear about the details, they did some sort of DNA testing, I don't know
why exactly,  and it turns out the kid isn't a Percy at all. Not biologically
related to Herb's son. She was pregnant by someone else. Not a surprise, if you
think about it. A cowbird kind of situation. But Herb brought him up, feels
responsible. Doesn't really like him so much, I think. He's six-four, takes up a
lot of room in the trailer. Drinks beer. And now it turns out he likes to start
fires."

Source: 2016/05/lola-on-romeo-and-juliet

Title: Lola on Romeo and Juliet
Date: May 18, 2016

The granddaughter, Lola, age 6 and a bit, has been reading to me -- a child's
version of Romeo and Juliet. The feud between the Montagues and the Capulets
distresses her. "Why do they have to fight. Why can't they just talk about it?
 Why don't they use their words?"

Source: 2016/06/wheres-the-gasplant

Title: Where's the Gasplant?
Date: June 22, 2016

I'm most fond of the gasplant, also called fraxinella or dittany or, when
formality is called for, dictamnus albus. It's a beautiful plant. In flower
it's an ornament to the perennial garden, and even when it's done blooming, it's
neat and orderly and retains a lovely shade of green throughout the summer.
Smells good too. It's a long-lived perennial, very hardy. It takes a number of
years to establish itself, but then lives almost indefinitely. If you have one,
you treasure it. I have two, both of which I took from the garden of my late
sister Phyllis when she died in 1998. Or should I say I had two, because over
the winter one of them went missing.

In the location where there should have been and always has been a fully-mature
gasplant, there was nothing -- not a leaf, not a twig, not a root. If the plant
had died, it would have left some evidence behind. It's a woody plant which dies
back to the ground each year, so every spring there is a bundle of dry hollow
stalks or kexes. But this year nothing. Not a shred.

What happened to Mr. Dittany. Here's a possibility. I transplanted him, put him
somewhere else, and then forgot that I had done so. An unlikely possibility.
I searched my brain but can't' recall moving it. I searched the grounds -- no
luck. If it wasn't me, was it someone else?  Did some malefactor steal the
gasplant?  I have never heard of a gang of perennial thieves. Is it possible
to believe that a nefarious individual entered the garden while I was away and
heisted an out-of-season gasplant, roots and all?  Not an hypothesis I can much
credit. Did the plant have enemies? If it's being held for ransom, I have yet to
receive the note. "We have your fraxinella. Either fork over $14.99 or we'll mow
it."

Another possibility: there never was a dittany. It was always a hallucination
of my decaying brain. Nope, no go. It's been in the same place for years. Many
people have seen it. I show it off -- it's so dramatic, so striking.

Or perhaps, it's a plot against me. Am I being gaslighted?  With a gasplant?

Source: 2016/08/sublime-prosaic-all-dialogue-drawn-from-real-life

Title: Sublime, Prosaic (all dialogue drawn from real life).
Date: August 02, 2016

She:  "I want to go outside to see the stars."  (Note perfect blank verse).

He.  "I want to go to the bathroom."

Source: 2016/10/elsa-morante-on-mussolini-

Title: Elsa Morante on Mussolini
Date: October 05, 2016

Elsa Morante, the distinguished Italian novelist, spent the war years in what
might be called internal exile, holed up, hungry, with her friend and later
husband Alberto Moravia in a one-room hut in Sant'Agata (both Morante and
Moravia were half Jewish). After Mussolini and his mistress Clara Petacci were
arrested and shot, hung upside down for all to see, Morante wrote about her
countrymen that "all of Mussolini's faults were either tolerated or encouraged
and applauded. Thus a people who tolerate the faults of their head of state are
complicit with these faults. But if they encourage and applaud them as well, it
is worse than being an accomplice, it makes them an accessory to these faults."
Mussolini was, according to Morante, a mediocre man, a crude man, a man outside
the culture. But Mussolini was also a perfect exemplar of the Italian people
who, she claimed, were such that they would rather given their vote to a strong
man than to a just man, and if they had to choose between their duty and their
profit -- even if they knew what their duty was -- they would choose their
profit.

It is difficult not to see an analogy to our beloved country at this election
season.

Source: 2016/10/pussygate

Title: Pussygate
Date: October 10, 2016

A textbook example of the unthinkable actually happening:

"It's good to be the king," says Mel Brooks (as Louis XVI) in The History of
the World, Part I, lifting the skirt of one of his lovely courtieresses in
order to dry-hump her. It's make-believe Hollywood pseudo-licentiousness. It's
outrageous, beyond the pale, and hilarious as long as it stays in the movie.

"It's good to be star," says Trump, bragging about his license to kiss women and
grab them by their "pussies."

What in comedy is amusing is in real life simply grotesque -- as is the
perpetrator of the atrocity, the maniacal Republican candidate for the most
powerful office on earth.

Source: 2016/12/orts

Title: Orts
Date: December 01, 2016

"Orts" is a rare but tasty word. Orts are the bits of bones, gristle, stems,
skins, pits and other inedibles that are left on the plate after one finishes
eating -- the stuff that is scraped directly into the garbage can. Orts are to
be distinguished from "leftovers" which are the uneaten remains of the meal that
are carefully sequestered for tomorrow's breakfast. Leftovers good, orts bad.

Shakespeare uses "orts" twice in the plays, both times metaphorically. The first
instance is in Julius Caesar, when Anthony tells Octavius how little he values
his colleague Lepidus. According to Anthony, Lepidus is "A barren-spirited
fellow; one that feeds/ On abjects, orts and imitations." In this instance, orts
seems to be prompted by the word "feed." A second appearance of the word orts
is in Troilus and Cressida. Troilus has discovered that his beloved Cressida
has been playing at fast and loose with Diomedes: "The bonds of heaven are
slipp'd, dissolved, and loosed/ And with another knot, five-finger-tied,/ The
fractions of her faith, orts of her love,/ The fragments, scraps, the bits and
greasy relics/ Of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed." It's a strong
speech and "orts of her love" is a powerful phrase, though rather obscure
nowadays to audiences for whom the "ort" is a mystery --which certainly includes
contemporary audiences.

Whether Shakespeare's first audiences would have required a footnote for orts
I do not know. It was never a frequently used word, though the OED attests its
presence in the language from 1440 to 1880. I don't know of any recent usages,
but once, when I was at lunch with a group of professional Shakespeareans, I
asked at the close of the meal, "What do we do with the orts" -- everyone at the
table knew exactly what I meant. Rather a specialized audience, however.

Orts should not be confused with Oorts. The Oort cloud is the presumed boundary
of the solar system, way out there, ten times further than Neptune, where the
comets are thought to reside until they are dislodged from their proper home
and come hurtling toward the inner planets. Orts and Oorts are both leftovers,
in the sense that they are the remains of an original creation, in the one
case chicken pot pie and in the other the universe. Orts are much smaller but
more palpable than Oorts. Makes a guy wonder what could possibly be denoted by
ooorts? Or oooorts?

Source: 2016/12/even-more-new-words

Title: Even More New Words
Date: December 08, 2016

Carinate, which sounds vaguely dental, actually describes the shape of a
particular kind of ceramic or metal vessel. An object which has a rounded base
and inward sloping sides is "carinated." Hypogea, which is drawn directly from
Greek under (hypo) and earth (gaia) means, obviously, underground, but in
the world of archaeology generally refers to an underground temple or tomb.
Catacombs and crypts, therefore, are both hypogea. A megaron was the great
hall of a Grecian palace but archaeologists use the word to describe the large
entrance room of any substantial structure. An exedra is a semicircular recess
set into a building's facade. It think of it, perhaps incorrectly, as a half
of a rotunda. A plinth is the base or platform on which a column or statue
rests. Ashlar is finely dressed stones, generally in the shape of a cube or
a rectangular solid. Ashlar construction is therefore different from rubble
masonry, in which walls are made of irregularly shaped or found stones. A
tophet is a burial place for children either sacrificed or dead of natural
causes; it's a word of Hebrew origin and recalls the valley near Jerusalem n
which ancient Canaanites sacrificed children to Moloch or Baal. I'm embarrassed
that I apparently never encountered the word annona, which characterizes the
grain supply of the city of Rome in ancient times.  Annona, the common noun,
is also personified or deified as "a theophany of the emperor's power to care
for his people through the provision of staples." Annona, the goddess, is
sometimes assimilated to her compatriot Ceres. Acephalous means headless, and
describes "clerics not under a bishop" or lines of verse missing a first foot.
In archaeology, it's a decapitated statue. A cist is simply a stone-lined
grave or shaft.

These splendid words are drawn from Shepherds, Sailors & Conquerors,
Archaeology and History in Sardinia from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages by
Stephen Dyson and Robert Rowland, 2007, which I read with great care,
enjoying especially the middle chapters on Sardinia's fascinating nuraghagic
civilizations.

Source: 2016/12/reposted

Title: Reposted:  "Crosspatch, / Draw the Latch" and Industrial Capitalism
Date: December 12, 2016

One of the most joyful of nursery rhymes, and a personal favorite, is this
brilliant piece of poetry:

Crosspatch,

Draw the latch.

Sit by the fire and spin.

Take a cup,

And drink it up.

Then call the neighbors in.

The clicky rhymes and jaunty meter are undeniably beautiful -- and there's much
more complexity than first meets the eye.

In the first triad, a "crosspatch," -- a "cross or ill-tempered person, usually
a girl or woman"-- is at work, spinning; in the second triad, she's exhorted to
drink and also to invite her neighbors "in" -- presumably into the room, or just
as likely, the tiny cottage-- where she lives alone. In the first strophe, the
theme is isolation, but in the second, isolation is challenged by the calls of
society and by the hope of a more satisfactory and convivial life.

What can we know about the surly individual addressed by the evocative
designation, "crosspatch?"  The first element in the name --"cross"-- implies
not only sourness, but also resistance, as in "cross-grained." The second
element--"patch"-- suggests that the crosspatch's discontent is not without
cause. We can infer that she's poor because she's a person whose garments are
either assembled from various rescued materials, as in "patchwork," or that her
clothes are, in another sense of the word patch, repaired. In addition, it's
possible that ill health has caused her skin to become "patchy." But "patch"
also signals a degree of mental stress, as in Shakespeare's "patched fool." In
this signification, patch derives from Italian pazzo, crazy. The crosspatch is
therefore disabled physically, socially and psychologically.

At the outset of the poem, our "crosspatch" sits glowering, impoverished,
perhaps muttering indistinctly, friendless, without family, her youth blighted
by poverty, huddled against the last embers of her dying fire. What is it
that she is spinning? No doubt she ekes out a meagre living in the impersonal
mercantilist "putting-out" system. Some exploitative proto-capitalist venturer
has delivered to her lonely door a quantity of unspun wool or cotton; her job
is to return the material to him in the processed form that will then be passed
on to an equally poor weaver, then to a tailor, etc. She works alone and never
sees the fruits of her labor except for the occasional, paltry farthing that
allows her a bare subsistence. No wonder she is slightly barmy and has "drawn
the latch" -- closed herself off from her fellows. But then, suddenly, comes
the antistrophe, and in a series of importunate injunctives the crosspatch is
solicited to rejoin the company of humanity. "Take a cup,/ And drink it up,/
Then call the neighbors in." What's in the cup?  Spiritous liquors, no doubt,
which, though designed to dull the pain of wage-slavery, also act to augment the
revelry with which the poem climaxes. The wine is not sipped, but it is drained
to the lees. And once the door is unlatched, and the neighbors -- neighbors of
both sexes, no doubt,-- are called "in," why then, let the libations and the
wild rumpus begin!  Alienated labor is suddenly set aside and replaced by the
natural bonds of one human being to another, and the stasis of the opening lines
of the poem transforms in a flash into a wildly kinetic bacchanal. Emotional
weakness transmutes into healthy liberated pleasure. Dour Puritanism, with its
punishing work ethic, yields to the spirit of holiday and to pagan, perhaps even
dionysian, excess. Here, in miniature, is the essence of the comic vision. In
a few powerful lines, freedom, good humor, and natural appetite triumph over
bondage, artificiality, social constriction and repression; the justifiably
sullen crosspatch, in a burst of energy, reintegrates herself into the social
nexus from which she has been banished.

Whether or not the crosspatch can permanently liberate herself from the
oppressions of industrial capitalism, or whether the anodyne and spurious relief
of alcohol is a merely transient solution is left unresolved. To ask a short
poem, however dense with meaning, to answer so difficult a question would, just
possibly, be to ask too much of it and, perhaps, to push the evidence the merest
tad too far.

Source: 2016/12/fango

Title: Fango
Date: December 18, 2016

I'm marvelously fond of the Italian word "fango," which translates into English
as "mud." "Fango" is expressive of the matter which it describes. To my ear,
the word fango sounds slimy and disreputable, perhaps even repulsive, while its
English counterpart "mud" is bland and lacks character. And "fangoso" is so much
more dramatic than "muddy."

But why fango?  How did fango infiltrate the Italian language? The Latin word
for mud is "lutum," which would naturally yield Italian "luto", which, as it
happens, is a word that does exist, but, so far, one that I've encountered only
in dictionaries. Fango it is, and gladly. Let us revel in fango.

Fango, according to my bank of etymological resources, appears to be of Germanic
origin and a distant cousin to the English word "fen," "a low land covered in
whole or part by water." Lots of fango in that there fen, obviously. There's
also a rare (my dictionary says 'poetical') French word "fange," for mud, but
the more common word is boue. Boue is one of a handful of French words (other
than toponyms) that are of Gaulish origin. So that when it came to mud, both
the Italian and French languages adopted indigenous rather than Latin words. And
for good reason: if there's any substance that is common rather than learned,
it's mud.

"Fango" bears no relation to English "fang." Fang is an oversized tooth, but
not in its earliest appearances. Old English fang denoted plunder or booty,
"a seizing or taking." The root meaning of grasp or capture is present in the
name of Good Master Fang, an ineffectual officer of the law in Shakespeare's The
Second Part of King Henry the Fourth. Yet fang as unquestionably tooth or toothy
in Duke Senior's metaphor in As You Like it, where "the icy fang/ And churlish
chiding of the winter's wind,... bites and blows upon my body."

Source: 2016/12/and-now-hes-come-out-of-his-coffin-to-advise-trump

Title: And Now He's Come out of his Coffin to Advise Trump!!
Date: December 22, 2016

I wrote the following long ago, republished it once. Here it is, relevant again.

What Doesn't Dick Cheney Commit Suicide?

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain? It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good. What could possibly stand in his way? Once he
sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some peace of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that although he was a black-hearted knave,
at least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade
us that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart." But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself. Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the entire
Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster. "Full
of scorpions [should be] his brain." At this moment of writing, Cheney is
guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count -- who
can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even the most
rudimentary of consciences, on it lies the heavy burden of 60,000 to 100,000
Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has
lived in such dishonor/That the gods detest [his] baseness." But Antony took
the proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman
fashion," let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating
himself and the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter. I know
that you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the
internet, perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your
purpose. Dick -- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in
history.  At this point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest
end."  You'll immediately feel better. It's a no-brainer. Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation to
suicide. You are, as usual, falsely optimistic. Cheney can't off himself because
a) he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-knowledge
and d) he can't point a shotgun. You cite the precedents of Othello and Anthony
but they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant. Cheney is a slug.
Moreover, Cheney can't be "great of heart" -- he has no heart of his own --it's
either a transplant or some mechanical contraption."

April 4, 2014  Why is this man still alive?  Allowed to give interviews?  Is
there no justice in our sublunary world?

December 22, 2016  Only a silver stake in his heart is going to do it. Mirrors,
garlic. Too late for prayers.