

================================================================================Source: 2007/01/my_favorite_inv

Title: My Favorite Inventions - II
Date: January 01, 2007

A while ago, I reported on my very favorite innovations of the last half-
century  -- including such wonders as the retractable vacuum cleaner cord,
fitted sheets, duct tape, and the mute button.  I now realize that I was remiss
in not celebrating the most revolutionary invention of recent decades -- the
disposable diaper.

I was knuckle-deep in the diaper business from 1965 to about 1973. Cloth was
then the material of choice. In our family there were three infants and each
one had, roughly speaking, 900 days of diaperhood. Suppose that there were nine
changes of diaper a day (a conservative estimate) -- that's a total of 24,300
diaper-changes.  Let's say that I personally presided over one-third of those
off-with-the-foul-on-with-the-clean exchanges. We're talking more than 8000
excretory experiences. So, dear reader, I know whereof I speak.

Post-cloth diaper parents live in a world of decadent ease. Here's what they're
missing. A) cloth diapers had to be changed more frequently than the new ones --
they didn't wick away the liquid as the disposables do. Rashes and irritations
were all too common. b) gagworthy solid material had to be carefully flushed
away. c)  soiled diapers sat in a waste receptacle, where they generated an
ammonia-based chemical one whiff of which could revive a morgueful of corpses.
d) cloth diapers had to be washed, dried, and folded for next use. e) diapering
with cloth and safety pins was a fine art. Badly-applied diapers hung to the
ground to shame the diaperer; open pins and pin-sticks were a constant worry.

Nowadays, it's pop 'em off, throw it in the trash, pop on a new one. Piece of
cake. Perhaps disposable diapers are not ecologically sound  -- I don't know.
But frankly, I can't think of a better use for the vast Canadian forests.

But I shouldn't complain too much. We owned an automatic washer and dryer. My
mom had the same number of diapers, but she scrubbed them on a washboard in
the "laundry sink," put them through the wringer (first a hand-crank, later an
electric), and hung them outside to dry. She was a true heroine of diaper labor.
And I can't even bring myself to imagine the diaperworld of older generations.

Today's parents, wallowing in sybaritic luxury, cannot appreciate what it means
to be "put through the wringer." And just as well.

Source: 2007/01/more_about_sinc

Title: More on Sinclair Lewis
Date: January 02, 2007

This blague's readers know that I've been revisiting books that I first read
in the 1950s. Last week I reported on Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith, which was
required reading in junior-year English in Erasmus Hall High School. I re-read
Arrowsmith in the very convenient Library of America series, which includes
Elmer Gantry and Dodsworth (along with Arrowsmith) in one thick volume.  I felt
that I owed it to Lewis (after all, he did win a Nobel prize) to read another of
his novels. Elmer Gantry won the toss.

While Arrowsmith has not worn very well, Elmer G. is uncannily pertinent. It's
about an amoral fundamentalist preacher. He's a nasty opportunistic bastard
who crusades against vice but maintains a series of mistresses; he's out for
notoriety and money no matter what the cost to his parishioners or to American
society. He even becomes --and here Lewis is truly prescient -- the first
radio evangelist. It's a heavy-handed, sloppy, brutally satirical book, but
it's also right on target.  I kept waiting for Elmer to be exposed, but the
novel ends when he dodges another mistress and sets out on a route to more
and more power.  It's a very dark view of the penetration of politics by
religion. No wonder it was banned in Boston; even eighty years later, it's much
too hot for high school -- although I can't imagine a single book that would
be more medicinal for pious youth. And now I understand why Arrowsmith was
given us to read:  honor the Nobel laureate, but stay as far away as possible
from controversy. Dodsworth is about adultery; Main Street attacks American
provincialism; Elmer Gantry pillories religion. Arrowsmith is a greatly inferior
novel, but it was safer.

Source: 2007/01/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: King Solomon's Mines
Date: January 05, 2007

As an adolescent, I was a passionate enthusiast of novels by Sir Henry Rider
Haggard. I read everything that was in the collection of the McDonald Avenue
public library. Not only King Solomon's Mines and Allan Quatermain and She and
Allan's Wife and Ayesha, but also some of the non-"African" adventures as well.
I particularly recall Eric Brighteyes and Montezuma's Daughter.  Yesterday
I read King Solomon's Mines (1885) for the first time in fifty years and I
couldn't be more unhappy that I did so. It's a toxic mixture of imperialism,
brutality, racism, sexism, classism -- a compendium of ethnocentric Victoriana
gathered into a single atavistic novel.  I'm familiar with the academic
doctrine that to judge the past by contemporary liberal values is to commit the
fallacy of "presentism," but I'm sorry, friends, I'm mortified that I ever, even
as a youngster, could have fallen for this appalling mishmash.  How could I
have tolerated the paternalistic Englishmen and the child-like natives?

Here are two representative incidents from King Solomon's Mines. The first:
three Englishman are tramping through Africa. They come upon a herd of
elephants. They shoot and kill them. No explanation, no justification, no
reason. The second: one of the Englishmen takes a liking to a young woman named
Foulata. She dies, sacrificing herself, as is the custom in imperialist fiction,
to save English lives. Rider Haggard's  comment: "I consider her removal was a
fortunate occurrence, since, otherwise, complications would have been sure to
ensue. The poor creature was no ordinary native girl, but a person of great, I
had almost said stately, beauty, and of considerable refinement of mind.  But
no amount of beauty or refinement could have made an entanglement a desirable
occurrence; for, as she herself put it, 'Can the sun mate with the darkness, or
the white with the black?'"

I shouldn't have tampered with my fifty-year-old memories. But I've made a
resolution: I'm going to wait fifty more years before I read another novel by
Rider Haggard.

Source: 2007/01/thoughts_about_

Title: The Lord and the Shopaholic
Date: January 07, 2007

Thoughts about Elmer Gantry, Sinclair Lewis's fraud of a preacher, were still
reverberating in my brain when I read in The New York Times the outrageous
stranger-than-fiction story about the "nationally renowned evangelical
preacher," Darlene Bishop. Reverend Bishop, who pastors the 4000-member Solid
Rock Church in Monroe, Indiana, and has a famous-in-certain-circles TV program,
apparently convinced her wealthy songwriter brother that she could miraculously
cure his throat cancer. She failed to do so, he died a painful death, and now
the dead brother's children are suing to reclaim a share of the estate which
Darlene somehow contrived to inherit. It's a Gantryesque tale -- though one
that's more sordid than even Sinclair Lewis, who hated demagogic religiosity
with a rare passion, could possibly have invented.

I was sufficiently intrigued by The Times' story to visit Darlene Bishop's
website, where she's posted a spiritual autobiography of sorts.  Here's the
crucial paragraph:

Being that Darlene was raised so poor she began to try to fill the void inside
of her with shopping. She bought 2 Cadillacs and 18 fur coats in one year.
Finally, one day she came in from a shopping excursion and as she pulled out
all the dresses to show her eldest daughter, Jana pointed to one and stated,
"Mom you already have that dress." Sure of herself, she replied, "Oh, no I
don't." So Jana led her upstairs to her closet and dug the dress out from the
collection of many only for Darlene to find that she did already have one of the
dresses hanging there with the tags still attached. At this, she realized it was
not working. The big house, the diamonds, fur coats, collections of designer
clothes, none of it was filling the emptiness residing in her inner most being.
She threw herself on the floor sobbing and declared, "Lord, I want more of you!
I just want you. And I'm going to seek you until I find my true place in the
kingdom."  From then on, instead of going shopping Darlene would delve into the
Word of God.

I read Darlene's conversion narrative with conflicting feelings. On the one
hand, it exudes authenticity. It's so unapologetic and downright and un-literary
that it can't possible be contrived. On the other hand, it's appallingly trite.
Darlene doesn't experience the "dark night of the soul"; instead, she shops. She
doesn't go through a spiritual crisis; she discovers that she's bought the same
dress twice. Nor is she overwhelmed with the beauty and majesty of the Lord.
"Instead of going shopping Darlene would delve into the Word of God"; that is to
say, and I don't mean to be snide, she started to shop at a bigger and better
mall. In a way, her very triteness serves as a guarantee of her authenticity.

Darlene's story also reminded me, once again, that I'm just not on the same
wavelength as many of my fellow Americans. I don't think that either shopping
or delving can give meaning to life. And yet Darlene Bishop is a celebrity of
American religion, who, people believe, can perform miracles.

And what about Darlene's wonder-working power? In her books and on her website,
she claims that she cured her own breast cancer. Did she?  I'm skeptical.
According to The Times, when Darlene was on the stand testifying under penalty
of perjury, she confessed that "no doctor ever diagnosed the breast cancer."
Instead, "she thought that she had cancer in 1986 and that it was cured." Here's
a pretty howdy-do. Darlene imagined she had cancer and then imagined that it
disappeared -- and on such a basis she proclaims a miracle. In my book, that's
setting a mighty low threshold for divine intervention.

On the website, there's nary a word about her brother's death or about the
lawsuit, but there's some fine, excruciating detail about the miracle. Unlike
the account of her rampant shopoholia, this story is not one bit credible: it's
either delusion or fabrication -- and I think the latter.

I had been preaching on faith for six weeks, when one night while laying in the
bed the devil said to me, "If you don't stop preaching like this, I'll kill you"
and without hesitation, I replied, "You're not big enough, devil". He said,
"Feel your right breast". When I felt my breast, I felt a lump the size of a
silver dollar....  Soon the whole bottom half of my breast became a solid mass.
The pain would be so bad some nights that I could only sleep a few minutes at a
time. It was as if someone had put hot coals of fire in my breast.

Let's get this straight. Darlene experienced hot coal pain in her breast, and
didn't take herself to the emergency room. She's not only a fake;  she's
dangerous. What sort of example does she set to the Solid Rock congregants
(and to her readers and her TV-watchers)?  "Let's pause here for a Solid Rock
public service announcement: if you experience excruciating pain, under no
circumstances consult your physician."

What should you do for that burning coal feeling?  For pain medicine, I would
write down scriptures on little pieces of paper and place them in my bra.

Are we to believe that the medieval remedies are still practiced in twentieth-
century Indiana?  Egad.

This went on for nearly four months until eventually my breast began to
hemorrhage. I had to put nursing pads in my bra to prevent the blood from coming
through my clothes. Some nights I would bleed all night and wake up with my
gown and bed sheets covered in blood. Until one day, as I was hunched over the
sink, my tears splashing into the bloody water, I heard Him speak my name in an
audible voice. He said, "Darlene!"  I rose up and cried, "Yes Lord". He said,
"Because you've continued in my Word and not leaned on the arm of the flesh, as
of this day you're healed.  Go! Proclaim it!

David Hume, whose "On Miracles" is still the definitive analysis, says that
when we evaluate a supposed miracle, we discount the testimony of a person
"who has an interest in what he affirms." Darlene has built a megachurch and a
flourishing business and has inherited her brother's estate on the basis of this
supposed cure. Enough said.

But what about the Solid Rockers?  Can't they see through such palpable
nonsense?  Are they mesmerized or stepfordwived?  Is there any hope that they
-- and other victims of similar hocus-pocus -- will some day get their brains in
gear again?  Not bloody likely.

Source: 2007/01/more_on_king_so

Title: More on King Solomon's Mines
Date: January 09, 2007

I received the following note from Marion Morrison, who is an associate
professor of English at the University of Iowa. It was written in response to my
entry a few days ago concerning H. Rider Haggard's King Solomon's Mines. I'm
extremely grateful to Professor Morrison for taking the time to comment on my
observations.

"Dear Dr. Metablog:

I detect the subtextual presence of mutually imbricated and conterminous
forces in your multichronotopic problematizing of King Solomon's Minds. The
indigenous woman, Foulani, living in a no (wo)man's land where the colonialist
gaze dissects racialized gendering, foregrounds the elusive intersectionalities
present in the semiological narratology of deconstructive post-structuralism.
It is only by scrutinizing the poetics of diasporic displacement that we can
contest the epiphenomenological echo of (hetero)masculinist discourse from a
gendered perspective, which, if I understand your insufficiently theorized
analysis, you have vainly tried to do. Such (re)mapping of knowledge, even when
employing a single-axis feminist theory, unpacks syncretism and hybridity and
at the same time denaturalizes doxa rooted in phallocentric epistemologies.
But, you ask, what about the reproduction of alterity through a highly policed
matrix of conceptual checkpoints?  The answer is simple: any binarist
recontextualizing across multiple terrains adds a metadiscursive dimension
to the polysemic site and leads to aporias of nationalist cartographies of
knowledge, as is crystal clear in the case of Rider Haggard. Without otherizing
the conceptual spaces opened up by postcolonial hybridity, hermeneutical
nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality -- and you know what that
might lead to. A meta-analysis of King Solomon's Wives -- a textual situation
in which there are multiple hegominid discourses as well as the potential for
co-implicatedness -- could rupture various subaltern geographic positionalities
(but only in a translinguistic sense).

As I'm sure you understand, these comments are written under the sign of the
plural."

January 10.  Today I received another communication from Professor Morrison. 
It's a bit angry, so I won't quote it all, but here are the relevant sentences.

"Dear Dr. Metablog, or Vivian, or whatever you call yourself:

When you typed my comments into your blog, you clumsily erred. I certainly did
not write "hermeneutical nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality"; it's
obvious that I wrote "hermeneutical nihilism would not dismantle palimpsestic
textuality."  Leaving out the "not" makes a mockery of my argument and renders
it virtually unintelligible. You owe me and your readers an apology."

Yours,

Marion Morrison, Ph. D."

Gosh, Professor Morrison. My bad. I don't know what I could have been thinking.

Source: 2007/01/a_remedy_for_un

Title: A Remedy for Unhappiness
Date: January 13, 2007

Intermittently throughout the decades, I've been afflicted with what has been
called, at various times in history, "the spleen," "vapors," "falling into a
brown study," "melancholy," "the blues," and currently, "depression." But now I
have devised a very effective remedy for this affliction.

With the help of the Ellis Island Foundation, I located the manifest of the
Rotterdam, the ship that arrived in New York on August 23, 1904 and which
brought my grandparents to the new world. I purchased and studied a copy of this
document. My grandfather, Joseph Uzilewsky, was 27 years old when he arrived
and is listed as a "chemist's (i.e. pharmacist's) assistant." My grandmother,
Sonia, was 20 and has no profession. Neither of them admitted to being either a
polygamist or an anarchist. There's a specific column on the manifest in which
each new arrival was required to say how much money he's bringing into the
country. Almost all of the immigrants have a few dollars, but Joseph and Sonia
have nothing at all. Nothing.

When I fall into periods of unhappiness, I think about my grandparents arriving
here without a nickel in their pockets and unable to speak the language. And
then I think of my own position in life. I had a job that allowed me -- no,
required me -- to read as much as possible, and occasionally to write something
about what I had read. My principal task was the pleasant and useful one of
learning the young 'uns how to read and write. Now I'm retired and someone puts
money in my bank account at the beginning of each month. It's not a lot of
money, but it's enough to allow me to do whatever I please.

I have no reason to think that I'm smarter or more talented than my
grandparents  -- in fact, everything that I know about genetics leads to the
conclusion that they were exactly as gifted as I. No question but that I've been
a heckuva lot luckier. I could have spent my entire lifetime rolling cigars in a
hot, airless back-room-behind-the-store, as my grandfather did.

I keep the Rotterdam manifest under the glass on my desk. When I start to feel
gloomy, I force myself to take another look. I don't dare allow myself to
succumb to depression. How justly would my grandparents have scorned the mopings
and the woe-is-mes of someone so privileged as I have been.

Source: 2007/01/too_many_fouls_

Title: Too Many Fouls, Too Many Timeouts
Date: January 14, 2007

Our local basketball team is in the Big 12. We're far from the best team in the
league, but the Big 12 is a major conference and as a consequence we have the
opportunity to see some well-played, exciting games and also a goodly number
of excellent young players. Great athletes appear regularly, mostly, I must
confess, on opposing teams, but we've sent a number of guys on to the NBA,
including Scott Wedman, Jay Humphries and Chauncey Billups. Last week the U of
Texas brought in a freshman named Kevin Durant. Remember the name -- he's going
to cut quite a swathe in the NBA. I'm a fan; I've gone to almost every home game
for twenty-five years or more. At its best, basketball is the most beautiful of
team sports. But I have some serious bones to pick about the way the colleges
play the game nowadays. Here are two of these many bones.

a) Time outs.  Every four minutes there's a "media timeout," so that the TV
stations, if there are any, can intrude their commercials. Media timeouts have
everything to do with money and nothing at all to do with the sport. Media
timeouts interrupt the flow. Team A is on a roll; the coach of Team B doesn't
have to use one of this allotted legal timeouts to change the dynamics of the
situation -- he just waits for the scheduled pause. Four extra timeouts in
a half, at a minimum of a minute and a half each, add twelve minutes to the
length of the game. And because each coach can hoard his legal timeouts, he has
them all available at crunch time, which means that the climax of the game is
far too frequently interrupted and the final moments become more the coaches'
responsibility than the players'.

b)  Fouls.  Too many ticky-tack fouls are called. The result -- teams are
regularly "in the bonus" nine or ten minutes into the half. And into the "double
bonus" four or five minutes later. All fouls -- offensive fouls, fouls away from
the ball, incidental contact -- become shooting fouls. The first ten minutes
of each half often have a pleasing rhythm, a bit of pace, but the second ten
minutes are always stop-and-go; rarely is there a full minute of uninterrupted
action. Boring?  You bet. Contests routinely turn into prolonged exhibitions of
foul-shooting. A gazelle of a game now hobbled and shackled.

Our own basketball stadium is at altitude -- a mile high, in fact. Our opponents
are almost always flatlanders. We should have an advantage because we're
better conditioned to play at 5280 feet. But because the games are so long and
punctuated by so many timeouts and fouls, our advantage is lost. No twenty-year-
old is going to run out of breath when a forty minute game takes two and a half
hours to complete.

Solution: a) no more "media timeouts." Oh yeah, I know, the teams need the
money. Well, maybe there would be some revenue from increased attendance if
the games were quicker and shorter and more exciting. b) better-trained and
better- instructed referees. No bonus shots. No free throws except for fouls in
the act of shooting. And teams should always be able to "decline the penalty,"
as they do in football, and take the ball out of bounds. Then there would be
no incentive to foul in order to stop the clock. Take back the game from the
coaches and from the referees. Let the young men play.

Common sense changes, in my carefully considered view, which, if adopted, would
make life richer and more satisfying and more aesthetic.

Source: 2007/01/my_predictions_

Title: My Predictions for 2007
Date: January 16, 2007

I've been staring into my crystal ball, sorting through chicken bones, tea
leaves and the Tarot cards, observing the flights of birds, inspecting the
entrails of sacrificed animals, and diddling with the Ouija board. Now I'm
ready. Here are my widely-anticipated predictions for the year 2007.

1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce; moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market, and, finally,

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

There it is right on the page in black and white. No taking it back now. Eight
major predictions. I know that I'm going way out on the proverbial limb,
but I feel confident -- not vain or proud, mind you -- of my abilities as a
forecaster. Let's all remember to check back at the end of the year and see
how well I've performed.  If I come through, I'll rank up there with the
true greats of the prognosticating game: John the Revelator, Nostradamus, the
National Enquirer, and Pat Robertson.

Source: 2007/01/marriage_advice

Title: Marriage Advice
Date: January 21, 2007

High on the list of The New York Times' "most e-mailed articles" is one with the
catchy title "What Shamu Taught Me About a Happy Marriage," by a writer named
Amy Sutherland. Apparently it's a well-regarded, influential essay. I think
it's misleading and wrong-headed, and I think that couples who heed its advice
will soon find themselves not in a happy marriage but in one that's sterile and
empty.

Amy's column is at this address, and will be available unless and until the
greedy Times decides to put it behind a paid wall. A summary: poor Amy is
perpetually annoyed by Scott, her husband of twelve years. He loses his keys
and asks her help finding them; he keeps her waiting at restaurants; he "hovers
around her in the kitchen asking if she has read this or that piece in the
New Yorker." She's tried nagging, but it doesn't work. As it happens, Amy is
writing a book on animal training and she's watched people "do the seemingly
impossible," such as 'teaching baboons to skateboard" and "hyenas to pirouette
on command." She decides to adopt the animal model and "train" her husband. "If
he threw one dirty shirt into the hamper, I'd thank him. If he threw in two, I'd
kiss him." She rewards "approximations." She uses "least reinforcing syndrome"
in which the trainer doesn't respond in any way when an animal does something
wrong -- just stands and stares. When Scott loses his keys, she ignores his
pleas for help, and eventually he finds them by himself. By the end of the
article, Scott has changed. "After two years of exotic animal training, my
marriage is far smoother, my husband much easier to love."

What's so awful about this advice? Let's take the shirts-on-the-floor crisis.Amy
can imagine only two methods to deal with this problem. There's nagging, which
she now rejects, and there's re-training. But there are other responses. The
first is for Amy to gain a bit of perspective. Marriage isn't about whether the
dirty shirts are in the hamper or on the floor. People have had long and happy
marriages without resolving such issues. Amy seems to assume that getting her
way about the shirts is crucial. But when she and Scott married, they agreed
to love, honor, and respect each other; they didn't agree that every shirt
would immediately find its way into a hamper. Perhaps Amy should re-think her
priorities and try to keep the larger picture in view. Secondly, Amy can't seem
to imagine any ground between nagging and animal training. But there is --
there's an enormous territory. There's discussion, negotiation, and compromise.
Amy:  "It bothers me that you expect me to pick up your shirts." Scott: "I'll
try not to drop them. I'll pick them up myself." Amy: "And I'll try not to make
such a big deal out of it."

When Scott comes into the kitchen and wants to read to her from a New Yorker
article, Amy could say, if she had any imagination, "Oh, good. Scott wants to
involve me in his intellectual life. He wants to talk to me." But she doesn't
see it that way; she wants him out of the room so she can "concentrate on the
simmering pans." But what's important about marriage, or about life?  Is it
the pans, or is it the conversation?  Once again, Amy has it all wrong. She
cares about her cooking, and getting the soup exactly right, more than she cares
about the marriage. It shouldn't be beyond her ability to stir and to listen
at the same time; it's been known to happen. Amy is, let's face it, a bit of a
narcissist. She wants to make Scott into an extension of herself; she wants to
subordinate the marriage to her own convenience.

Readers and friends, here's my opinion. If your spouse comes to you and says,
"I've lost my keys, I'm distressed," you should stop whatever you're doing and
you should start searching. When you do so, you're treating your spouse with
respect and you're taking your marriage seriously. And if you happen to misplace
your own keys, it's perfectly fair to ask your spouse to help find them. Because
sometimes finding keys is a team activity. I'll go even further: sometimes it's
less important to find the lost keys than it is to search for them together.

But you should engage yourself with the problem of the keys, or the shirts, only
if you want a relationship of equals. If you think that it's so important to
train your spouse to stay out of your damn kitchen, then go ahead and follow
Amy's advice. But you might wind up with not with a husband or wife, but with a
pirouetting hyena or a skateboarding baboon.

Amy and Scott: here's some valuable advice. It comes to you courtesy of Mr.
Hart, who lived a couple of houses down from us. He died at age 90, in the same
month as his equally aged wife. The Harts had been married for 60 or so years.
"What's the secret of a long, happy marriage," he was asked. He said, "find out
what your wife wants and make sure that it happens." Which is, if you think
about it for a moment, only a variation of the traditional golden rule and of
its even more practical cousin: "do unto others as they want to be done unto."

January 23.  Today I received an e-mail from my old friend Spike Schapiro.
Spike says, "How come Amy and Scott have been married for twelve years and don't
have any children. I'll tell you why. Because Amy doesn't want kids who would
leave their toys in her kitchen or leave their clothes in the bathroom. She's
quite a piece of work, isn't she?"

Source: 2007/01/its_will_be_ver

Title: Notes on Interspecies Sexuality
Date: January 24, 2007

Readers might be tempted to disbelieve the outrageous silliness that follows,
but here it is, exactly as it appeared in the newspaper.  If you don't believe
me, check for yourself.

DEAR ABBY: Am I a "sicko" because I step out of the shower naked in front of
our dog? My wife, Amy, thinks so. The trouble started when we got a female dog,
"Taffy," from the local animal shelter. Taffy sleeps in our bedroom and is there
in the morning when I take my shower. Amy insists that I cover up in front of
the dog and that Taffy is no different from a child. This has created a lot of
stress between us because, to me, a dog is a dog. Is it wrong to be naked in
front of a dog? -- SCOTT IN NEW JERSEY

How even to begin?  My immediate thought was to take the opportunity afforded
by ABBY and Scott and Amy to make some jokes. E.g., is it wrong to be naked in
front of a dog?  Depends on the dog's attitude toward sexuality and gender.
Depends on whether it's the kind of dog who likes to worry a bone. Depends on
whether it's a hairy or a hairless dog. And also: would it matter if the dog is
gay?  Or male?  How does Amy feel about Taffy eyeballing her?  Would Tuffy be
granted the same privilege?  Does Taffy spend extra time licking her genitalia
after getting a full frontal view of Scott? Etc. Lots of opportunities for
bad humor. In addition to the jokes, I thought that I might also write a few
serious sentences about sentimentality toward animals. And also about flagrant
anthropomorphism -- I'm deeply troubled when someone proclaims that a dog is "no
different from a child."

I wrote an e-mail to confidants asking for help, thinking that they might
provide me with some one-liners. One of the answers that I received came from
my old friend Spike Schapiro, who, diligent readers will remember, wrote to me
a couple of days ago on the subject of marriage and animals (see the entry for
January 21 titled "Marriage Advice). Spike got himself a little bent out of
shape by DEAR ABBY, but I must admit that he took the plight of Scott and Amy
much more seriously than I did.  Here's a excerpt from Spike's response:

"The trouble began when we got a female dog, Taffy." No, Scott, the trouble
didn't begin when you brought home the little bitch.The trouble began long
before that. It all started when Amy was a child and her neo-Victorian God-
fearing parents, who more than likely had sex once and only once, and then only
to fulfill a legal requirement, found their daughter frolicking clothesless and
with a hand "down there" and patiently and sensitively explained to her that
the great Jehovah would wither her finger if her naked skin ever saw the sun
again. Amy's been in a psychological twist ever since. And Scott  -- why the
heck do you bother writing to ABBY?  You must know the score. Your wife is a
total nutball. She's nuts about animals, nuts about nakedness, nuts about sex 
-- which, I guarantee, you're not getting a lot of. Think seriously whether you
want to stay in this relationship. Amy -- get a hold of yourself before it's
too late. If you want to save your marriage, which is now staggering to a nasty
conclusion, don't worry about the intimacy of Scott and Taffy. Throw Taffy and
your dancing hyena and the fool baboon out of the window. Worry about Scott and
Amy.  Exercise your buccinatory muscles. Learn how to make winky-winky. Unlearn
everything that you learned from your parents. Take off your clothes and look at
yourself in the mirror.  Grow up."

I guess I see Spike's point.  I think, though, that he's confused this Amy and
Scott with the Amy who wrote about training her husband Scott in the well-known
NYT article. Although, come to think of it, they could be the same couple.

In any case, I think that Spike could have made the same point a little more
gently. I've edited out some of his harsher adjectives.

Source: 2007/01/the_alljohnson_

Title: The All-Johnson Team
Date: January 26, 2007

Here's the eagerly-awaited all-Johnson NBA team:  Magic, Marques, Kevin,
Dennis, Gus.  Everyone knows the first four, but only those with a few years
on their backs will recall Gus Johnson, who averaged 17 points a game and 13
rebounds in nine season with Baltimore.  Johnsons in reserve:  Vinnie ("the
Microwave"), Larry, Joe, Avery.  There's not a last name that can compete
(there are 49 NBA Johnsons to choose from, including the three Eddies and the
three Georges).

I would lay odds that the Johnsons would easily defeat the Williamses (though
not in depth -- 54 Williamses played in the league).  The all-Williams team: 
Gus, Aaron, Buck, Walt, Deron, Jason, Herb.  All of them role players -- no
real stars in the group.  What about the 53 Smiths?  Could they compete with
the Johnsons.  I don't think so:  Elmore, Adrian, Joe, Kenny, and all three
Charleses (subsumed into one mega-Charles) could play, but they'd be better if
the rules allowed them to use Rik Smits at center.  Who else?  The Millers --
not much there beyond Reggie. The Joneses:  Caldwell, Bobby, Sam, K.C., Eddie,
Popeye -- good but not in the same league as the Johnsons.  It's Magic and the
guys by a landslide.  Anyone out there with other suggestions?  Search here
for the data.

Source: 2007/01/medical_waste

Title: Medical Waste
Date: January 30, 2007

The Aged Parent, who's ninety-four, received a curious letter from AARP
MedicalRX Plans. MedRX is the insurance company that we've chosen to use as
part of the Bush drug plan for the old folks. In point of fact, the benefit
hasn't been very significant, especially since we fell into the infamous "donut
hole."  We pay AARP MedRX monthly by means of deductions from the Aged P's
social security check.

The AARP letter to which I refer was neither cordial nor pleasant. It said this:
"Our records show that you owe $108.00 for your AARP MedicalRX Plan premium. 
This outstanding amount is for premiums due before you changed your payment
method to automatic deduction from your social security check."  The letter
also included a threat:  "Failure to pay this outstanding balance could result
in the cancellation of your coverage."

I immediately suspected that the AARP claim to a hundred bucks of the Aged P's
money was absolutely false.  We initiated payment the very first month that the
plan came into effect and we always paid by deduction. There was no possibility
that the Aged P was in arrears. So I called AARP MedicalRX Plans to find out
the real story. First there was the usual song-and-dance: "If you are calling
about... Press 1.  If you are calling about... Press 2."  I pressed all the
correct numbers and was put on hold for ten or so minutes. I listened to some
crappy elevator music.  At last, a cheery voice.  "This is Anastasia. How
can I help you this morning?"   I explained the problem. "May I put you on
hold?"  "Sure." More crappy music, interrupted by, "Please continue to hold.
Your call is very important to us."  My call was so important that I was
told it was important every twenty seconds for another ten minutes. At last,
Anastasia returned.  "Do you remember that last summer you received a letter
saying that Social Security had sent you $108.08 in error?  Me:  "Yes, I do.
I had several letters from Social Security to that effect."  Anastasia. 
"Well, the money that Social Security sent to you was supposed to have been
sent to us at AARP Rx.  It was accidentally mailed to you." "I remember.  But
then I wrote a check to Social Security. I returned the $108.08 to them as they
requested."  Anastasia:  "Well, what happened is that Social Security never
sent the money to us." Me:  "So then your quarrel isn't with me. It's with
Social Security." Anastasia:  "Exactly right. We're trying to get the money
from Social Security. It's been a major confusion. We've been working on it for
months."  Me:  "So then I don't owe you any money at all."  Anastasia: "No,
you don't.  Just ignore the letter."  Me:  "Ignore the letter?  Why would
you send a letter to me that you expect me to ignore?  Why am I wasting my
time trying to figure out what your threatening letter is supposed to mean?" 
Anastasia:  "Well, you're not alone. We've sent out over a million of these
letters."  Me (somewhat exasperated now):  "You've sent a million letters that
you know are erroneous and misleading.  You've threatened a million old people
with loss of insurance coverage. Why?"  Anastasia:  "It's because the computer
is programmed to automatically send out letters when there's a premium that
hasn't been paid."  Me: "Why can't you reprogram the computer. How hard can it
be?  I'm sure it would be a lot cheaper than sending out a million letters.
And then you wouldn't have to deal with hundreds of thousands of telephone
complaints." Anastasia (testily):  "Sir, I'm not in charge of the computers." 
Me:  "Tell me, what do you do about the old people who don't understand your
letter but figure they'd better pay you or they'll lose their coverage? 
Do you return their checks?"  Anastasia.  "I don't know.  That's not my
department."  Me:  "Thank you very much.  It's been a gigantic pleasure
talking with you."  Anastasia.  "Is there anything else we can help you with
today."  Me:  "Can't think of thing."  Anastasia:  "Have a nice day."

February 2. Later, I tried to decide whether AARP Medical RX is incompetent
or corrupt. It's a tough call. On the side of corruption: if they sent out
a million letters and received $100 from 10% of the recipients, they would
have $10,000,000 as, in effect, an interest free loan. But in theory they'd
have to return the money eventually.  While there would be administrative
costs, it would still be a profitable gamble. On the side of incompetence:  It
probably costs a dollar to print and mail a letter, so AARP has already wasted
one million dollars and will squander more on time spent trying to repair the
damage. That's a lot of misspent effort.  So I lean toward incompetence. 
However, if in the end AARP retains the money from the old folks and also keeps
the money from social security, then there would be no question but that it's
conscienceless malfeasance.

Source: 2007/02/where_a_day_is_

Title: Where a Day is Longer than a Year
Date: February 02, 2007

A Venusian day, strange to say, is longer than a Venusian year. How can such
an apparent paradox be allowed?  It's easy: Venus rotates on its axis once
every 243 earth-days, but it revolves around the sun in 225 earth-days. How
appallingly counter-intuitive!  If I had any gift at all for thinking in the
abstract, I'm sure that I wouldn't find the idea that a day can be longer than
a year so disorienting. But I do;  for me, the word "day" has a metaphorical
as well as a scientific dimension: "days" are short, "years" are long.  I'm
consoled by thinking that my counterpart, a philosophically-handicapped Venusian
visiting the earth, would find our speedy days and our disproportionately long
year quite incredible. On Venus, the lazy old sun takes 116 days to rise in the
west and set in the east (Venus, ever the contrarian, rotates, so to speak,
"backwards").  So much for Ovid's swift horses; on Venus, they're all glue and
molasses, their forward progress barely perceptible.  There's a mythological
corollary that might please the poets. Randy Jupiter would be happy on Venus:
the venereal night is truly a megala nux.

I suppose that the example of Venus teaches us that days and years are not
things but concepts. For me, this is a hard lesson. I recognize that it's
earthocentric to measure the long Venusian day in terms of earth-days, but I
can't seem to reason my way around doing so -- the only day that I've ever
experienced is 24 hours long and the only year with which I'm familiar has 365
and a bit days. It's alarming to realize how short-sighted it is to assume
that a day, a month, a year, tied in, as they are, to astronomical reality are
natural, when, in fact, they're only artifacts of our earthly orbit.

Other measurements of time are less "natural" and therefore even more
troublesome.  How entirely arbitrary to divide the day into 24 parts!  Since
everything else is going metric, why shouldn't we divide the day into ten or
a hundred parts -- decidays or centidays?  And minutes and seconds -- why
sixty of them, when decihours and centihours makes so much more sense?  (The
ancients, incidentally, struggled mightily with hours -- read all about it
here.)  And the week?  No natural reason at all for the week. The Romans, as
is well known, were weekless.

Venus, having no moons, has no months. Mars has two moons -- would a Martian
calendar, if there were such a thing, have had months, or demi-months, or
monthettes, or what?

When I was a boy, I was a diligent if uncritical reader of science fiction.  In
those days, it was not uncommon for entire fanciful Venusian civilizations to
rise, peak, and fall and the course of a novel. But in the 1950s, almost no data
was available to us about the mysterious planet. Now, I'm afraid, the glamour
is long gone. The surface temperature of Venus averages 869F, the atmospheric
pressure is 90 times that of the earth, the atmosphere is 97 per cent carbon
dioxide and contains no oxygen, and the pretty swirling clouds are entirely
composed of hot, concentrated sulfuric acid. It's hardly a place in which an
advanced culture would be likely to thrive nor a place from which we would
expect much in the way of sophisticated calendrical theory.

Source: 2007/02/my_favorite_cri

Title: My Favorite Criminal Athletes
Date: February 11, 2007

Here are some that come immediately to mind:

Riddick Bowe. Heavyweight boxing champion who served 18 months for kidnapping.

Tonya Harding. The first American woman figure skater to land a triple axel
in competition, she is most famous for arranging to have her competitor Nancy
Kerrigan smacked on the knee. She later dabbled in pornography, boxing, and
boyfriend-beating.

Denny McLain. Baseball's last 30-game winner and an inveterate gambler, McLain
was imprisoned for drug trafficking, embezzlement, racketeering.

Jack Molinas. Columbia and NBA forward famous for fixing college and NBA games.
Banned from basketball, Molinas spent five years in jail for bookmaking. After
his release, he took up a new career in pornography. His murder in 1975 was
probably mob-related.

Gerry Priddy. 1940s-1950s American League Infielder, convicted and jailed for
extortion (he claimed to have left a bomb on a ship).

O.J. Simpson. Nicole Brown Simpson, Ronald Goldman, r.i.p.

Darryl Strawberry. Numerous counts of wife and girlfriend-beating; tax evasion,
DUI's.

Mike Tyson. Rape, earbiting, various drug and DUI charges.

Jayson Williams. New Jersey Nets star rebounder acquitted of murder, but when
the jury deadlocked on manslaughter, settled with the family of the dead man for
$2.5 million.

March 30, 2007.  Bulletin:  "Former Major League pitcher Ugueth Urbina
yesterday was sentenced to 14 years in prison in Venezuela for the attempted
murder of five workers on his family's ranch."

Source: 2007/02/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  "I, the Jury" and "The Kid from Tompkinsville"
Date: February 12, 2007

Mickey Spillane's I, the Jury (1947) is a loathsome novel. It makes me gag to
remember that it was wildly popular in the P.S. 217 schoolyard -- passed from
hand to hand in lurid 25-cent paperback editions. Spillane's hero, the crudely-
monikered private investigator Mike Hammer, lives in a world in which guns are
"rods," bullets are "slugs," cars are "heaps," a policeman is a "flatfoot,"
gays are "queers" and "pansies," and people of any color other than white are
"jigs," "bogies," or "darkies." His is a horrible, amoral universe of bigotry
and violence. Mike Hammer, nominally an officer of the law, makes no effort
to bring criminals to justice -- he prefers to kill them. "I'm going to enjoy
putting a bullet into that crazy son of a bitch more than I enjoy eating. I'd
sooner work him over with a knife first." He's a sadistic vigilante who beats up
suspects and bystanders indifferently: "my fist went in up to the wrist in his
stomach."

Charlotte Manning, the beautiful uptown "dame" whom he thinks he loves, tells
him what he wants to hear (and what the novel endorses) -- that he's a "a real
man -- no inhibitions." Of course, he doesn't go to bed with Charlotte Manning
-- he only traffics with women who are those he derides as "nymphos." At the
climax of the novel, Hammer discovers -- a surprise to no one but himself! --
that the killer for whom he's searching is Charlotte herself. As he fingers
his .45 caliber pistol, she slowly disrobes. When she's entirely naked, Hammer
shoots her in the stomach. "'H-how could you,' she gasps. Hammer: "It was easy."
Was it difficult, even in 1953, to understand such perverse, misogynistic
symbolism?

Mickey Spillane left his native Brooklyn to go to serve as a soldier; what a
shame that he returned as a fascist.

For all I know, I might have read I, the Jury during the same week that I read
John R. Tunis's The Kid from Tompkinsville. As degraded as is the one novel, so
the other is otherworldly and pure. The "kid" is Roy Tucker, a simple country
boy who tries out for the Brooklyn Dodgers, wins a place on the team, and is
pitching shutout after shutout when he trips in the shower and injures his
throwing arm.  A few weeks later, mirabile dictu, he returns as an outfielder
and leads his team to a pennant with his hitting. It's a heckuva lot of drama
for one short season, but Tunis makes it credible  -- well, at least, it seemed
credible to youthful me back in 1953.

Tunis takes his baseball seriously and he never patronizes his young readership.
Like most of Tunis's novels (The Kid Comes Back, Young Razzle, Iron Duke), all
of which I swallowed in single gulps, The Kid from Tompkinsville extols the
virtues of integrity, effort, and teamwork. Was I astute enough to notice that
there was no drinking, no staying out late, and not a hint of desire for women
in Roy Tucker's life? I don't believe I was.

While nasty old Mike Hammer asked us to wallow in a swinish world, upstanding
Roy Tucker lifted us from the mire. There could hardly be a better illustration
of Shakespeare's observation that "the web of our life is of a mingled yarn,
good and ill together." I'd like to believe that Tunis was a greater influence
on me (as he was certainly a greater source of pleasure) than Spillane -- even
though, as I recently discovered, Mickey Spillane (Frank Morrison Spillane) was
a fellow graduate of "good-and-ill-together" Erasmus Hall High School.

Source: 2007/02/what_a_relief_t

Title: Sub-Nadir Brainlessness
Date: February 15, 2007

It took three long weeks, but the four ministers who were appointed to counsel
the disgraced former New Life minister report that Haggard is now "completely
heterosexual."

How do they know? Did he pass a test? Did they make him look at pictures of a)
muscular male prostitutes, and b) fancy ladies -- and then check his arousal
rate?  Did the Reverend Ted buy a new gun rack for his truck? Has he started
watching NASCAR? Is Gayle pregnant again? What gives?

The Reverend Tim Ralph, one of the gang of four, produced the following
thoroughly incoherent analysis. "It was the acting-out situations where things
took place. It wasn't a constant thing." I construe "things took place" to refer
to whatever Ted did with the brawny masseur. I construe Reverend Tim's sentences
to mean: "Things took place when they took place. At other times, they didn't
take place." Very insightful, very reassuring. But since Reverend Tim and his
friends have succeeded so well and so rapidly with Haggard, don't they owe
something to all the other struggling-against-their-own-gayness evangelicals
(and Roman Catholic priests) out there. Shouldn't they franchise this cure?
There's a huge market.

Some questions. A) Do the four ministers truly believe that Haggard is
"completely heterosexual?" If they do, their knowledge of human life is shallow
beyond belief. If they don't, they're frauds of a high order of fraudulence. B)
Do the ministers think that we regular walking-round non-evangelicals swallow
their stories? Do they care?  C) Do they think that New Life congregants
believe them?  D) Are New Life congregants completely brainwashed?

A skeptical note. It's reported that the Reverend Ted settled with the New
Life Church for a sum of money. By the terms of the agreement, neither he nor
the church are allowed to say exactly how much treasure is involved. Moreover,
Reverend Ted has agreed to leave Colorado Springs. Cynical old me thinks that
it's nothing more than an old-fashioned payoff: you get out of town and never
darken our doorstep again, and here's a bunch of cash. Stick around and we can
do nothing for you. Dollars to donuts there's a no-litigation-on-either-side
agreement as well. It's all so very uplifting, so very spiritual.

February 17.  I received this jaundiced e-mail from my friend and correspondent
Spike S. "You're entirely too easy on these clowns. Ted's clearly bi-sexual,
and he'll always be. But here's the deal they made: the ministers said, we'll
declare that you're heterosexual, but only if you get out of Colorado. Their
only agenda is to make sure that the mega-million dollar New Life church stays
solvent, and they can't manage it if Ted's around. They'll pay for Reverend
Ted's master's in psychology -- no doubt from some off-brand bible college --
and he'll take up a new career re-programming and therefore screwing up young
gay fundamentalists. And what about the Reverend's drug problem?  Wasn't he a
member of, what do they call it, the First Methedrine Church, or is he a Crystal
Methodist? How long, anyone want to guess, before Ted falls off either or both
of these wagons? I'll give him a year and a half, max."

Source: 2007/02/a_moral_tale

Title: Friend Indeed or Nosey Parker?
Date: February 20, 2007

At a community meeting a few days ago, the question of alcohol consumption
came up (as it frequently does in our adjacent-to-a-university neighborhood).
One young man complained that when local bars (where over-serving is -- in
theory -- proscribed) shut down, the students then take their drinking to
"house parties" where there is no adult present to oversee how much can be
consumed. "They just go and get themselves totally wasted," said the student.
Our local police sergeant challenged him. "What do you do," she asked, "when
your friends make plans to get drunk? Do you try to stop them?" Her question
took the student aback. I don't think that the idea that someone his age could
or should intervene had occurred to him until that moment.

I was surprised that the sergeant asked the young man to look after his friends.
It was as though she asked him to become that dreaded folk-figure, the busybody.

What are the rules in such cases? Isn't the notion that each person is
responsible for only his own welfare a contemporary American dogma? "You can't
help people; they have to help themselves."

Some score or so years ago, I had a friend (I'll call him Vincent) who was
a two-(or three) pack-a-day smoker. He was an intimate enough friend that I
crossed the invisible busybody barrier. I'd argue with him about the health
risks of using tobacco; I'd send him articles to read. He was not impressed or
persuaded, but he was often irritated. Once he said, scornfully, "you are trying
to be your brother's keeper." Vincent was angry when I asked him not to smoke
when he visited my house. His conviction was that when you have a friend, you
don't try to change him or to regulate his habits; you accept him with all his
foibles. Perhaps he was right, but nevertheless, for several years I didn't
invite him home, which was a great loss, because he was smart and informed and
charming and sociable.

Then came the lung cancer, the surgery, the chemo, the false remissions, the
swings between hope and despair, and eventually, the premature death. In an
interview in the local newspaper a few weeks before he died, Vincent said, "I
have simply lost twenty years of my life to smoking." To me he said, once, very
quietly, "you were right."  Did he mean, "you were right that smoking was
dangerous," or did he mean, "you were right to try to change me?" I don't know.

I may have been right, but what good did I do? I alienated a friend and I didn't
add a day to his life.

When I look back now after so many years have passed, my regret is not that I
intervened but that intervened so ineffectively. It haunts me that I didn't I do
a better job.

In our neighborhood, we lose a local student to alcohol poisoning each and every
year. Can there be a sadder or more useless death?  Mom and dad nurture a child
for eighteen years, send him or her off to college, and a week later receive a
phone call that their child has choked to death on his own vomit.

Who is the responsible party?  Friends, teachers, police, family, liquor-
purveyors? Or only the individual?

Source: 2007/02/the_damnation_o

Title: The Damnation of Theron Ware
Date: February 25, 2007

A few of us were in a coffee shop talking about Ted Haggard, Darlene Bishop
and other right-wing Christianistas. One of the guys thought that I could gain
some perspective and also stoke my outrage by reading Harold Frederic's 1896
novel The Damnation of Theron Ware. I recognized the title -- it had appeared
on reading lists when I was a student in the 1950s and 1960s  -- but I'd never
turned a single page. Well, better late than never; Theron Ware is a truly
splendid book.

Here's a sample of its satirical spirit. Youthful, ignorant Theron Ware meets
the governing elders when he arrives to take up his ministry at the Octavius
Methodist Church:

"We are a plain sort o'folks up in these parts," said Brother Pierce....  We
walk here... in a meek and humble spirit, in the straight an' narrow way which
leadeth unto life. We ain't gone traipsin' after strange gods, like some people
that call themselves Methodists in other places. We stick by the Discipline an'
the ways of our fathers in Israel. No new-fangled notions can go down here. 
Your wife'd better take them flowers out of her bunnit afore next Sunday."

It's a wonderful speech, especially that last oppressive sentence, set without
pause or punctuation against flimsy pretenses to meekness. Harold Frederic
leaves us in no doubt that Brother Pierce and his Methodist co-religionists
worship only at the altars of joylessness and petty tyranny. Theron Ware would
like to rebel against these sour Puritanisms, but he's devoid of the necessary
intellectual resources. He's backwoods ignorant. He does after a while acquire
and read Renan's Life of Jesus and for a few chapters it seems as though he's
going to tread the familiar nineteenth-century path from narrow sectarianism
toward a less restrictive spirituality. But the author has many surprises in
store. Ware encounters Father Forbes, an intelligent, informed and (gasp!) Roman
Catholic priest and he also develops a painful crush on a dashing rich free-
spirited young and (horrors!) Irish-American beauty named Celia Madden. Ware is
unable to grasp that these two sophisticates treat him not as an equal, but as a
kind of mascot puppy. Wonderful and embarrassing complications ensue.

Frederic creates some full and rich and modern characters. Father Forbes is a
1890s decadent with roots in Pater and perhaps even in Huysmans, while Sister
Soulsby is a practical, energetic no-nonsense entrepreneur whose trade just
happens to be promoting Methodism. Most interesting of all is Celia Madden, who
plays Chopin and admires George Sand, and who is as up-to-the-moment as anyone
in The Woman Who Did (and who would have been perfectly at home discussing
aesthetics in Bloomsbury). Theron Ware's encounters with her are painfully
amusing. It's as if Frank Merriwell had somehow blundered into Madam Merle's
drawing-room.

The town of Octavius is modeled on Utica, New York, where Harold Frederic was
born and spent his young manhood. Utica is a place I know very well, but I don't
believe I've ever come across a Frederic monument or a "Harold Frederic lived
here" plaque. Perhaps the city fathers aren't eager to remind us that Utica is
portrayed as gossipy, narrow, ignorant, and exceedingly philistine.

Source: 2007/03/its_rumored_tha

Title: Seventy-two Virgins
Date: March 05, 2007

It appears to be the case that martyrs of a certain persuasion will be rewarded
in the afterlife with the ministrations of seventy-two virgins. It would take
a theologian of extraordinary skill to explain why acts of violence should be
rewarded with sexual indulgence. I raise a far less knotty question: if the
aim is bliss, then why virgins?  Why not women of experience and expertise?
Benjamin Franklin, the most practical of our Founding Fathers, was dogmatic on
this nice point: shun the callow in favor of women who've been around the block,
because "every Knack... by Practice [is] capable of improvement."  I think that
B-Frank would agree that there is something about the virgins-for-martyrs deal
that's kind of, how shall I say, impractical or counter-intuitive or even, dare
I say, kinky.

Here's a second theological conundrum. What is the reward when the martyr is
herself female? I must presume that she will be blessed with seventy-two male
virgins -- if not, there's a very serious afterlife asymmetry. Not to reward
females who give themselves to the cause would be a statement that the culture
of religious martyrdom does not support sexual equality, which I can hardly
bring myself to believe. But in the case of female martyrs, the matter of sexual
expertise is further exacerbated. Specifically, of what conceivable value are
seventy-two knackless male virgins? If we postulate that each male virgin is
good for between ten and fifteen seconds of actual intercourse, it follows that
they will be consumed at the rate of four to six every minute, which means that
on average a martyress, however patient, would enjoy a sum of only twelve or
so minutes of pleasure (setting aside time for re-mounting and repositioning),
which is surely insufficient exercise to produce a meaningful let alone heavenly
experience.

Nor will it be all that great for the male virgin at the end of the queue who
has to settle for sloppy seventy-seconds.

Source: 2007/03/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Amboy Dukes
Date: March 08, 2007

During my Erasmus Hall High School years, the hottest of all "hot" books was
Irving Shulman's The Amboy Dukes. It was official doctrine that a single oblique
glance at the inflammatory cover of this paperback could transform a well-
behaved kid into a murderous, reefer-crazed, oversexed hooligan. Simply to read
about the "juvenile delinquents" who populate The Amboy Dukes was to wander into
a criminal twilight. A guy definitely did not want his mommy to know that he had
heard of this book, let alone possessed a sticky contraband copy.

What was all the fuss about?  Why was the book condemned all over America and
even banned (for a while) in Canada?

Here's a paragraph that was much brooded upon in the local schoolyard. (I've
since learned that some 1950s moralists condemned it as pornographic -- and
perhaps they were right.)

They pushed onto the bus, and Frank watched Black Kenny and Mike get a nice-
looking broad between them and give her a rub. Mike and Kenny hemmed the girl
between them, skillfully pocketing her to prevent her escape. In her eyes
there was loathing and fear of the two hoodlums, who did not look at her but
nevertheless pressed against her lasciviously, pinioning her against their rigid
hot bodies. Mike pushed against the girl's buttocks, thighs, and legs, while
Kenny pressed against her stomach and breasts. The girl wanted to scream, to cry
out, but she was afraid....

Ugly to be sure, abusive, sexist, nasty, but still rather tame by later
standards. It's an effort of will to remember that during the Eisenhower years,
words such as "breasts" and "buttocks" were not uttered casually and that their
appearance on the printed page was rare and incendiary. But I don't think it
was the language alone, or even the stark portrayal of adolescents in heat that
rattled polite society. It was the intrusion of viciousness in the tame 1950s
father-knows-best twin-bed universe that provoked the reaction. That "nice-
looking broad" whom Mike and Black Kenny molest was, or was imagined to be, some
respectable family's sister or daughter. Just as the two hoods thrust themselves
against the young woman, so The Amboy Dukes flaunted itself in the face of
respectability. The proper middle class went to great lengths not to acknowledge
that brutes such as Black Kenny and Mike were their next-door neighbors. The
Eisenhower era lived in denial; there were some things that everyone knew but of
which no one spoke. In The Amboy Dukes, Shulman spilled the beans.

That's why The Amboy Dukes fascinated the guys who hung around the P. S. 217
schoolyard. Unlike our parents, we couldn't choose to deny the existence
of psychopaths such as Black Kenny and Crazy Shak (the novel's rapist and
murderer). Guys like that smoked and spit on every street corner and disrupted
many of our classrooms. We had to negotiate with violence or with the threat of
violence every day. To read The Amboy Dukes was oddly refreshing; it validated
the daily reality of teen-agers who weren't gang members.

Moreover, the novel had a strong vicarious appeal. While my friends were trying
to manage their hormones, keep up with their schoolwork and occasionally get
in a good game of basketball or stickball, the Dukes were cutting class,
punching out their teachers, smoking dope, and getting laid. Reading the
novel let us share in some of that other-side-of-the-track forbidden fruit.
But it allowed us to participate safely. The Amboy Dukes, like so many such
scandalous publications, is at heart a cautionary novel. Frank Abbot, the
central character, is a bad guy but he's appealing and not irredeemable; he goes
too far, gets in over his head, and winds up dead -- a warning to all of us. The
Amboy Dukes allowed "normal" kids to enjoy the novel's transgressive moments and
still return safely to the nest.

Although The Amboy Dukes sold millions of copies, I couldn't find it in any
of the libraries that I use. Through the miracle of the internet, I was able
to buy a tattered, yellowed-pages-unglued 35-cent 1949 Avon paperback. The
object itself is a piece of history. On the cover, a woman with flaming red hair
resists the embraces of a dark and handsome young man. Their facial expressions
(he: lustful; she: fearful) are highly melodramatic, but the pair are dressed
conservatively, as though they've just returned from a day of yachting. Also on
the cover are a couple of claims to literary merit: "The one book that tells the
inside story of juvenile delinquency no other novel has told before." And an
appeal to the moralists: "This book is emphatically a reading 'must'" --Edwin
J. Lukas, Executive Director, Society for the Prevention of Crime." Finally,
in almost unreadable tiny print, "This book is specially revised and edited
for Avon Books" -- an admission that leads me to guess that the paperback mass
edition expurgated some words or events that were deemed too strong for the kids
who bought the cheap edition and concealed it inside their official three-ring
binders.

Source: 2007/03/in_the_1950s_wh

Title: Writing: a Personal History
Date: March 13, 2007

My first writing instrument was the "straight pen," which was more durable but
not different in conception from the goose quill -- simply a metal nib set into
a wooden dowel. It was quite a trick for a six-year-old to carry a small drop of
ink from the inkwell and draw a line or circle without blotting -- especially
since there was a wartime shortage of quality paper and the the stuff that was
substituted was coarse and maximally absorbent. At P. S. 217, in the 1940s, each
classroom had an "ink monitor," whose job was to mix a dry powder with water in
a tall jug and fill all the inkwells. Every desk had an inch-in-diameter hole
in the upper right corner -- southpaws were expected to conform -- with a brass
fitting into which a small glass removable "well" was inserted. I got myself
into serious trouble for dunking the end of one of Josephine Casalino's long
black braids into my inkwell-- though I believe that I was neither the first nor
only boy who succumbed to so obvious a temptation. From the perspective of 2007,
it's hard to believe that dexterity with the straight pen was still part of the
curriculum -- it was as though we were being prepared to clerk in some gloomy
Dickensian counting-house.

I think that ballpoint pens arrived in the early 50s, but they were flighty
at first and regularly leaked onto the page or in the pocket. I remember that
my right thigh was dyed a perpetual blue. In 1956, setting off for college,
I invested $20 in a second-hand self-styled "portable" but nevertheless very
heavy Smith-Corona. I would not have plunked down so much cash if I hadn't
thought that I was making the purchase of a lifetime. After all, the typewriter
had represented the state of the writing art for eighty years -- ever since
Remington had taken Christopher Latham Scholes' invention into the mass market
-- and I had no suspicion that it would ever be superseded. Nevertheless, the
mechanical typewriter was obsolete by the 1960s, when I composed a document of
several hundred pages on a borrowed IBM Selectric. Not only did the electric
typewriter produce a more handsome page, but it made acceptable carbon copies.
(Carbon paper is unknown to younger generations and is now only found in
archaeological digs; it's shocking that internet-era folks have no clue that
"cc" abbreviated "carbon copy".) The heyday of the electric typewriter was brief
--twenty years or so. Sometime in the early 1980s, I was introduced to word
processing -- at first on an Apple 2+. Its dot-matrix printer was nasty (no
true extenders) and the hazardous program took perverse pleasure in displaying
ominous messages, such as "Fatal Error # 45."  After a while, I moved to
Wordstar, then to WordPerfect, and now, to whatever Typepad provides for this
essaylet. Could my straight-pen self have possibly imagined that I would someday
amuse myself with a self-published, self-edited internet blogazine?  Meanwhile,
my once-magnificent writer's bump has atrophied. It's gone the way of carbon
paper and white-out.

Information-gathering has been equally transformed. In the 1950s, data had to be
painfully copied by hand onto index cards, which were easy to misplace, misfile,
and misread. Sometime in the late 1960s I first started to make copies of book
and journal pages -- at first using a very smelly, expensive process, the name
of which I can't recall, which could only make crude and blurry negatives, but
was still far more efficient than copying by hand. It wasn't long before Xerox
rendered all previous copy systems obsolete.  Then came the internet which made
things easier still -- although for any depth of knowledge --let's not fool
ourselves -- books are still the only way.

At a library that I patronize, someone has taken fifty or so old wooden card
files and assembled them into a sculpture of sorts. It's titled Top Drawer
Society. For a donation -- I haven't inquired how large -- you can have your
name inscribed on a drawer's brass plate. I couldn't begin to estimate how
much time I spent searching through card catalogs in my lifetime: thousands of
hours, I'd guess. I never anticipated that so useful an item as a tray of cards
would be transformed into mere ornament and into a gesture to an antiquated
technology.

There's no question that innovations in writing and researching in my lifetime
are greater than anything that's happened since Gutenberg. I now know that
change will continue, but I have no more insight into the future than I did when
I plied my straight pen in first grade. What could possibly be out there beyond
the wordprocessing horizon?

Source: 2007/03/more_on_ninetee

Title: More on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Conveyances
Date: March 17, 2007

A year or so ago, I confessed that when I read novels that take place in
pre- internal combustion days, I don't clearly distinguish among various
horsedrawn conveyances -- they're all coaches to me. I have no mental image of
"fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet," "sulky," "surrey,"
"curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler," or "spring-van."  The
pictorial or social resonance of these colorful names is something to which I'm
pretty much tone-deaf.

I was therefore amused when just yesterday I happened upon the following
passage in Flaubert's Sentimental Education (completed in 1869 but set in the
1840s).  Frederic and Rosanette attend the horse races in a "berlin."  Stuck
in traffic, they find themselves surrounded by a crestomathy of carriages:
"barouches, britchkas, wurts, tandems, tilburies, dog-carts, covered wagonnettes
with leather curtains full of singing workmen out on the spree, and go-carts
carefully driven by fathers of families.  There were crowded victorias in which
some young man would be sitting on the feet of other passengers, with his legs
dangling over the side. Big broughams with cloth-covered seats carried dozing
dowagers; and occasionally a magnificent high-stepper went by, drawing a post-
chaise as simple and smart as a dandy's tail-coat."

I'm positive that Flaubert chose his words carefully and I'm equally sure that
he had no premonition that his vocabulary would be obsolescent in just fifty
years and incomprehensible in a hundred.

Every contemporary novelist knows that it matters whether his hero arrives in
a Jeep or a Jaguar or a jalopy. If his book will be read in a later century,
extinct and quaint words such as "pickup," "step-van," "SUV," "Buick,"
"station wagon," "jeep," "hummer," "flat-bed," and "Subaru" will be annotated
with copious scholarly footnotes. And the words to songs as well. How much
scholarship and how many sentences will it take to fully explicate "We'll have
fun, fun, fun/ Until Daddy takes the T-bird away?"

Source: 2007/03/an_imperfect_mu

Title: An Imperfect Murder
Date: March 19, 2007

From the get-go, our internationally-renowned neighborhood scandal, the JonBenet
Ramsey murder, had TV movie written all over it.  It had upper-class sheen,
infant-beauty-pageant perversity, and tantalizing whodunnitness.  Our latest
local murder lacks all such glamor.  The characters are sad, dumb, and pathetic
and, to make matters worse, everyone already knows whodidit.  Fodder for what
sort of film?  The answer should be screamingly obvious to movie aficionados.

Here are the facts as they have been extensively reported locally.  Tess Damm
(note transparent symbolism of name), an in-and-out-of-trouble somewhat trashy
15-year-old, persuades her boyfriend, Bryan Grove, to kill her alcoholic and
abusive mother Linda.  Bryan obediently does the deed by stabbing Mom Damm in
the "throat and mouth."  The kids, however, don't have a clue how to dispose of
the body, so they stow it in the back seat of the Subaru.  While it festers,
the young 'uns cavort.  Neighbors tell reporters that that "the teens were
seen coming and going at all hours of the night, 'car-surfing' through the
neighborhood and blaring loud music."  After a raucous month of celebration
in which they spend the $4000 in Mom's bank account, the murderers come to
the realization that it might be good idea to dispose of the evidence.  They
solicit the aid of third young malefactor.  (Possible dialog:  Bryan:  "Hey
dude, want to, like, help us get rid of a, like, corpse." Jared:  "Cool.") They
head out to the Erie landfill, but the car gets stuck in the mud and so they
return home.  The next night, they try again: they drive to a local cemetery (a
stroke of pure cinematic genius!) but because the ground is frozen, they can dig
only one or two feet into the ground.  The bury the body, but, panicked that
the shallow grave will be noticed, they return the next night, exhume Mom and
return her to the Subaru.  At this point, just as the story is becoming weirder
than weird, an "anonymous tipster" notifies the police and thereby cries "cut"
to the youthful criminals.

It's probably too morbid and half-baked for a broadcast TV movie, but can anyone
deny that the story is made to order for Joel and Ethan Coen?  Some typical
Coen Brothers elements:  truly sleazy characters; rampant brainlessness; 
the inability of the participants to look even a few moments into the future;
gruesome details;  gratuitous blood and gore;  very, very, black humor; 
and, finally, the opportunity to satirize American mores.  What could be more
perfect?   It's a Coen Brothers world after all.  Can the argument be taken
a step further?  The adventures of Tess and Bryan and Linda couldn't possibly
have occurred until Joel and Ethan had made and exhibited Blood Simple and
Fargo.  The murder -- and the macabre and superbly noir series of actions that
follow -- would not have been possible without a literary precedent.  Once
gain, Life can do no better than slavishly tread in the Footsteps of Art.

Source: 2007/03/recommended_rea

Title: Recommended Reading
Date: March 22, 2007

The most glorious fictions that I've read in many years are late writings by two
nineteenth-century masters. The first is Leo Tolstoy's Hadji Murad; the second,
Gustave Flaubert's A Simple Heart. Hadji Murad (published posthumously in 1912)
is a novella on the subject of war and its follies. A Simple Heart (1877) is a
short story about an exploited servant woman who finds a bit of beauty in an
ugly world. They're both absolutely transcendent stories -- "beyond beyond," as
Shakespeare says.

April 2.  Additional recommendations. I've now read three "detective" novels
by Leonardo Sciascia. They are all superior creations, although their open-
endedness might be disappointing to people who expect that mysteries must be
resolved and that criminals should be brought to justice. They're not genre
fiction; they're writings that cleverly expand and question the crime genre.
The novels:  he Day of the Owl  (1961), To Each His Own (1966), Equal Danger
(1971), -- all reprinted in attractive, reader-friendly editions by New York
Review Books. I'll be looking for more Sciascia on the library shelves. Also,
You Know Me All, by Ring Lardner, an excellent baseball novel first published in
1916. It holds up well, although the humor leans heavily on "country bumpkin"
stereotypes.

Source: 2007/03/authorship-1

Title: Another Folly: the "Shakespeare Authorship Question."
Date: March 26, 2007

This guest entry was contributed by Pauline Harlem, the internationally-
acclaimed author of The Wonderful World of Anagrams (New York, 2006).

"Just last week, the Washington Post published a pair of articles on "who wrote
Shakespeare's plays." The one claimed that Shakespeare's plays were written
by Edward de Vere, the seventeenth Earl of Oxford; the other re-asserted the
traditional view that William Shakespeare wrote William Shakespeare's plays. By
juxtaposing the two articles -- one for, one against -- the Post is guilty of
outrageous anti-intellectualism.The authorship of the Shakespeare plays is not
an open question. It's as if the Post were to offer its readers two articles,
one in support of evolution and the other in favor of new-earth creationism.
Just as the matter of evolution is a settled question, so the authorship of the
plays is not -- and never has been -- in any sort of doubt. The true believers
who keep stirring the pot are faith-based cranks, fanatics, and conspiracy
theorists who ignore the usual rules of evidence and reason.  Shame on the Post
for giving them a voice!

The nay-sayers discard the historical record and ask this question: is it
likely that Shakespeare, with his small-town background and (it's claimed)
limited education, could have written plays that demonstrate a sophisticated
knowledge of the law, the court, geography, seamanship, etc?  As to the matter
of likelihood, who could possibly disagree?  Of course it isn't likely that
these extraordinary plays would have been written by anyone -- but it happened
nevertheless. It's also unlikely that the theory of relativity would have been
developed by a civil servant in a Swiss Patent Office; it's extremely unlikely
that the most transcendent music ever written would have been composed by a
man who was totally deaf; it's beyond belief that an autodidact living in
intellectual isolation in Madras could single-handedly recreate a big hunk of
modern mathematics; it's more than incredible that a hermit-like lens-grinder
living in self-imposed intellectual exile would be one of the western world's
most innovative and progressive philosophers. What is "likely" and what actually
happens are two entirely different kettles of fish -- especially when genius
is concerned. Despite the unlikeliness, Shakespeare existed and he wrote
plays and poems.  His name is on thirty-six of the plays and his friends and
colleagues and contemporary admirers testify not only to his existence but
to his accomplishments. Among the thousands of books and the corridors of
unpublished manuscripts and records that survive from his time, there's not a
scrap of information to hint that the plays weren't his. Not a scrap, not a jot,
not an inkling, not a tittle.  Nothing.

The fallacious claims of the Oxfordians, Baconians, Elizabethians, Rutlandians,
et. al. have been refuted time and time again. Here's a representative sample of
the quality of the argument  -- it's from the recent Washington Post article.
"[It's unlikely that Shakespeare wrote the plays because he] never left England
-- but sixteen of the plays are set in Italy or the Mediterranean." Persuasive?
In what universe must authors travel the world in order to set their plays
outside of England?  Certainly not in the world of Shakespeare and his fellow
playwrights. Did Christopher Marlowe travel to Malta in order to compose The
Jew of Malta or to the Asian steppe to astonish the world with the Scythian
shepherd or to Wittenberg to trouble the orthodox with Doctor Faustus?  Thomas
Kyd never left England, but managed to startle theater-goers with The Spanish
Tragedy.  Ben Jonson never made his way to Italy, but he had no trouble putting
Volpone in Venice. John Ford, no traveler, set 'Tis Pity She's a Whore in Parma.
John Webster's two great plays The Duchess of Malfi and The White Devil are
set in Italy, a country on which Webster never set eyes. Thomas Middleton's
masterpiece, The Changeling takes place Alicante, in Spain -- but Middleton
was a Londoner who never went abroad.  And so on and on, endlessly. Like his
friends and competitors, Shakespeare wrote out of books. He, and they, pillaged
the literature for promising stories. If the story happened to have originated
in Italy, that's exactly where it remained. The playwrights were not geographers
or social historians and they created not real but literary places.  Marlowe's
Germany and Middleton's Spain and Webster's Italy are no more German or Spanish
or Italian than Shakespeare's Belmont is Belmontian or for that matter, W. S.
Gilbert's Mikado is Japanese.  Did Shakespeare need to travel to Denmark to
write Hamlet or to Vienna to write Measure for Measure?  It's nonsensical to
think so.  It's an argument without a scrap of merit. It's not honest.

But is it even a fact that that sixteen of Shakespeare's plays are set in
"Italy or the Mediterranean." Only by a stretch. Do the sixteen plays include
Othello, the Moor of Venice -- four acts of which occur in Cyprus?  And is the
argument that Shakespeare or some other author had to travel to off-the-beaten-
Elizabethan-track Cyprus in order to write it?  Do the sixteen include A
Midsummer Night's Dream, nominally set in Athens but in fact stuffed with
English tradesman and English fairies?  Or The Comedy of Errors, which takes
place, in part, in ancient Ephesus in Asia Minor. Or Pericles in Antioch? The
Tempest occurs on an enchanted island which is called Bermuda but seems to be
somewhere between Naples and Libya. Would a playwright need to traverse the
Mediterranean in order to bring Ariel and Caliban to life?  Is it any sort of
argument that plays set in the great age of Rome (Julius Caesar, Antony and
Cleopatra, Titus Andronicus, Coriolanus) required a playwright to abandon his
careful reading of North's Plutarch for a time-travel trip to ancient Italy? 
Shakespeare no more had to cross the Alps to write his sixteen plays than he
had to board a time machine to dark age Scotland to write Macbeth or teleport
himself to ancient Britain in order to write King Lear or Cymbeline.

The author of the Post article knows these facts. He knows that the travel
argument, and the other tissue-thin assertions that he advances, have been
refuted over and over again.  But like all faith-based controversialists, he
does not withdraw or concede or counter. He merely repeats and repeats and
repeats, because his personal conviction is prior to and more important than
either evidence or reason.  He's not conducting a legitimate search for truth;
instead, he is in thrall to an irrational and deeply-held conviction. Facts will
be bent to support his extra-logical hypothesis. His intellectual processes
mimic the creationists, the holocaust-deniers, the flat-earthers. Such minds
are not reachable -- but there's not the slightest reason for a respectable
newspaper to give them space."

Thanks, Pauline. I couldn't have said it any better myself.  V.

Source: 2007/03/peony_survival

Title: Peony Survival
Date: March 27, 2007

Last October, I decided that one of my herbaceous peonies -- a Prairie Moon, to
be precise -- needed to be separated and re-planted. I did the deed, but a few
days ago, while cleaning the garden, I found a small, overlooked fragment of a
tuber -- six inches in length and no more than half the diameter of a finger --
lying on the ground entirely exposed to the elements. I missed it last autumn, I
guess.  But the good news: while there was no sign of rooting, there was a bud
-- and the bud was swelling with new life.  (It had been a wicked winter, with
temperatures down to 10F.)

Peony-growers know that it's important not to plant the roots too deep in the
soil. The experts say two inches at the most. My experience is that in our
Colorado clay, two inches can be too much, and that peonies so planted may come
up spindly and flowerless. But now I know that it's safe to err on the shallow
side.  Herbaceous peonies are tougher than I imagined -- pretty much impervious
to cold.  Or at least such is the case with this particular variety.

Friends, I can't tell you how much I admire that tenacious little cylinder of
life.  It's toughness is inspiring.  I've prepared a burrow for it -- the best
in the way of soil and situation that I can offer. Let's see what it makes of
its new opportunity. It's spring;  I'm optimistic.

Source: 2007/03/just_when_you_t

Title: American Journalism Hits a New Low
Date: March 30, 2007

Just when it appears that our corporately-owned pseudo-local newspaper (the
Daily Camera) has hit rock-bottom-nadirhood, it plummets to still another new
low. It's a bottomless cistern.

We're suffering through a horrid local murder. The Camera is covering the story
with rare enthusiasm -- trying to elevate it to JonBenet Ramsey celebrity
status.  (It's the Linda Damm murder. You can look it up here.)

Some days there's no news.  But that doesn't stop Al Manzi and his troops.
Let's try to guess at the four-column headline on the front page of the edition
of March 28. Hint: It wasn't the Iranian capture of British sailors, which
might lead to a wider war in the Levant;  it wasn't AG Gonzalez kayaking the
disinformation rapids;  it wasn't the Senate repudiating the Smirker by setting
a deadline on Iraq. Nope. Here it is, folks. It's (drums and trumpets): FINDING
A NEW HOME:  LINDA DAMM'S DOG ADOPTED BY LONG-LOST FRIEND. Linda Damm's dog! 
Excuse me, but this "news" is not the truth that is going to set us free. This
is poverty-stricken intellectually vacant journalism.

The story itself is heart-rending. One human life has been lost and several
others are ruined. And our newspaper can do no better than run a report on
Linda Damm's dog!  Have the publisher and his reporters no dignity, no sense
of proportion, no shame?  No ethics. I'm embarrassed to be a reader of this
newspaper;  I'm embarrassed to be a fellow-citizen of its publisher.

Is it true that crude, yellow, lachrymose sensationalism still sells
newspapers?  I guess so.

March 31.  I received the following from Spike Schapiro, a friend of my
youth.  As usual, Spike is unhappy with what I've written.  "Viv, you've lost
your bearings.  You've been living in wussy Boulder so long that your brain
has turned to tofu. I'd heard that everyone out there was a fey vegan, but I
didn't believe it until I read the Damm dog story in your local rag. Let's get
this straight. Dogs are not placed in "foster homes" -- they're sent to kennels;
they're not "adopted", they're bought and sold; and they don't have "guardians"
-- they have owners.  Have you people lost the ability to make distinctions? Do
you treat all animals as if they were human infants?  The Camera reporter can't
tell the difference, that's for sure. I have ten bucks that says that she's
twenty-two years old, graduated with a degree in communication from some off-
brand college (probably Bible U.), and prides herself on her "spiritualism" --
by which she means "spirituality."  Plus she volunteers with Squirrel Rescue.

Viv, my friend, get back to your roots! The Camera's story isn't just egregious
journalism -- it's immoral trash. Try to recall the intersection of Newkirk
and Coney Island, where there wasn't the luxury for such foolish, fatuous
sentimentality."

Source: 2007/03/some_parallels

Title: Some Parallels
Date: March 30, 2007

Leonardo Sciascia's laconic and precise "metaphysical mystery" The Day of the
Owl (Il Giorno della Civetta, 1961) is set in unwholesome, Mafia-dominated
Sicily.  Captain Bellodi and Sgt. Major Ferlisi, dedicated and intelligent
police officers, investigate a series of horrific crimes. Their trail leads to
the local boss, Don Mariano Arena, but further searching opens the possibility
that an "honorable deputy" and a cabinet minister also may be implicated.
We'll never know the whole story -- Bellodi is recalled to Bologna and Ferlisi
transferred to Ancona, and the investigation languishes.

In Bush's America, Congressman Duke Cunningham is convicted of accepting bribes;
further investigation appears to implicate "Dusty" Foggo, third in the hierarchy
at the CIA. It's also possible that senior White House officials might be
involved  -- but Carol Lam, the efficient U. S. attorney in charge of the case,
is suddenly relieved of her position. The investigation languishes.

And also: Jack Abramoff is sent to jail for perjury. The trail of corruption
once again appears to lead to the White House -- but the prosecutor, Noel
Hillman, is offered a federal judgeship and the investigation grinds to a halt.

At the end of The Day of the Owl, Captain Bellodi, though exhausted and
disillusioned, resolves to return to Sicily. He will, it seems, try again.
Sciascia's unhappy novel offers a small ray of hope. It seems to say that it is
wrong to succumb to hopelessness and despair in the face of political abuse. A
useful moral, I think.

Source: 2007/04/cheney_suicide

Title: Cheney + Suicide
Date: April 06, 2007

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain?  It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good. What could possibly stand in his way?  Once he
sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some piece of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that while he was a black-hearted knave, at
least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade us
that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart."  But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself.  Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the
entire Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster.
"Full of scorpions [should be] his brain."  At this moment of writing, Cheney
is guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count
-- who can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even
the most rudimentary of consciences, on it lays the heavy burden of 60,000 to
100,000 Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has lived
in such dishonor/ That the gods detest [his] baseness."  But Antony took the
proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman fashion,"
let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating himself and
the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter. I know that
you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the internet,
perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your purpose. Dick
-- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in history. At this
point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest end."  You'll
immediately feel better.  It's a no-brainer.  Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation to
suicide and also Otis Brown's Comment (see below).  You are, as usual, falsely
optimistic, but OJB is right on target.  Cheney can't off himself because a)
he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-knowledge and
d) he can't point a shotgun. You cite the precedents of Othello and Anthony but
they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant.  Cheney is a slug."

Source: 2007/04/headline_dr_m_p

Title: Headline:  Dr. M. Patronized by Five-Year-Old Grandson
Date: April 07, 2007

We take the small aluminum bat and the "safety" baseball to the concrete
schoolyard and I try to pitch the ball at the exact level where the grandson
swings.  Every time he makes contact, the ball rolls a hundred or so feet until
gravity and friction kick in (I have no fielders behind me). Grandpa retrieves
the ball. The grandson says, "Grandpa, why don't you run after the ball?"

Even without running, Grandpa manages to pull a muscle in his side and
experience some interesting numbness in his left leg.

We play a board-game called Narnia. It has three separate kinds of dice; it has
"sword cards" and "event cards," "wolves" and "white witches."  Grandpa doesn't
seem to grasp the game's subtleties.  The grandson says, "Grandpa, why don't we
play something less complicated."

We play chess. Grandpa manages to lose the first game, but despite his best
efforts, takes a lead in the second match (perhaps because he's fully mastered
the way the knight moves). Grandpa makes a gracious offer: "why don't we just
say it was a draw?" The grandson responds by flying his queen over the ranks and
files and knocking Grandpa's king off the board. The grandson says, "Why don't
we just say I won?"

Source: 2007/04/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  A Death in the Family
Date: April 10, 2007

I remember exactly when I first heard of James Agee's A Death in the Family. It
was in Ithaca in 1958. The late Edward Ruhe, who was then a young instructor in
English, stopped me on the street and asked if I had read it. He said I must,
and, obedient lad that I was, I immediately purchased a copy. I can't remember
much from my fifty-years-ago reading, except that I was put off by the novel's
long italicized flashbacks and by what I regarded as its excessively intimate
tone, which I then judged to be sentimental and false. But I've now re-read the
novel. It's authentic, it's emotional, and it's so very American. I'm very glad
to have had a chance to revise my earlier opinion. Perhaps I was too young. It's
curious that I didn't connect Agee to the autobiographical poets that I was then
reading, for the ground that Agee covers was then being explored by Lowell and
Snodgrass and Roethke and of course by Sylvia Plath.

It's a novel not only about death (it's told through the observing eyes of
Rufus Follet, the six-year-old whose father dies in an automobile accident) but
about the details of American life. There's very little in the way of plot, but
Knoxville in 1915 is wonderfully evoked, mostly through concrete images. It's
very much a novel of things. Perhaps I'm especially conscious of this technique
because I've been re-reading Flaubert. But in Flaubert's novels, almost every
object is laden with satirical significance (which is also the case -- to choose
an American parallel -- in the novels of Mark Twain). Agee, however, loves the
objects that he describes. Although there's puzzlement and mystery, there's not
an ounce of satire or cynicism anywhere in A Death in the Family. Rufus Follet
and Huck Finn -- it's not as unlikely a pairing as it might at first seem.

The facilitator of Agee's achievement is James Joyce. A Death in the Family
could not have been written without the precedent of A Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man. But it's an American not an Irish portrait -- not as complex
or as original, but fully as real as Joyce's. If an extraterrestrial visiting
our lovely green planet wanted to understand the difference between Europe and
America, he couldn't do better than read Portrait and A Death in the Family side
by side.

Source: 2007/04/book_report_tim

Title: Book Report:  Tim O'Brien's In the Lake of the Woods
Date: April 13, 2007

In The Lake of the Woods sold well and was much adulated in 1994. It's been
on my reading list for a long time, and I've finally gotten around to it.
In plot, it's uncannily reminiscent of Sloan Wilson's The Man in the Grey
Flannel Suit (on which I reported some months ago). Wilson's novel is post-WWII;
O'Brien's is post-Vietnam. In each novel, the semi-autobiographical ex-soldier
protagonist has committed unspeakable acts that he conceals from his loving
wife; his silence embitters the marriage. In both books, the central figure
embarks an ambitious career, but he is haunted by his past. Eventually, by force
of circumstance, closeted history re-emerges and a crisis is precipitated.
Deliberate and willed amnesia is the common theme of both books -- in fact,
neither the characters nor their creators can bring themselves to confront the
past except obliquely.

I've come to In The Lake of the Woods thirteen years too late. I'm sure that it
had immediacy and power when it was fresh and new, but now it seems contrived
and obvious. The machinery of the novel  -- multiple interlocking flashbacks,
third-person commentary, authorial interjections, etc. -- may have worked in
1994, but is now marvelously self-conscious and ostentatiously "literary."
I know that Vietnam was a trauma for all concerned and I respect O'Brien's
sincerity and pain. I just wish In the Lake of the Woods weren't so thin and
pseudo-mysterious and evasive.

Is there a great novel of Americans in Vietnam or is it still waiting to be
written?  It was a particularly ugly war and it was the watershed experience
for people of my particular generation. Do we have a War and Peace?

Question:  How many masterpieces would it take to compensate for the
disaster?  Answer:  There isn't enough paper.

Source: 2007/04/regular_readers

Title: Sex and the Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Conveyance
Date: April 18, 2007

Regular readers of this blague are well aware that I have repeatedly indulged
my bemusement at the names of extinct or obsolescent horsedrawn conveyances.
My point is that modern readers, who know precisely what is signified  --
in design, in metal, rubber and plastic, and especially in social value --
by such words as Jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, and jalopy, know just about zip about
"fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet," "sulky," "surrey,"
"curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler," "spring-van," "berlin,"
"barouche," "britchka," "troika," "wurt," "tandem," "caleche," "tilbury," "dog-
cart," "wagonette," "go-cart," "victoria," "brougham," "diligence," "clarence"
or "post-chaise."  If we notice these words at all, we tend to savor them as
archaic Victorian music rather than to identify and evaluate them as specific
forms of transportation.

Return with us now to the unthrilling 1950s, before pre-marital cohabitation
became ordinary. In those days, automobiles reeked of sex. Indeed, I can
remember that one sociologist described them as "portable bedrooms" -- a
witticism that produced profound envy in those of us who came from automobile-
less families.  While I knew that Nashes and Studebakers and big ol' DeSotos
could serve as mobile boudoirs, I must confess that I had never suspected that
horsedrawn vehicles could perform the same function. The eye-opener came by
way of some sly and wicked goings-on in Flaubert's Madame Bovary.  Here's the
situation: Emma has been wooed for a hundred or so pages by her young admirer,
Leon. They are both eager to consummate their affair, but there's no convenient
venue. Taking fate into his hands, Leon "pushes" Emma into a cab. "'Where to,
Monsieur?' asked the cab driver. 'Wherever you'd like,' said Leon."  And then
Flaubert describes the route around Rouen taken by coachman, cab, and lovers.
He give us a page and a half of paragraphs like this one:  "The coach promptly
began to move again, passing through Saint-Sever, along the Quai des Corandiers
and the Quai aux Meules, over the bridge once more, through the Place du
Champ- de-Mars and behind the gardens of the Home for the Elderly, where, in
the sunshine, old men clad in black jackets stroll up and down a terrace green
with ivy. It climbed up the Boulevard Bouvreuil, traveled along the Boulevard
Cauchoise, then right over Mont-Riboudet as far as the hill at Deville." 
At discreet intervals, Flaubert interrupts the narrative: "'Keep going,"
cried a voice from inside...."  "'Keep going!' shouted the voice, even more
furiously...."  "The coachman could not understand what rage for locomotion
could be compelling this pair never to stop." Eventually, the cab "drew up in an
alley near the Beauvoisine district, and a woman stepped out, walking off with
her veil lowered, never looking back."

Nineteenth-century writers were not allowed to be explicit about sexual events,
so they had to adopt various circumlocutions and codes. They lacked the freedom
of both earlier (Fielding, said Thackeray, "was the last of our writers who
drew a man") and later (post-Joyce) novelists. To write frankly about the act
of intercourse was absolutely taboo.  Despite the obstacles, Flaubert does a
excellent job of suggesting both the duration, the energy and the jouissance
that Emma and Leon experience while their coach was "tossing about like a ship."

I suspect that Flaubert's readers had little trouble comprehending what is meant
by the passengers' sudden "rage for locomotion."

Source: 2007/04/an_informal_sur

Title: An Informal Survey
Date: April 23, 2007

OK, it's time to get going. Could we put the house lights on, please. Here's
the first question. Raise your hand if you think that the loss of 5.000,000
e-mails by the White House was simply an accident. That it was unintended.
Anyone?  Yes, I see a couple of hands in the back, and there's someone here on
the left. I guess most of you think it was 'accidentally-on-purpose.' Fine. OK
now, here's another question. The White House claims that Karl Rove didn't use
the Republican National Committee e-mail address to bypass the records act, but
just simply to keep politics and government business separate. If you believe
that, please raise your hand. I'm not seeing any hands at all -- oh yes, there's
someone, and there's someone else near the center aisle. There's two hands --
no, I'm sorry, three.  Ready for another question?  The President is willing
to let his advisers talk to congressional investigators, but not under oath,
not publicly, and with no transcript. If you believe that he's not trying to
hide something, raise your hands, please. Did I make that question clear? Let
me say it again. If the president's argument is persuasive to you, raise your
hand. If you think he's just protecting himself and his advisers, keep your
hand down. Hands? I see two on the left, and one there in the back. Same person
as before, I think. OK now, -- next question. Karl Rove's lawyer admits that
Rove systematically erased his e-mails, but only because he thought that they
were preserved elsewhere. Anyone believe that one?  Please raise your hand.
Nobody?  OK, there's someone down here. Sorry, I almost missed you, ma'am. So
we have only one person who believes that story. Ready for another question? 
Attorney- General Gonzalez says that he would never fire anyone for political
reasons or to interfere with an investigation in progress. Do I have any hands
on that one? No, none at all?  Interesting?  I'll wait. Still nobody? Let
me try another question. Anyone here believe that Gonzalez is a tool of Rove
and that he does exactly what Rove tells him to do?  OK, now we're finally
getting some response. I thought no one was paying attention. Looks like about
two-thirds, maybe three- quarters of you. Maybe more. We only have time for
one last question.  Anyone here convinced that Karl Rove is a vicious liar
who deserves to hang by his thumbs in a Gitmo prison, please raise your hand.
Whoa, almost everyone. Please, I can't keep count if you raise both hands. Just
one hand, please. Look, shouting isn't necessary  -- I just need to count the
hands. What's that you say?  I can't hear you -- there's so much noise. Oh, you
think he should hang by his nuts. Very good. OK, thanks a lot, everybody. Thanks
for your cooperation. That was very helpful.

Source: 2007/04/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Scaramouche
Date: April 25, 2007

For the life of me, I cannot remember whether I read Scaramouche because I
was entranced by the movie, or whether it was the other way around, and I
surrendered my 16 cents to the Leader Theater because I had already fallen
in love with Rafael Sabatini's historical romances. I know that I gorged
myself on huge helpings of Sabatini -- not only Scaramouche and Captain Blood,
but everything else in the rich collection of the McDonald Avenue library.
Scaramouche, first published in 1921, enjoyed a second burst of popularity
when the Mel Ferrer-Stewart Granger Technicolor swashbuckler hit the screens
in 1952. I've now re-read the novel, and while it lacks the magic that it had
for my 13-year-old self, and, moreover, is awkwardly plotted, and stilted, and
thin, and obvious, it's nevertheless an engaging adventure story. The central
figure is the dashing and resilient Andre-Louis Moreau, who survives crisis
after crisis with a witty, devil-may-care sprezzatura. The novel itself overlays
elements of picaresque (on-the-lam Moreau becomes an itinerant actor, then a
fencing master, and finally a politician) onto a traditional romance plot (in
the novel's final pages, our bastard hero discovers that he's an aristocrat by
birth). At heart it's yet another version of the secret-sharer, doppelganger,
Jekyll-Hyde plot so common a hundred or so years ago. Moreau is haunted by his
wicked double, the Marquis Gervais de la Tour D'Azyr, with whom he competes for
not one but two different women  -- one fallen and one pure, as was the custom
in those days. D'Azyr claims that Moreau has been "the evil genius of his life,"
but he's got it backwards: he's Moreau's evil twin. In the thrilling climax, so-
called, Moreau wins Aline de Kercadiou -- the upper-class paragon whom both he
and his double desire. The novel is set during the French Revolution, but the
historical context is dimly realized  -- a much paler embodiment than The Tale
of Two Cities, which, like Scaramouche, is also a novel of doubles (remember
Charles Darnay and his dissipated friend Sidney Carton!).  A dyspeptic reader
might assert that the novel is nothing but dilute Dumas; it would be hard to
challenge such an opinion.

The film, which I remembered fondly, was a bitter disappointment. It's
appallingly, embarrassingly bad. There's some good theatrical dueling, but
the plot is a mess, the dialog is ghastly, the humor infantile, and the
acting vaudevillian. Eleanor Parker is hopeless as a cliche "spitfire" who
alternately kisses and smacks around her admirers; however, a young and rondelet
Janet Leigh, swathed in whole hectares of taffeta, manages to redeem the
part of Aline. All the characters, even Aline, wear their hair in the oddest
configuration: highly artificial, upswept white wigs. They look like well-
groomed sheep. I suppose it's too late to shoot the hairdresser.

The Sesquipedalian Sibilance Society would like to extend its appreciation to
Mr. Sabatini for popularizing the word "spadassinicide," which is much-used in
the novel. It's from Fr. spadassin, "assassin," and from the Latin verb meaning,
"to kill."  Etymologically speaking, spadassinicide ought to denote a person
who murders murderers, but the author uses it to mean a person who kills by
taking advantage of the etiquette of the duel. It's a handsome old neologism,
although not easy to work into everyday conversation.

Source: 2007/04/novelists_must_

Title: A Bad Case of Irony Overload (IO)
Date: April 30, 2007

O m' god. I'm having a serious attack of Irony Overload. This is no joke. In the
last few days, the news has been saturated with extreme instances of Natural
Irony. It's dangerous stuff. Left unchecked, you know, IO can progress to Morbid
Cynicism (MC), which is terminal. The cases to which I refer are not your run-
of-the-mill family-values preacher caught pants-down with a male prostitute.
These are more colorful, more exotic performances.

Paul Wolfowitz, World Bank prexy and ferocious campaigner against corruption and
nepotism, "directed" that his very own girlfriend or house mate or whatever she
might be called, be hired at a handsome tax-free salary at a State Department
agency where she's to be guaranteed superior evaluations and inordinately large
salary increases. It's a variety of cronyism that we can call "nepotistical
irony."

Another: Robert E. Coughlin, deputy chief of the criminal division of our very
own US of A Department of Justice, which is overseeing the investigation of Jack
Abramoff, suddenly needs to spend more time with his family when investigators
scrutinize his financial relationship to Kevin Ring, an Abramoff stooge. What
are the odds? The investigator supervising his own investigation! There's
enough irony in this story to fill a barrel with monkeys or, alternatively, an
industrial size hen house with packs of famished foxes. And there's more to the
story. Last year, the very same Robert E. Coughlin received, at the hands of
Alberto Gonzalez himself, the highly coveted Attorney-General Award for Fraud
Prevention.

And just yesterday, when I thought that my IO index couldn't rise any higher,
Global AIDS Ambassador and Deputy Secretary of State Randy (actual name!!)
Tobias, a big abstinence guy and the overseer of a program designed to help
men in poor countries "develop healthy relationships with women" resigned "for
personal reasons" when it was revealed that he had been regularly dialing up an
"escort service" that sent shady ladies to his home.  Asked "if he knew any of
the alleged call girls," Randy replied that in "he didn’t remember them at
all. He said it was like ordering pizza." Women are like pizza?  To a man whose
mission is "to help men in poor countries develop... etc., etc."  In the face
of such a revelation, how's an ordinary guy supposed to keep Morbid Cynicism at
bay.

By the way, Randy T. has chosen to go with the Ted Haggard defense. Yes, he
frequented prostitutes, but not for sex, only for massage.

So here we go again, dear readers. Pop quiz, multiple choice. Your back is
hurting and you need a massage. Whom do you call?  Two choices:  a) massage
therapist, or b) a notorious madam.

If you answered A, you win a lifetime membership in the Committee to Stamp
out Morbid Cynicism.  If you answered B., you receive a lucrative patronage
appointment in the Department of Justice plus a secret e-mail account with the
Republican National Committee.

Source: 2007/05/book_report_pet

Title: Book Report:  Peter Pouncey, Rules for Old Men Waiting
Date: May 03, 2007

Rules for Old Men Waiting (Random House, 2005) is both a good and bad novel.
Some of the time it's rather wonderful, but there are long stretches that are
maximally pedestrian. It's distinctly odd that the story-within-a story -- a
WWI morality about good and evil in the face of combat-- is gritty and real and
exciting, while the frame is flaccid and unconvincing and also offers some of
the woodenest dialog I've read in the new millennium. Rules for Old Men Waiting
is a first novel by a sexagenarian that recounts the story of an old man who's
decided to devote his last days to writing fiction. It's less involuted than it
sounds but still a little too self-consciously theatrical. Pouncey must have had
tons of trouble bringing the novel to a close, because in the last few pages he
invents a new character to help him staple on an ending. Nevertheless, the novel
is an honest, respectable effort -- and extremely effective when Pouncey sticks
with his strengths.

My geezer group is going to read Rules for Old Men Waiting later this month, so
stay tuned for a fuller report.

Source: 2007/05/the_answer_is_n

Title: "The Answer" is not the Answer
Date: May 03, 2007

I never, ever, thought that the Denver Nuggets' acquisition of Allen Iverson
was a good idea. He has skill, he has speed, and he's the most resilient guy in
the world. He can do everything on a basketball court except win games. These
last four losses against San Antonio prove the point. It's not just that last
night he was 6 for 22;  it's that when the Nuggets come down the floor, whether
Iverson eventually shoots or not, he clings to the ball and dribbles around
while the rest of the team stands and watches. Iverson turns his teammates into
spectators. Last night, Carmelo had three points in the fourth quarter; he
barely touched the ball.  Nene, who can score off almost everyone down in the
post, might as well have sat for the last twelve minutes.

Of course it's clear that the Nuggets can't advance in the playoffs until they
find themselves a reliable three-point shooter.

It's just as obvious that Iverson isn't going to become a team player; he's
31 years old and he's averaged 23 shots a game with a .422 percentage for an
entire career. He's not going to alter his game, but he's definitely going to
deteriorate. I'm afraid that we're stuck with him. Meanwhile, Philadelphia
has done better with Andre Miller than with The Answer. In addition, we gave
Philly two first-round draft picks to help them fill in their gaps. I like
Philadelphia's chances;  I don't like ours.

Source: 2007/05/loyal_bushies_t

Title: "Loyal Bushies":  Two Archetypes
Date: May 07, 2007

Here are two types of "civil" "servants" prominent in the Bush era.

A.  The Moronotron. Just under 30 years old, he/she (let's say she) comes from
a large family of home-schooled children, five of whom are still active in the
LifeForce Harvest Church of Milan, Ohio, pastored by the Reverend Mike. Family
trauma (one of her brothers committed suicide; another had to be disowned when
he moved to San Francisco with his friend Gabe; that her mother recently entered
alcohol rehab has only strengthened her faith. She graduated from Brethren
College, where students and faculty bask in an "authentic relationship with the
Lord," with an honors degree in Christian Communication. After Brethren, she
attended law school at Regent University, where she chaired the debate team and
counseled pregnant teens. She was making fundraising calls for the Santorum
campaign in 2004 when she was offered the position of assistant undersecretary
for policy in HHS -- her roommate's cousin was a fraternity brother of a 'prayer
partner' of Lynne Cheney's aunt Sylvia's husband. As White House liaison, she
"relayed" information from the President's "closest advisers" to the Secretary.
Now undersecretary of HHS, she oversees 160,000 employees and a budget of 800
gajillion dollars. She is unmarried and doesn't date, enjoys Fruit Loops, and
someday, when her life is less busy, hopes to travel to third-world countries to
bring good news to the unenlightened.

B. The Henchdoofus. He is now close to 60, a graduate of the Chadron State
College in Chadron, Nebraska, with a degree in marketing. At Chadron, he
captained the cheerleading squad and made a complete recovery from the illnesses
(depression, fatigue, etc.) that made it impossible to for him serve in the
military during the Vietnam era. He joined Exxon Mobil right out of college.
He had worked his way up to a moderate-sized cubicle when he left to head up
Patriotic Americans For Clean Energy (wholly funded by Exxon). PACE lobbied
for a "balanced approach to offshore oil drilling." In 2000, President Bush
appointed him chair of the Advisory Council of the Food Safety and Inspection
Service. In 2001, he founded a K Street lobbying firm called ACS Associates
which had as its principal client the American Melamine Council. ACS (from
which his wife Christine continues to draw a $30,000 monthly stipend) is often
credited with the resurgence of profits of both the melamine and the pet-food
industries. He was recently appointed Undersecretary for Nutrition Policy in
the Department of Agriculture. He's a dedicated environmentalist and hunter,
and enjoys the wilderness in his SUV, his ATV, and especially in his Arctic Cat
Panther 360 snowmobile equipped with an ATN 24x75LU peak performance titanium
night vision telescope mounted on a Remington X-40 high-powered assault rifle.

Source: 2007/05/in_the_previous

Title: Another "Loyal Bushie."
Date: May 10, 2007

In the previous post, I recorded two archetypes of "Loyal Bushies" -- the
Moronotron and the Henchdoofus. Here's another one.

The Spoiled Rich Prick. Typically, the SRP attended boarding school at
Phillips something-or-other or at St. Somebodies in New Hampshire. Although he
learned nary a thing, and his SATs were under 1000, he was admitted to Yale
(which his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather attended) and in his
senior year was tapped for membership by Numskull and Boners. The SRP went
on to study at the Harvard Business School, where he graduated dead last in
his class. Although eligible for the draft, through his father's influence
he was able to secure a place in the National Guard, from which he was
frequently absent-without-leave.  For a decade or so after Harvard, the SRP
was distinguished for booze, cocaine and drabbing. Friends of the family set
him up in a business, which failed, and then bought him out for many millions.
Then the SRP's father decided that he was too incompetent to enter the family
business, so he had him elected governor. He still holds high political office
and is famous for his laziness, rhetorical incompetence, anti-intellectualism,
partisanship, ignorance, truculent stubbornness, petulance and bonehead errors
in matters of national consequence.

Spike Schapiro comments:  "Thanks for this portrait. I guess you had Dan Quayle
in mind."

Source: 2007/05/my_favorite_cog

Title: Favorite Royal Cognomina and Sobriquets
Date: May 13, 2007

Reading an introductory history of Spain (I'm appallingly ignorant about the
Iberian peninsula), I learned of the dark age king with the excellent name of
Wifred the Hairy. Wifred stimulated me to recall other monarchs with colorful
sobriquets: Vlad the Impaler, Ethelred the Unready, Ivan the Terrible, Charles
the Fat, Edward the Confessor, Pippin the Short, Eric the Red, William the
Conqueror, Richard the Lion-Hearted, Joanna the Mad, Suleiman the Magnificent.
When my learning and memory failed, wikipedia rode to the rescue: Sviatopolk
the Accursed, Ismail the Bloodthirsty, Ivailo the Cabbage, Alfonso the Chaste,
Louis the Indolent, Denis the Farmer, Piero the Gouty, Fulk the Ill-tempered,
Edgar the Outlaw, Louis the Pious, Eric the Priest-hater, William the Silent,
Olaf the Stout, Bayezid the Thunderbolt, Garcia the Tremulous, and Alfonso the
Wise. Then I thought, how sad that in this formal age of first and last names we
no longer make use of such picturesque appellations. Let's return to the earlier
tradition. I propose, as a start, Mel the Bigot, Mike the Ear-biter, Rush the
Blowhard, George the Truculent (or George the Decider), Alberto the Forgetful,
and Dick the Dick. Suggestions are very welcome. The world is all before us,
where to seek.

May 15.  Pauline Harlem, acclaimed author of The Joy of Anagrams, suggests
these two: Woody the Perplexed and Warren the Promiscuous.

May 16. Spike Schapiro comments:  "Who in the living heckola is 'Ivailo the
Cabbage.'  Did you make that up, Vivian?  Do the rules of your game allow me
to invent vegetable sobriquets?  Suppose I said, 'Ivana the Beet' or 'Penelope
the Melon'?  Would that be amusing or pertinent?  What's the deal here?

Vivian replies:  Spike -- Ivailo the Cabbage, King of Bulgaria, was also known
as "Ivailo the Lettuce" and "Ivailo the Radish."  Why would I try to deceive
you?  Besides, I'm not nearly so inventive.  For more info, click  here.

Source: 2007/05/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Bridge of San Luis Rey
Date: May 14, 2007

The Bridge of San Luis Rey, although published in 1927, was still widely read
in the 1950s both by the  general public and by students in classrooms all
over America. It's a fine novel but it's unfortunate that Thornton Wilder's
philosophical premise is so naive and lame. In 1714 a rope bridge over a gorge
in Peru breaks and five people perish. Brother Juniper investigates the lives
of the fallen, assuming that the good lord wouldn't have allowed them to die
without a reason. Eventually, the well-meaning priest learns that the five
victims were no worse and no better than any other quintet of ordinary mortals.
His conclusion is displeasing to officialdom and both he and his compilation of
facts are burnt by the Inquisition.

By the oddest of odd coincidences, I had recently read an essay on the rope
bridges of the Incas, in which I learned that, though brilliantly designed,
these bridges required annual renewal. My reading of The Bridge of San Luis
Rey was therefore colored by questions not of theology but of engineering.
Why didn't they repair the damn bridge?  Why did they think that a fiber
bridge wouldn't rot?  Why doesn't Brother Juniper investigate the bridge
maintenance department? The conclusions to which the novel seems to come --
that a) sometimes good people die for no good reason, b) that god is either
indifferent or not there at all, and c) the Spanish inquisition was unpleasant
-- don't seem particularly challenging. Is it possible that the novel's theses
were daring in the 50s classroom?  They seem mighty tame today.

Though the frame of The Bridge of San Luis Rey is bland, the accounts of
the five people who die are sharp and colorful and imaginative and rather
beautifully written. There are moments, in fact, when Wilder's storytelling
seemed almost post-modern. Here's part of a paragraph about the twins Manuel and
Estaban. To me, it sounds like an extract from The Hundred Years of Solitude.

Because they had no family, because they were twins, and because they were
brought up by women, they were silent. There was in them a curious shame in
regard to their resemblance. They had to live in a world where it was the
subject of continual comment and joking. It was never funny to them and they
suffered the eternal pleasantries with stolid patience. From the years when they
first learned to speak they invented a secret language for themselves, one that
was scarcely dependent on Spanish for its vocabulary, or even for its syntax.
They resorted to it only where they were alone, or at great intervals in moments
of stress whispered it in the presence of others. The Archbishop of Lima was
something of a philologist; he dabbled in dialects; he had even evolved quite
a brilliant table for the vowel and consonant changes from Latin into Spanish
and from Spanish into Indian-Spanish. He was storing up notebooks of quaint
lore against an amusing old age he planned to offer himself back on his estates
outside Segovia. So when he heard one day about the secret language of the twin
brothers, he trimmed some quills and sent for them. The boys stood humiliated
upon the rich carpets of his study while he tried to extract from them their
bread and tree and I see and I saw. They did not know why the experience was so
horrible to them. They bled....

I think if this extract were presented to ten literate readers, nine of them
would immediately guess "Marquez." Of course, its Marquezness would be even more
obvious if Manuel and Estaban would fly up to the ceiling or be transformed into
a thousand glorious butterflies. I don't know whether Marquez ever read The
Bridge of San Luis Rey, but I certainly wouldn't be surprised to discover that
he had done so.

Incidentally, Manuel dies and his twin Estaban wrestles with "the guilt of the
survivor." Is it relevant that Thornton Wilder's own twin died at birth? 
And does it follow that Wilder, despite the fact that he came from a large
and accomplished family, might well be thought of as some curious sort of
replacement child?

Source: 2007/05/a_violent_liter

Title: A Violent Literary Dream
Date: May 16, 2007

Last night I dreamed that I was in conversation with two English professors
(both male and middle-aged) from a college in New Orleans (query -- why New
Orleans?). One of them said, "Rex is a very good baseball player. Thanks for
recommending him." I said, "Yes, he's good, even though he has two prosthetic
shoulders. But I didn't recommend him to you as a baseball player. I recommended
him as a novelist. He writes detective stories."  One of the professors
said, "I like his stories, but he doesn't transcend the genre"  ("transcend
the genre" is an actual verbatim quote from the dream. I don't invent the
dialogue; I only report the facts.)  And then I said, and I think I remember
this accurately, "if you want to read someone who 'transcends the genre,' you
should read novels by Leonardo Sciascia." Once those words were out of my
mouth, I started to feel foolish -- did I mention the name Sciascia because I
was genuinely trying to add to the conversation, or was I just showing off? 
(I often bother myself with such questions in 'real life'.)  While I was
cross-examining myself, a young woman appeared on the "set."  She was no one
I recognized, but I can report that she was wearing a white blouse and a long,
dark skirt. She held a gift-wrapped package and she opened it, pulling out a
book. She said, "here's something that will transcend the genre." And then she
shouted, "Transcend the Genre."  "Transcend the Genre."  Just at that moment
I heard shooting and realized that a sniper was firing at at her. She took a
bullet to the stomach and another to the head, and lay there at my feet, dead
and bloody. It seemed like a good time to wake up, and I did so.

May 18. Marion Morrison, associate professor of English at the University of
Iowa, who has contributed to this blague in the past, writes:  "Dr. Metablog,
or Vivian, or whatever you're calling yourself today, I'm embarrassed for you.
That's the most mysognynistic dream I could imagine. As soon as true creativity
arrives on the scene of your dream, in the form of a young, attractive and
obviously creative woman, your unconscious killed her with a shot to the heart.
Your dream admits no other interpretation."

May 19.  Spike Schapiro writes:  "Marion, that's a crock of you know what.
The dream is not a bit 'mysogynistic' -- I presume you mean 'misogynistic'.
It's about pretentiousness. The woman who shouts "transcend the genre" is an
pretentious intellectual bully. She deserves to be obliterated -- incidentally,
not with a bullet in the heart, as you claim, but in the head and stomach. You
can't even get the facts right. But what can you expect from someone who thinks
that Rider Haggard wrote a novel called King Solomon's Minds, which is what
you called it in your pretentious little slice of literary you know what. Hey
everyone, click on "in the past" in the preceding paragraph and check out what
I'm saying. Marion, go back to the classroom where you can poison the brains of
another generation of vulnerable children."

Source: 2007/05/an_overheard_an

Title: An Overheard Anecdote
Date: May 20, 2007

We were flying Frontier from DC back to Colorado. Two old guys (old, but younger
than I) were swapping stories. Here's one. "Rosie and I were at a hotel in
Vegas, in bed.  About one in the morning, we hear a hooker knock on the door
across the hall.  'Anyone want a little action.' No answer. Then, sure enough,
she knocks on our door. 'Want some action?'  Rosie says, 'Move on, honey, I'm
working this room.'"

Good dialogue.

I assume that Rosie is the wife.  But the story, at least to my tired old ears,
has a slightly different valance if she's a date, a business associate, or a
mistress.

Source: 2007/05/my_new_career

Title: My New Career
Date: May 21, 2007

Ever since I retired a few years ago, friends and relations have been asking
what I intend to do with the rest of my life. It's time to start on a new
career, and after much deliberation, I've decided to fulfill a lifelong dream.
I've always had the soul of a power forward;  now I'm going to make it happen.
With this blague entry, I declare my eligibility for the NBA draft.

Let me confess:  I don't expect to be a lottery pick. There's too much college
talent and too many 7-foot Lithuanian teenagers. High second round is what I
aspire too.  I might even have to play a year or two in a European league to
sharpen my game -- no problem.

I figure that to play in the NBA, a guy needs three things: the game, which I
have; the attitude, which I certainly have; and the body, which I am working on.

Let me point out that at 5' 10 1/4"  (formerly 5' 10 3/4") I am a full five
inches taller than Earl Boykins. Plus I can get into the air higher than Yao
Ming; I'm a better three point-shooter than Shaquille O'Neal; and I'm a more
consistent at the charity stripe than Ben Wallace. Those are some big names
there. Not only that, I'm a better interview than anyone in the league past or
present--even better than Sir Charles himself. I'm a team player. I don't need
to play 48 minutes;  I don't need to take the game-winning shot. On defense,
there's not a player in the league whose flopping will be more authentic.

Because I've lived a more-or-less bookish life, my body is still in tiptop
shape. No gimpy knees or repaired Achilles tendons or fused vertebrae. True,
the A-fib could be a problem down the road, but I don't imagine that the apical
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, of which I have the merest tad, will hold me back
in the slightest.

To the club owners and general managers who are reading this blague entry -- let
me point out that I appeal to an entirely different demographic than players
now in the league. Until now, there was no one to be a "spokesman" for Beltone
hearing aids or Avodart or AARP. Untold, untapped commercial opportunities
waiting to be seized!!

I've been running this idea by my friends and family for the last few weeks, and
I'm sorry to say that there's a lot of ageism and size-ism and negativity out
there.  Let's leave that skepticism behind us! I'm ready to roll! I just have
to decide on the appropriate tats.

(For an update on this subject, read more here.)

Source: 2007/05/boustrophedonia

Title: Boustrophedoniana
Date: May 23, 2007

I'm fond of a passage in Gulliver's Travels where Jonathan Swift describes
Lilliputian script. In a single sentence, Swift manages to attack and nail two
of his favorite targets: "ladies" and "England." The Lilliputians "manner of
writing is quite peculiar being neither from the left to the right, like the
Europeans;  nor from the right to the left, like the Arabians; nor from up to
down, like the Chinese, nor from down to up, like the Cascagians, but aslant
from one Corner of the Paper to another, like Ladies in England.

In good satirical fashion, Dr. S. supplements truth with fancy: the
"Cascagians," who write from bottom to top, may sound like the Carpathians or
Sarmatians or some other trans-Caucasus people, but they don't exist. It appears
that Swift invented them in order to complete his survey of the directions in
which writing might flow.

Yet even including the fantastical Cascagians, Swift's list is not
comprehensive. There are other possibilities for writing beside up and down,
right and left or aslant.

In boustrophedon (a lovely Greekish word that signifies "turn like an ox
plowing"), alternate lines move in opposite directions. Lines one, three, five
and seven and so on proceed from left to right; lines two, four, six, and
eight from right to left. Ancient languages such as Safaitic were written in
boustrophedon; some Etruscan inscriptions, still undeciphered, seem to follow
the same pattern. Boustrophedon is not unreasonable, but it's certainly awkward
for those who have made a fetish of left to right.

Here's how Shakespeare transforms boustrophedonically.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,—

!srats etsahc uoy, uoy ot ti eman ton em teL

It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood;

,wons naht sreh fo niks retihw taht racs roN

And smooth as monumental alabaster.

.nem erom yarteb ll'ehs esle, eid tsum ehs teY.

Survival of the fittest, applying even to scripts, no doubt led to the
extinction of boustrophedon.

Query: would our brains be more supple and more imaginative if we had retained
this style of writing? Or would we simply be more perplexed? Or dizzy? And would
we, as a civilization, prize as the peak of wit and award the laurel to the
palindrome?

Incidentally, Rongorongo, the indigenous language of Easter Island, was
apparently written in reverse boustrophedon, i.e. bottom to top -- a
compositional practice that any satirist, even Swift, would have been delighted
to invent.

May 26.  Marion Morrison, Ph.D., an associate professor of English at the
University of Iowa, writes: "I'm confused about 'reverse boustrophedon.' Is it
real, or is it another Dr. Metablog 'invention'?  Is Rongorongo a metablogian
Cascagian?  I'm skeptical. And how does it work?  Can you favor us with a few
lines in so-called 'reverse boustrophedon?'

Vivian replies:

Devoutly to be wish'd....

noitammusnoc a siT' .ot rieh si hself tahT

The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks dne ew yas ot peels a yb dna
;emor oN

And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-

,selbuort fo aes a tsniaga smra ekat ot  rO

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune

reffus ot dnim eht ni relbon sit' rehtehW

To be, or not to be- that is the question:

Source: 2007/05/fiction_by_jhum

Title: Fiction by Jhumpa Lahiri;  Anthroponomastics
Date: May 30, 2007

Last week I read and was much impressed by Jhumpa Lahiri's collection of short
fiction called Interpreter of Maladies (1999), especially the first story "A
Temporary Matter," which shouldn't leave a dry eye in the house. I've now read
Lahiri's only published novel, The Namesake(2003). It's a fine book. I didn't
know, although I should have, that a film of The Namesake, directed by the great
Mira Nair, is now in release. I'll try to see it.

Lahiri writes about Bengali immigrants in America. Acculturation is not a
new subject in our fiction. Like other groups, the Bengalis bring their own
flavor to the American gallimaufry. In The Namesake, the first generation keeps
the customs and the food and largely self-segregates; members of the second
generation go to good colleges and become engineers and doctors, understand
but don't write Bengali, eat pizza and Chinese takeout, and aren't keen about
arranged marriages.

In Bengali society, individuals apparently have two names: an official public
name, and what Lahiri calls a pet name, but which anthropologists call a
hypocoristic. The central character in The Namesake was supposed to be called
Nikhil, but through a bureaucratic error, his pet name, Gogol, became his school
name. So he goes through the first years of his life as Gogol Gangulia. The name
inhibits and embarrasses him. Before he matriculates at Yale, he changes his
name back to Nikhil, yet he's always caught between the two identities signified
by these rival appellations.

Jhumpa Lahiri is a pseudonym for Nilanjana Sudeshna. She's married to Alberto
Vourvoulias-Bush. I can't imagine what's on her passport or what's she's named
her two children, but it's a sure thing that she's thought more than a little
about nomenclature  -- as must anyone who feels that his name doesn't properly
fit his character. I myself am ambivalent about my own name.  Vivian de St.
Vrain isn't exactly "me," if the truth by told. It's French, and I don't always
feel French. My teachers couldn't always pronounce my given name properly, and I
had to correct them, which was embarrassing for a shy youth. And Vivian -- it's
so ambisexual. I would have preferred to have been named something decisive and
less ethnic. I should have had Gogol's courage. Or Nilanjana Sudeshna's.

Source: 2007/06/a_mental_prosth

Title: A Mental Prosthesis
Date: June 01, 2007

Regular readers of this blague will remember that Dr. M. has long ago confessed
that he suffers from a serious case of "directional disability," or as some call
it, "geographical dyslexia" -- which means that he regularly loses his way, is
subject to travel-based panic attacks, and is consequently abused by friends and
family who refuse to recognize that he's not stupid, just utterly lost.

Advanced technology rides to my rescue. I now own a mobile navigator. It
affixes to the windshield of the car, and, using signals bounced off three
or four satellites, instructs me how to get from point A to point B. I've
fallen profoundly in love with the disembodied female British voice who
doesn't criticize me when I make a wrong turn: she just says, very politely,
"recalculating."  Then she says, "drive point five miles and turn left." 
What a boon to the chronically lost! I now drive as accurately as a migrating
bird. My only reservation: I think that my friend should congratulate me when
I get to where I'm going. She should show a little enthusiasm. But all she
says is "arriving at destination, on left." What would it hurt her to offer
congratulations?  I'm not asking for a commitment or for flowers.

The navigator has now moved into first place among my prostheses, supplanting
the incisor.

Source: 2007/06/antepenultimate

Title: "Penultimate"
Date: June 04, 2007

At our local farmer's market last Saturday, an enthusiastic young man was
bragging to his out-of-town guests about the various vegetable and food stands.
"Here's where you buy the best bread in town," I heard him say. "It's the
penultimate bakery." "Penultimate?" There's no doubt in my mind that the young
feller meant to say that this particular bakery -- a very excellent one, in fact
-- was the best of the best. Not just the "ultimate," but more than ultimate.
In his mind, "ultimate" means best, and the prefix "pen" signifies "more than"
or "extremely."  I'd never heard "penultimate" used in such a way, but I
googled the word and found a number of such uses, including a Penultimate Wine
Bar in St. Louis and a quotation from the speaker of the Massachusetts House
of Delegates, who, arguing in support of a proposed constitutional amendment
banning gay marriage, specified that "voters must be given the chance to speak.
They have the penultimate constitutional authority, not four judges."

Of course, according to every dictionary on the planet, "penultimate" is not a
superlative of "ultimate." It means, as it has always meant, "next to last."
It's from the common Latin word "paene" -- nearly or almost, and from "ultima"
-- last. Penultimate is almost the last in the same way that penumbra is almost
a shadow.

One of the reasons that I'm taken aback by this novel use is that for me,
penultimate isn't at all an unfamiliar or exotic word. It entered my life in
high school Latin, in the early 1950s, and therefore dates back to my earliest
adventures in literacy. In Miss Beulah Withee's classes, we spent many hours
learning to scan Virgil and Ovid. (I don't really know why we did so; you don't
need to master metrics in order to appreciate the poetry. I imagine that the
practice dates back many centuries to a time when gentlemen were expected to
compose Latin verses.)  We students of first-year Latin were taught that the
last syllable of a line was the ultima, the next-to-last the penult, and third
from last the antepenult. Thanks to Miss Withee, "penultimate" has never posed
any mystery for me. But let me hazard a guess that neither the bread enthusiast,
nor the owner of the St. Louis watering hole, nor the Massachusetts speaker were
ever required to scan Latin hexameters.

Although penultimate in the sense of "the very best" is, so to speak, "wrong,"
I can feel it gaining fast.  It's breathing down my neck. And if it's used
often enough in the new signification, "very best" will soon supplant "next to
last."  Let me predict that in fifty years of so, "penultimate," which even as
I write these words yearns to mean "better than best," will be only used in its
original Latinate sense by a handful of old fogies who will cling to the antique
meaning with all the feeble strength in their ancient bony fingers. I can even
imagine a time when the prefix "pen" will become detached from "penultimate"
and will be used to create a whole series of imaginative new "cranwiches":
"penexcellent," for example, or "penpenurious."

I'm of two minds about such changes. I'm well aware that language is
inherently unstable and, intellectually speaking, I'm a descriptivist, not a
prescriptivist. I try to be tolerant of new words; in fact, I'm proud of the
handful that I've invented myself.   don't want to turn into some kind of
mossbackosaurus convinced that any innovation in usage signals the demise of
western civilization as we've known it. Nevertheless, I can't deny that the
phrase "penultimate bakery" grates very harshly on my sensitive ears.

Moreover, I'd feel mighty squishy if I had to suppress my instinctive desire to
rail against contemporary linguistic collapse.

Source: 2007/06/king_lear_vi

Title: King Lear, V.i
Date: June 06, 2007

Today's contribution is the work of resident Shakespearean Pauline Harlem, the
internationally-acclaimed author of Anagrams for Fun and Profit (2005) and The
Naked Anagrammatist (2007).

William Shakespeare, culture hero and playwright, is so often idolized for the
great iconic moments and the big megaphonic speeches that quieter but equally
luminous effects may go unnoticed. A good example of such an oversight is the
extremely brief scene that graces the end of the History of King Lear -- eleven
lines in total that have never been granted the praise they deserve.

As King Lear winds to a close, readers (or playgoers) are exhausted. Not only
are their emotions wrung, but their capacities have been taxed just trying to
track the crowded details of the plot. Even the author had trouble keeping
King Lear's entangled stories in mind -- perhaps because he revised the play
several times. Yet although Shakespeare may have slipped on a detail or two, he
never lost sight of the main lines of the parallel plots. In the one, Cordelia
marshals her army against that of Lear's enemies, which is led by her wicked
sisters Goneril and Regan; in the other plot, old Gloucester, cruelly blinded,
is carried to Dover by his faithful son Edgar. Gloucester intends to put an
end to his own life. Edgar has a different agenda; it's his plan to rescue his
father from suicidal despair and by doing so save the old Earl's soul.

In the third-from-last scene of the play, Cordelia tenderly and reverently
reveals herself to her father. The tragedy's very last scene is long and
complex, encompassing a formal duel between Edgar and his half-brother Edmund in
which Edmund is mortally wounded, plus the suicides of the wicked sisters and
the murder of the good one, and finally the deathbed speeches of Lear himself.
Between the weighty matters of the last and of the antepenultimate scenes,
Shakespeare tucks in a brief enactment that can easily be overlooked -- but
which shouldn't be. It's one of the pinnacles of playwriting, as splendid a
piece of art as the world will see between the last big bang and the next -- or
until all molecular motion ceases -- and even afterward.

Shakespeare carefully sets off the scene from its surroundings. It both begins
and ends with a child taking a father by the hand and attempting to draw him to
safety -- an image of care and concern with deep roots in both "real life" and
the western literary tradition. First Cordelia wordlessly leads her maddened
father across the stage. Just as the pair exit, Edgar stumbles on stage with
his own father in tow. The brief exchange between father and son pauses while
Edgar secludes Gloucester. Then comes the conflict between good and evil figured
in the offstage roar of battle. Edgar returns, exchanges another couple of
sentences with his father, and then takes his hand and leads him on. It's an
unobtrusive scene, brief and understated -- and for Shakespeare, relatively
languageless. But every single word tells.

Here is the scene exactly as it appeared in the quarto of 1605. For you internet
wanderers who have accidentally found your way to this blague and who've never
been offered the opportunity to look at Shakespeare in the raw, unedited and
unmodernized, this passage offers some good examples of the playwright's quirky
spelling and of his characteristically minimalist punctuation. (The medial u's
-- standard in Elizabethan printing -- should be read as v's; i.e. "thrive" for
"thriue.")

Alarum.  Enter the powers of France over the stage, Cordelia with her father in
her hand.  Enter Edgar and Gloster.

Edg.  Here father, take the shadow of this bush

For your good hoast, pray that the right may thriue

If euer I returne to you again ile bring you comfort.  Exit.

Glost. Grace goe with you sir.  Alarum and retreat.

Edg.  Away old man, giue me thy hand, away,

King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter taine,

Give me thy hand, come on.

Glost. No farther sir, a man may rot euen here.

Edg.  What in ill thoughts againe men must indure,

Their going hence, euen as their coming hither,

Ripeness is all come on.

Let me provide just a bit of historical context. Before Shakespeare tackled the
story of King Lear, it had been told many times on stage, in poetry, and in
mythic history. In every previous versions, the armies that are led by Cordelia
triumph in the battle that comes to pass in this scene. Because the story is
nowadays so familiar, it's hard for us to imagine exactly how surprised and
shocked early audiences would have been at the battle's outcome. Doubtless
they would be entirely confident that Lear will succeed. Even today, anyone
reading or hearing the scene's first lines would reasonably assume that the
armies of justice will conquer and that the long British nightmare will finally
end. Shakespeare deliberately raises such hopes only to dash them. Edgar's
first sentence lulls us into false security. "Pray that the right may thrive"
is plainly a signal to the audience that everything is going to come out just
fine. There's an even stronger "foreshadowing" of success in Edgar's definitive
announcement that "if ever I return to you again, I'll bring you comfort."
Sly old Will has set a grand trap. And it's not just the plain import of the
sentences; it's the warm and cozy vocabulary: "host," "pray," "right," "thrive,"
"comfort," "grace." It's all light and clarity and optimism. But King Lear is
a play, as the audience well knows, in which "the worst is not/ So long as we
can say 'This is the worst'"  There's no bottom to this play's misery. And so
Edgar, briefly absent, returns to the stage with the blunt, four-word message
that is an arrow to every sentient heart: "King Lear hath lost." And onto this
mountain of grief Shakespeare piles even worse news: that Lear and his innocent,
loving daughter have been "taine" -- ta'en, taken, or as we would say, captured.
In the first moments of the scene the audience might be comforted that Lear
is in the charge of his daughter and Gloucester in that of his son, and that
young and sensible people have finally come to the aid of the old fools. But
good things do not last -- not in this play. The forces of evil that King Lear
unleashes are far from exhausted. They will continue to ruin lives and blight
hopes right to the end.

It's Shakespeare's usual practice to lead his audience to anticipate one thing,
but to give them another; this scene, like many such, is carefully constructed
to overturn easy expectations. It seems impossible but it's true that in
these eleven lines Shakespeare has embedded a second reversal that is equally
momentous as the first.

Here we are at last, at the very end of the play; the audience has every reason
to believe that it will be gratified with a big, climactic, flashy battle. It's
always been the way. But once again, expectations are defeated and the audience
gets both less and more than it anticipated. Instead of lances and swords and
duels to the death -- he allows us simply some offstage clatter. Why?  Before
he wrote King Lear, Shakespeare had staged many such battles. But he wasn't
a film director with an unlimited budget and with all sorts of technological
resources at hand; all he had at his disposal was a sunlit stage thirty-four
feet wide and a handful of supernumeraries. Not nearly enough. Shakespeare
adepts will be well aware that the playwright had already expressed, some half
a dozen years before, his great frustration with the limitations of his martial
scenes. In Henry V, the Chorus, speaking for the author, had apologized for
inadequate representations of warfare: "our scene must to the battle fly,/ Where
- O for pity- we shall much disgrace/ With four or five most vile and ragged
foils/ Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous/ The name of Agincourt." In King
Lear, Shakespeare shocked his audience with the outcome of the battle, but he
shocked them even more, if possible, by not giving them the battle at all. King
Lear is too serious, too desperate, too sad for yet another ridiculous brawl.
Nor did Shakespeare take the other easy option -- the long narrative of the sort
with which messengers had been regaling audiences from the days of Aeschylus.
Instead, Shakespeare offers his audience a profoundly revolutionary experience:
noise, followed by four monosyllables. "King Lear hath lost."  Could any artist
be more economical -- or more devastating.

These eleven lines therefore constitute an entire tragedy in little. Hope,
followed by loss and despair -- succeeded by a moderately uplifting moral.
Hearing the horrid news, Gloucester once again falls into suicidal thoughts.
"No further, sir.  A man may rot even here." The defeated old man is weary
of the world and anxious to leave it behind. But Edgar will have none of his
despair. "What, in ill thoughts again?" he says.  (The word "ill" is stronger
in Elizabethan English than it is now; it's closer in meaning to our "evil.")
"Men must endure/ Their going hence, even as their coming hither."  Shakespeare
doesn't say, "You must endure." It's the more general, "men must endure"; not
the individual, but the species. We're on this planet and we're human and the
world may be, as Chaucer says, "a thoroughfare of woe" and we're born in pain
and we die in pain, but it's our burden and our obligation to endure, to hold
on. It's not exactly an optimistic statement, but it's realistic, and stoic,
and appropriate to the context, and it's wise. And then Edgar/Shakespeare adds
a further expression of condensed and gnomic wisdom: "ripeness is all." 
"Ripeness is all" -- to expand the metaphor -- signifies that we human beings
can't opt out, can't surrender until the cycle of life draws to its natural
close. We, or men, or humanity, must continue the struggle to the last breath.
Shakespeare doesn't say, if you commit suicide, you're going to go to hell. He
doesn't, at this point in the magnificent eleven lines, threaten Gloucester with
eternal damnation. Instead, he exhorts him to persist, to endure, to live life
to the bitter end. And when Edgar says to Gloucester, "Come on," and father and
son leave the stage hand-in-hand, we appreciate and admire, even in the midst of
all the horror, the perennial human virtues of endurance and loyalty and love.

Source: 2007/06/worlds_largest_

Title: World's Largest Ball of Twine
Date: June 10, 2007

Today In Cawker City, Kansas, we made a pilgrimage to the world's largest ball
of twine. It's enormous: 40 feet in circumference and 14,000 pounds (when last
measured and weighed in 1986). And still growing. We were offered some twine to
add our bit, but declined. It would be desecration -- like adding a stone to the
great Pyramid at Giza or to Stonehenge. Instead, we paid silent homage.

We didn't stop to see the world's largest prairie dog in Oakley. Or the Russell
Stover birthplace in Alton. Nor even the Evel Knievel Museum in Topeka. Can't do
everything.

And yet there are these pseudo-sophisticates who say that there's no culture in
Kansas.

Source: 2007/06/travels_with_do

Title: Travels with Dorcas
Date: June 14, 2007

We've named our GPS navigatrix,  who gives instruction with a schoolmarmish
London accent, Dorcas (which is, along with Prunella, one of my very favorite
English given -- or as they call them,"Christian"-- names).  Dorcas has proved
to be, on the whole, a reliable friend. She had a little trouble in Cincinnati,
where, it turns out, there are two entirely distinct 225 Hill Terrace addresses.
She took us to the wrong one -- but I confess that in this case the error can
fairly be traced to information-inputter, Dr. M. himself.

Dorcas also had a royal hissy fit when we had to detour onto a single-lane-on-
the-other-side-of the-road somewhere in Ohio -- she "recalculated" twenty or
thirty times, until I had to temporarily stop her mouth.   It could only be my
imagination, but I thought I detected a trace of exasperation in her tone of
voice.

Despite these failings, the Dorcster is a dream at finding her way around
unfamiliar towns. No longer will I have to stop at gas stations for
incomprehensible advice about how to get back on the highway.  I just call on
Dorcas and I've got a friend, oh yeah, I've got a friend.

Source: 2007/07/rodent-wars

Title: Rodent Wars
Date: July 02, 2007

The house was unoccupied for a month and the mice moved in, bigtime. I peanut-
buttered some mouse traps and caught five or six adults. But I'm not finished
with the mice; there's some compelling evidence that an occasional mouse is
still attempting to share my food. Meanwhile, the lawn and garden are dotted
with mole-holes. The moles are harder to deal with than mice, but they stay
outside, so they're less offensive. In the compost pile, chipmunks are at work,
but I don't begrudge them their scraps of vegetables. I'm more worried about the
groundhogs, who can strip a flourishing garden in an evening. I've patrolled the
places in which they've installed themselves in the past, and, so far, there are
no signs that they've returned. One of these years, though -- the garden is a
tempting target. But the big news is the beavers. When we arrived, two weeks ago
Friday, the pond was up a good eighteen inches. It was also stagnant and there
was a huge heap of mud and sticks where the water should have been flowing out
rapidly. I tore out some of the material and produced a little Niagara  -- 
a couple of acre-feet of water leaving us in a hour. But by Saturday morning
the dam had been re-built and the water was up again. I got out the shovel and
hoe and totally dismantled the dam. I must have sent several hundred pounds of
mud and a big pile of twigs and branches downstream. Sunday morning I made my
inspection: no repairs. This meant one of two things: either the beavers had
moved on, or they don't work Sundays. But it's now two weeks, and they haven't
returned, so I'm declaring victory in the rodent wars.

This morning I found some suspicious stuff that looks like bat-droppings in one
of the shed rooms. Are bats rodents?

The north American beaver, Castor canadensis, is a formidable creature -- males
characteristically weigh 60 pounds and a big one can reach a hundred. But the
extinct local beaver was 5 to 6 times larger --bear size. It's a good thing I
didn't have to use shovel and hoe on the dam of one of those babies. I wouldn't
want to get on the bad side of a four hundred pound rodent --even if it were a
vegetarian.

July 5.  Sarah (see comments below) asks:  what's the problem with beavers.
Well, they render the pond unusable, for one. No more grandchildren peacefully
paddling. Because they create a new dike which water flows through, not over,
algae, twigs, and scum of all sorts accumulates, rots, and sinks to the
bottom.  The size of the pond expands very rapidly as the beavers move to
create a suitably large habitat -- so the fields become flooded.  The beavers
cut down all the trees that I've been carefully cultivating.  In a few months,
the land will be totally transformed.

I'm hoping that the beavers find a new home on someone else's land. I didn't
want to trap or kill them, but I'm certainly happy that I was able to discourage
them from taking up permanent residence.

Source: 2007/07/when-i-was-seve

Title: My Life in Periodicals
Date: July 02, 2007

When I was seven or eight years old, I was given a subscription (by whom?)
to a children's magazine (which one?) Was it my older brother who said,
"you still reading that magazine for babies?" Always susceptible to public
criticism, I soon lost interest in the publication. Since then, I've subscribed
and unsubscribed to dozens of periodicals. Here are some that I remember.
In my teens, Mad Magazine, of which I was a serious enthusiast, and had
been since Mad's Harvey Kurtzman comic book days. Also, Sport Magazine -- a
precursor of SI. And various pulp sci fi mags -- Astounding Science Fiction and
Galaxy Science Fiction and probably others that came and went. In the '60s,
political magazines: The Reporter, The Nation, and before it went totally wrong,
The New Republic. A decade later, Local Population Studies, The Journal of
Interdisciplinary History, The Psychohistorical Review, The History of Childhood
Quarterly. When I became serious about Shakespeare, I was an assiduous collector
of the Shakespeare Quarterly and the Shakespeare Newsletter and Shakespeare
Research and Opportunities and the Shakespeare on Film Newsletter. Closely
related: English Literary Renaissance and the George Herbert Journal (of which I
at one time owned every issue). In the '70s or '80s, Organic Gardening (sample
title -- "How We Grew Papayas on our Vermont Hillside Using Organic Methods and
Faith in God"); later, Fine Gardening (sample title: "How We Converted a Defunct
Brewery into an Extremely Expensive Bed-and-Breakfast Complete with a Replica
of an 18th-century Capability Brown Landscape"). At various times: Scientific
American, Science News, Bluebirds Across Vermont, the newsletter of the Southern
Vermont Dairy Goat Association, One Two Three Four (a magazine briefly in
existence that concerned itself with the early history of rock and roll), the
Atlantic, The Skeptical inquirer. Newspapers: The New York Times, United Opinion
(nowadays the Journal-Opinion), Behind the Times, the Daily Camera. Nowadays: 
Harvard Magazine, New Yorker, New York Review of Books, Northern Forests.

I'm sure there must be many others that I can no longer recall.

Source: 2007/07/good-news-for-t

Title: Good News for the Directionally Impaired
Date: July 09, 2007

I've been indoctrinated by our uncomprehending society to regard my geographical
dyslexia, or my directional disability, or whatever it's to be called, as a
shameful condition. So it's good to know that DD can be otherwise valued.

I've been informed by one of my readers that the Pilipino word ligaw has two
meanings: a) courtship, and b) totally lost. As a result, the adjective ligawan
can refer either to a person who has no sense of direction, or to someone
who is especially attractive to suitors. It stands to reason that a person
who has absolutely no awareness of direction (right or left, east or west)
whatsoever and is constantly buffaloed and flabbergasted by the well-meaning
instructions of friends and would-be guides must be extremely radiant, perhaps
even charismatically magnetic.

I find this new information to be both highly probable and extremely consoling.

Moreover, my admiration for Pilipino language and culture and good sense has
skyrocketed.

I therefore propose that the term "geographical dyslexia" be replaced by
"ligawan."

From this moment on, there's a new order to the universe: to be hopelessly
dysgeographical, hopelessly lost is now, officially, sexy.

Source: 2007/07/summers-at-sear

Title: Summers at Sears Rosebush
Date: July 19, 2007

I worked for Sears, Roebuck and Company at its warehouse on Utica Avenue during
the summers of 1957, 1958 and 1959. The job lasted for ten or twelve weeks
each year and I was paid $1.25 an hour for the first two summers and then was
catapulted to $1.30 for the third. At 40 hours a week, I could, in theory, earn
$50 a week and take home $40, but Sears managed to calculate it so that I had
worked 39 hours or 38.5 hours. Always less than forty. I was routinely baffled
and disappointed by my pay envelope. I'm utterly convinced that the time clock
was rigged, but there was no one to whom to protest, and if I had made a fuss, I
wouldn't have won my case anyway. No one did. (It might seem frivolous to worry
about a few cents, but cents mattered a lot more in the 50s than they do now.
Ten weeks at $40 amounts to $400. When I entered Cornell in 1956, tuition cost
$450 a semester and a half of a double room in the dorm for the year was $315.
At college, I survived on chocolate malts ($.25), hamburgers ($.25), and an
occasional celebratory cheeseburger ($.30).)

At the Sears warehouse, my job was to pinch hit for people who were absent for
their annual two-week vacations. I performed a variety of services of which I
have clear memories of just two. I was a substitute "receiver" on the loading
dock where I kept records of railroad cars and tried to minimize "dunnage." A
second job: I operated the manual telephone switchboard, inserting jacks into
receptacles in order to complete a connection; it's stunning to remember that
such equipment, now seen in old black-and-white movies and found only in museums
of early technology, was still in wide use. I can't remember my other jobs,
except that each one took about two hours to learn, was interesting for a day,
but stupefyingly boring for the remainder of the two-week stint. I developed
real sympathy for the people who were Sears lifers. What a test of will to
come to work every day, year in and year out, to the tedious rote dehumanizing
employment that the warehouse provided! Job satisfaction? I doubt that anyone,
employee or employer, had stumbled upon such a concept, let alone given it an
instant's thought.

The warehouse stocked "big-ticket" items: washing machines, dryers, and reefers
(refrigerators). Day one: sales orders were sorted and routed; day two: goods
were pulled and lined up on the dock in the reverse of the order in which they
would be delivered; day three: items were loaded onto trucks and sent out to
various Brooklyn neighborhoods. The system worked well but there were always
crises when a particular model in a particular color wasn't available. It might
be impossible for this generation of youth to believe, but in those pre-civil
rights years Sears didn't sell refrigerators at a fixed rate. Salesmen (at
the main store on Flatbush Avenue) received 11% of the negotiated price on an
item and therefore had an incentive to set the figure as high as possible.
It quickly became evident to me that there was a pattern: the poorer the
neighborhood, the higher the sale price. Moreover, 99% of big-ticket items
were purchased on time. The obvious corollary: the poorer the neighborhood,
the higher the negotiated rate of interest. Prices and interest were most
outrageous in Bedford- Stuyvesant, at that time -- and perhaps now -- Brooklyn's
Harlem. Occasionally I'd see a repossessed used model (no cardboard carton)
on the loading dock. It was to be delivered as if new to Bed-Stuy. When I
questioned the practice, I was told, very definitively, "Who's going to believe
them?" Working for Sears was, in a word that had not yet come into existence,
"radicalizing."

The warehouse was a Staszewski-Sullivan stronghold. No Italians, no Jews, no
"Negroes." Well, actually, there was one African-American, but he was assigned
to a broom rather than to a forklift. I didn't make any friends at the warehouse
(I was chronically, disablingly shy), and although I was fearful that I might
be ostracized as a "college kid," I was treated not unkindly. I suspect that my
paltry wage made me an object of pity.

An embarrassing moment: Sears held a sale on cheap, shiny suits. They sold so
many that I was called to the main store to help fold and pack. Even today I'm a
hopelessly inadequate folder and packer. It was a nightmare. After watching me
fumble for a few moments, the wives would snatch the suit impatiently from my
hands. "Here, sonny, let me do that."

A good moment: I was on the ROR desk for a week or so. ROR stood for "record
of return." When a refrigerator or washer came back, Sears didn't reimburse
the purchase price until the ROR had been cleared. One day, bored, trying
to kill some time, I was searching the desk to which I had been temporarily
assigned. Stuck behind a drawer I found a misplaced three-or-four-year-old ROR,
unprocessed. I called the telephone number on the ticket and asked the woman who
answered if she'd ever been reimbursed for the refrigerator she had returned --
$350 or so. There was a long silence. Then the woman broke into tears and into
fervent thanks. "I've been trying to get my money back from Sears for years.
I've tried everything. I can't get anyone to believe me." I arranged to have the
money sent to her and I felt that I had done a good deed. Not much satisfaction
for three summers of employment, but something.

The principal result of doing my time at Sears: a decision to give a wide
berth to the much revered "corporate sector." It's a decision that I've never
regretted, not for a moment.

Source: 2007/07/equines-and-ovi

Title: Equines and Ovines
Date: July 21, 2007

There are now five horses and about twenty-five sheep pastured on our fields.
The horses are Morgans; they're handsome and dignified. They have mucho gravitas
and very distinct personalities.  I'm proud to say that we're friends; the
horses make a point to trot over and say hello when I'm working nearby. They
have big brains (or, at least, room for big brains) and they seem to want to
communicate. I sweeten our intimacy with windfall apples. My relationship with
the sheep is less satisfactory. Frankly, we're not on the same wavelength. Today
I was cutting some brush (mostly beaked hazelnut and red maple) on the other
side of the pond right against the sheep fence. Because I know that sheep take
a gourmet interest in leaves of any sort (although we keep them away from lilac
and wilted cherry), I carried a stack of branches out into the field. The sheep
were interested but wary. Finally, one of the lambs (Braveheart, let's call him)
sidled up to the pile and pulled on a leaf -- at which point the whole stack
moved an inch or two. The entire flock started and immediately skedaddled back
home.

The sheep are Scottish Blackfaces. My neighbor Ed, who owns them, claims that
Scottish Blackfaces are the smartest of all ovines. Talk about damning-with-
extra-faint-praise. Here's how utterly brilliant sheep can be. There are two
gates right next to each other to a second pasture. One of the gates is for
the horses and one is for the sheep. The sheep gate is nothing more than a few
boards tacked together to make a space 4 feet high and 4 feet wide -- just large
enough so that the sheep can slip through but the horses can't. The gate for the
horses must be 12 or 14 feet across. It's metal and it rests on a hefty pair of
hinges. Sometimes it's left open to allow the horses access to the field. But
even when it's wide open, the sheep don't use it. Instead, they line up single
file at their own little gate and wait their turn. Not a one of them, even
Braveheart, has the sense to look around and notice that the main thoroughfare
is available to anyone who wants to show a little initiative.

The horses are organized. Gillian, who's a twenty-something-year old mare, is
the boss. Gabe, an ex-boy, is at the bottom. In between, the two young chestnut
mares and a newly gelded bay struggle for status. In social terms, the sheep
are a horse of another color. If there's a system to the society of sheep, I've
not been able to discern it. It's all random Brownian movement. I asked Ed,
who knows his sheep and has kept them for many years, if he'd ever been able
to discover the structure of ovine social life. "Near as I can figure out,"
he answered, "one of them gets it in his head to go somewhere, and the rest
follow."

Horses are noble; sheep are amusing but duller than Charles B., who was twice
left back in first grade in P. S. 217, and duller also than my long-time
colleague Joel S.

Whose idea was it, do you think, to placate the gods by sacrificing sheep? 
Were our ancestors trying to pull the wool over their deities' eyes?  Were they
being deliberately disrespectful?  What sort of offering is a sheep?

"Here, sir god, I'll kill you a sheep. It's enough. What would you want with a
horse?"

Source: 2007/08/christopher-mar

Title: Christopher Marlowe's Shoes
Date: August 11, 2007

At age seventeen, awash in hormones, I took a serious shine to the sensuous
words with which, in Marlowe's play, Faustus addresses Helen of Troy.

Oh, thou art fairer than the evening airClad in the beauty of a thousand
stars;Brighter art thou than flaming JupiterWhen he appeared to hapless
Semele;More lovely than the monarch of the skyIn wanton Arethusa's azured arms.

Just a bit more polished and glorious than what I myself could devise in the way
of compliment, the outer limit of which was "you're looking kinda nice."

No wonder I was impressed. Marlowe was, and still is, a young person's poet.
Ageless because he was murdered at age 29, he was flamboyant, unsubtle, and
hyperbolic beyond any ordinary hyperbole. And above all, musical. "Wanton
Arethusa's azured arms?" "Azured" only because the unusual adjective jauntily
reinforces the timbre of  "Arethusa."  In actual fact, even the most alluring
of female arms aren't blue --unless they are bruised, which Marlowe surely
did not mean to imply). "Wanton?"  In the story, Arethusa was chaste and
preserved herself from the approach not of the monarch of the skies, but of the
minor river-god Alpheus. Marlowe could trample on visual accuracy and learned
tradition. But who could grudge him when the outcome was sonic delight. Nor did
it seem to matter that Helen was compared not to a female goddess (many were
available) but to Jove himself. And so I toted Tucker Brooke's old-spelling
edition of Marlowe's works to my 1950s summer job, hoping and pretending that
the poet's escapist rhythms could put a little shine into the grim warehouse
where I earned my pittance.

I've just read a new biography of Christopher Marlowe. It's Park Honan's
Christopher Marlowe, Poet and Spy (Oxford, 2005). It's a good but not great
book. It's a revelation how much new information has come to light in the last
fifty years  -- not so much about Marlowe himself as about his co-workers in
the espionage business. Honan attends to Marlowe's plays, but he's clearly more
interested in spying and in the Elizabethan political milieu. He repeatedly
employs such formulas as "Marlowe could not help think... or "Marlowe must have
felt..." in order to lace public events to the poet's putative consciousness.
It's a doubtful procedure, but I suppose justified by the paucity of direct
biographical evidence. Honan is diligent in accumulating information but his
writing is careless and his interpretation of the plays hardly more than
slapdash.

It's no secret that Christopher Marlowe, son of a mere shoemaker, wrote
obsessively about men of lowly origin who achieve greatness. Faustus was (in
Marlowe's version only) "base of stock," Gaveston a commoner who attends a
king, and most notably Tamburlaine a simple shepherd who sets his foot on a
large slice of the Asian steppe. Honan thinks that Marlowe was ashamed of his
father's trade, and adduces as evidence the fact that the playwright "never
uses words such as shoe, shoemaker, or sole but distances himself from his
father's concerns. At the various times when he refers to leather, or boots,
the allusions are oddly repulsive: 'Covetousness: begotten of an old churl in a
leather bag,' 'a worm eaten leathern targets,' 'As if he had meant to clean my
boots with his lips,' 'our boots which lie foul upon our hands.'"  Such lines,
according to Honan, "suggest hatred" of the cobbler's work.

Perhaps, but not the whole story. In Tamburlaine, when the Scythian shepherd
woos Zenocrate, his seduction technique is to pile gifts at her feet. "A hundred
Tartars shall attend on thee/ Mounted on steeds, swifter than Pegasus./  Thy
garments shall be made of Medean silk,/ Enchast with precious jewels of mine
own./ With milk-white harts upon an ivory sled,/ Thou shalt be drawn amidst
the frozen pools,/ And scale the icy mountains lofty tops." And on, and on --
Marlowe, bless his enthusiastic heart, was never embarrassed by excess. No shoes
in the royal dowry?  But wait. There's also Marlowe's best known poem, the
"passionate shepherd to his love." The Arcadian shepherd, following at the heels
of the Scythian, also offers a long list of gifts to his beloved.

I will make thee beds of roses

And a thousand fragrant posies,

A cap of flowers, and a kirtle

Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle.

A gown made of the finest wool

Which from our pretty lambs we pull,

Fair linèd slippers for the cold,

With buckles of the purest gold.

"Fair-lined slippers for the cold,/ With buckles of the purest gold!!"   Not
your ordinary, trudging-around-Canterbury-in-the-mud shoes, but footwear
nevertheless. When he wrote these lines, "Marlowe could not help think" --
to use the formula of biographers -- that he had celebrated and ennobled his
father's profession.

Or so I like to think. Although John Marlowe probably did very little business
in the gold-buckle line.

Source: 2007/08/bring-me-the-he

Title: Bring Me the Head of Alberto Gonzales
Date: August 14, 2007

It's public knowledge that Bush recently underwent a colonoscopy, but the
doctors' reports have not been widely disseminated. It appears that, in addition
to the polyps, way up high, lodged against the pyloric sphincter, was found
the entire head of Attorney-General Alberto Gonzales. Until this discovery, it
was not generally known that Gonzales' head was missing; according to received
Washington wisdom, it was only his brains. A second smaller mass, puzzling
at first, has now been definitively identified as the nose of Senator Joseph
Lieberman (I-Conn).

(August 16)  Spike Schapiro adds: "Not the whole story. Bush's head was also
found in there. It had been missing since late in his last term as Texas
Governor."

Source: 2007/08/the-absence-of-

Title: The Absence of the Elms
Date: August 16, 2007

When we arrived here, in the summer of 1968, there were so many huge old dying
elms that we jokingly referred to the place as "Dead Elm Farm." One by one
every single elm succumbed to the virus. Bare and leafless, they dropped their
branches and then stood as barkless pillars until rot or a windstorm toppled
them. For many years there were young elms around, but as soon as they grew to
twenty or so feet, the disease would take hold. There are still a few adolescent
elm skeletons, but they're harder and harder to find.

We have some slippery elms and an occasional water elm, but the good old
American elm, a prominent feature of our landscape for several hundred million
years down to this present moment, is virtually extinct.

Am I a member of the last generation on earth to marvel at the majesty of these
great trees?  Sure the landscape is still rich -- maples, oaks, birches both
white and yellow, beeches, spruce, pine, fir, hemlock, the big-toothed aspen,
a cottonwood or two, cedars and our most plentiful wetlands inhabitant, the
deciduous conifer variously called the hackmatack or tamarack or larch (in
taxonomists' parlance, the larchy larch, larix laricina).  But I grieve for the
elms. Their absence makes a space in my mental landscape.

I don't, of course, long for the American chestnut, which was gone for fifty
years when I came on the stage. Just as my descendants won't notice the absence
of the elms.

Not far from the house an old elm has coppiced in an awkward place, and it needs
to be removed. It's ugly -- twenty or so stems ten or twelve feet high racing
for the sun. It should go. But I imagine that I'll leave the best of the shoots
and hope that it will thrive. It would be almost criminal to saw down the last
lonely elm. There's always the one-in-a-million chance that this unhandsome
specimen will prove to be virus-immune. Wouldn't that be something?

Source: 2007/08/a-exceedingly-w

Title: A Exceedingly Weird Dream
Date: August 22, 2007

Aficionados of this blague know that I'm directionally disabled. I don't think
that I've admitted that I suffer from frequent nightmares in which I'm totally
lost in a strange city or building.

Last night I experienced another such dysgeographical dream. I was trying to
walk north in some unidentifiable but mysterious city. A large building, which
seemed to me to be a junior high school, blocked my path. I decided to cut
through the building and continue on my way. I traversed various confusing
corridors and staircases until I was satisfied that I was about to exit the
correct door (one of many). But I couldn't get out because there were wires
(which looked like electric fencing for animals) strung across the doorway. I
attempted door after door and each one was wired -- chicken wire, barbed wire,
all sorts of stuff. I started to panic, as I often do in such dreams.

At last I decided to force my way through one of the doors. I tangled myself
in various wires which had somehow metamorphosed into thick chains. The chains
rattled loudly and I said to myself that someone would hear them  --  it was
as though I was back in school and had gotten myself into deep trouble with the
principal. And sure enough, along came a guy who seemed to be either a janitor
or a detective. He was speaking rapid Spanish and I couldn't understand him.
Although I begged him, he would not untangle me. I cried out, "I'm  tired of
this basura (basura is the word for garbage in Spanish, which happens to be
a language I've never studied and don't know). I shouted, "With basura, with
basura."  And then I thought, wow, the phrase "with basura" could be used as
the basis of a parody of Ezra Pound's Canto XLV, "With Usura:" ("With usura
hath no man a house of good stone/ each block cut smooth and well fitting/ that
delight might cover their face" etc. etc.)   A person could substitute the
word "basura" for the similar sounding "usura" and make good fun of Uncle Ez's
economic theories -- theories which are in fact nothing more than a great big
load of reactionary pseudo-medieval poppy-and-lily trash. Inspired, I decided to
wake up and get to work on the poem, but I wasn't alert more than a few seconds
before I came to the realization that the great world is probably not exactly
aching for a parody of Pound's Canto XLV.  Even an exceedinglyl clever parody.

Source: 2007/08/clean-deer

Title: Clean Deer
Date: August 27, 2007

That most malicious of all living creatures, the white-tailed deer, has been
destroying the phlox. Also the roses, the blueberries, the plums, the hollyhocks
(tender new leaves only), the day lilies, and most particularly, the precious
new apple trees. They've weakened the Wealthy, noshed the Norland and bonsaied
the Baldwin. My friends and neighbors suggest various remedies. Eight-foot high
fences is the consensus -- although occasionally, allowed a running start, the
deer are able to leap even these. But do I want an unsightly eight-foot fence
around my garden and orchard? Let's consider some other wisdome of the ffolke.

Should I buy human hair from the local barber and hang bags of it around the
orchard? I don't think so -- far too voodooish for a post-Enlightenment gardener
such as myself. I could douse the grounds in coyote urine, though I'm not sure
that I want to milk a coyote -- or, a fortiori, a mountain lion. I know one
kind of urine that doesn't repel deer  -- at least when anecdotally applied.
Some folk, more determined than I could ever be, soak rags in human urine and
ring the garden with them, but I suspect that I would not savor either the
administration or the aesthetic repercussions of this method. A strong solution
of garlic might work, but it's deer I want to repel, not vampires. A spray of
peppermint seems like a more pleasant choice, but apparently it must be renewed
after every rainfall, which is highly impractical in our moisture-abundant
climate. A recipe of a slightly beaten egg mixed with a gallon of water is
claimed to be effective, but must be applied nightly -- too much cookery for me.
Some people claim that moth balls repel deer, but the same people claimed that
moth balls would repel raccoons. My raccoons took the moth balls for marbles and
made a game of them and of me. Decaying fish heads would no doubt repel deer,
but they'd also repel bees, birds, friends, and family. Even if I could procure
them ("I'll have a couple of pounds of decaying fish heads, please"), do I
really want to sit, contemplative, in a garden of such stinkiness?

Besides, I don't believe in these superstitions. I want data. I want double-
blind experiments. I want science.

My sister, who lives in prime white-tail country, hangs bars of Ivory soap in
her apple trees. It works, she says. Not credible, not scientific, say I. But
last week we visited her, and there they were, a half-dozen or so thriving young
apple trees. Not a nibble on a one of them. New growth allowed to be new growth.

Hers are New Hampshire deer. I bet that our Vermont deer will sniff the soap,
chortle, and proceed to bathe face and hoofs. We'll soon have the cleanest deer
in all creation.

In desperation, I've joined the ranks of the credulous. I've threaded Ivory soap
with baling twin and hung a cake on each of the young apples. White rectangular
scarecrows. But for the first time all summer, I'm seeing new growth. This could
work.

One of my neighbors says, "No, no, don't use Ivory soap -- use Irish Spring."

Source: 2007/09/why-i-hate-mach-1

Title: Why I Hate Machines
Date: September 05, 2007

So I've been trying, by god, to figure out why the riding mower has been cutting
on an angle, the right side leaving the grass higher than the left, and I've
been crawling under the machine looking at the cutting deck from all angles
and not able to understand the mechanism except it's obvious that it's not
parallel to the ground, and my neighbor Ed was by and he's kind of a genius with
machinery which I most definitely am not, and I said to him, Ed would you take
look and see why the mower is cutting at an angle and he said, Well, here's one
problem your left rear tire is flat which made me feel really dumb because I
was so busy trying to understand the suspension system on the deck that I never
even looked at the tire and I said, Flat, how can it be flat, I never run it
anywhere but over the grass and he said, Well, look right there it's got a thorn
in it, A thorn, I said, how can a thorn penetrate a Carlyle Super Tuff tire, and
he said, Oh yeah they do that, but I can fix it, I'm busy today but I'll do it
tomorrow I have a system you just push through what looks like knitting needle
with sticky stuff on the end and pull it out, it will seal it right up, it's a
tubeless tire isn't it? and I said Yes it is, and if you could fix it tomorrow
that would be great, well next day he took the tire and tried it his way but he
couldn't get it to hold air so he says Take it down to PTOs and they'll patch
it from the inside, so I put it in the trunk of the car and drove to town and
they fixed it and then I put it back on the axle, it has three small washers
and one large washer and one of those spring nuts and I started the engine but
by god the mower wouldn't move and I thought what the heck is going on here, I
put everything back exactly as it came off and it was running just fine when
I took it off so what could I possibly be doing wrong, I took the wheel off
and put it on again and I still couldn't figure it out so I got in the car and
drove over to Ed's, he was cutting wood but he stopped and I said, Ed, what's
wrong with that lamb, why do you have him penned up all by himself and he said,
you know how the lambs are always butting heads and pushing each other around,
well I went out in the field and he was down, couldn't move a bit, so I took
him home and I don't know whether his brains are addled or he's really hurt,
I thought we'd better have him slaughtered but you can see he's doing better,
getting up and eating so we'll hold off a day, and I said maybe he has a bad
back like me, and he said, No, he's too young for a bad back, so I said, Well,
maybe he has vertigo like you, which is not all that funny because Ed lost a
week to vertigo last June, and he kind of laughed and said, Well, is your mower
working now, and I said, Not exactly, the engine's fine and the belt turns but
it's not moving frontwards or backwards and he said, How can that be, I'll come
over and take a look so later that day he came by and sure enough it wouldn't
move, so we took off the wheel again and studied it but I certainly couldn't
figure it out and he couldn't either, everything looked good and perfect, we
puzzled over it for a while and then he called the John Deere dealer in North
Haverhill and the technician said maybe you lost the key when you took off the
wheel and Ed said, O yes of course, we must have lost the key, I didn't think of
that, and I said What the heck is the key and he said Well, in a lot of these
machines the axle is broached which means there's a slot in it and a slot in the
wheel and you have to have a key which is just a small piece of metal otherwise
the axle will spin but the wheel won't rotate, so we looked all around for the
lost key but couldn't find it and then Ed said, Look at your tire they didn't
even mount it right, it's out of round, you'd better bring it back in and while
you're there check if the key is in the shop somewhere, it might have stuck in
the wheel because of the grease, so I took the wheel and put it in the trunk and
drove back to PTOs and showed him that the tire was out of round, the owner was
embarrassed about the bad job he had done and wouldn't even look me in the eye
but he re-mounted the tire and when he finished I said, By the way, you didn't
happen to find the key I lost it, and he said I'll look inside but he couldn't
find it, so he said I'll make you another one which was nice of him though the
key is only at most a 50 cent piece but it saved me from having to go to Napa
Auto Parts or drive 30 minutes to North Haverhill to the John Deere dealer,
so he made the part it took him only a couple of minutes, he had the stock he
just had to cut and file a two inch piece, I brought it home and I put the key
in the slot and put the wheel on, I had to use a board for a lever to get the
rear of the mower up in the air and it was tricky because I held the board with
my right hand and the wheel in the left but I managed alright and then I got
on the tractor and started the engine and everything worked perfectly except
that the tractor still wouldn't go either forward or backward, I took the wheel
off and put it on again, but it still wouldn't work, so I walked over to Ed's
and I said, Ed, I can't for the life of me figure it out, I got the key and it
fit just perfectly but the machine still doesn't move, and he said It's got to
work, it makes perfect sense, I said, Hey look, your lamb looks a lot better
but why did you put a hog panel across your driveway, he said It's because of
the dog, he's been getting out, tomorrow he's going to be snipped and that will
quiet him down a bit, which is a good idea because the dog is far too friendly
even to me and I don't particularly like the dog, he's a beagle mix, not as bad
as their other dog which was a rescue dog a bulldog, very ugly in my opinion,
which also got out and trotted over to the pottery down the road where he was 
seen running off with the Murrays' Silkie in his mouth, a Silkie is a fancy
chicken, they charged Ed a hundred and sixty dollars for vet bills and mental
anguish, the chicken died anyway, so Ed got out his rifle and shot the bulldog
and then dug a hole four feet deep, he said that all the way down it was nothing
but powder, it's been that dry the last few weeks, anyway Ed came by again and
we tried the machine and it wouldn't go forward or backward and I was about to
surrender and load up the damn thing and take it back to the dealer when we
lifted both back wheels off the ground and suddenly the axle which hadn't been
turning even though the belt had been turning started to spin, it must have been
something about the gears that didn't mesh properly anyway we put the wheel back
on again and I started it up and by god it ran as good as ever but I had wasted
a whole day fussing with the mower just because it had picked up a goddamn thorn
probably blackberry which is in brief why I hate machines

Source: 2007/09/cuisine-de-minn

Title: Cuisine de Minnesota
Date: September 14, 2007

The Ranch Restaurant (family-owned, not a chain) in Rochester, Minnesota offered
a splendid salad bar. In addition to the conventional fare (greens, onions,
tomatoes, peppers, etc.), there were some items that were distinctly regional:
herring in wine sauce, baked beans, cherry jello topped with whipped cream,
chocolate pudding and also Watergate Salad.

Watergate Salad, new to me I must confess, is a melange of pistachio pie
filling, mini-marshmallows, canned pineapple chunks (with syrup), pecans, and
Cool-Whip. Here's a question for those who are expert in Minnesotan fine dining:
is your Watergate Salad best eaten with or without herring?

Our waiter at The Ranch, asked whether the tomato soup was prepared with cream,
replied, "It's a tomato biscuit with peas and stuff in it." He was slightly off
the mark: lots of stuff in the bisque but alas no peas.

Source: 2007/09/wild-turkeys-in

Title: Wild Turkeys in My  Garden
Date: September 16, 2007

Even a decade ago, wild turkeys were an utmost rarity, and the sight of one in
the distance caused everyone to stop and peer. But each succeeding year, there
are more and more of them. They're everywhere -- on the roads, in the fields,
even under the apple trees, gorging themselves. Last week, a hen and a dozen
poults walked bold as brass right up onto our front lawn, ten feet from the
deck.  Didn't even bother to hasten away -- took their own sweet time wandering
off.

I don't believe that turkeys were native to Vermont, but it's well known
that since the reintroduction, they've expanded well beyond their former
range. They're adaptable and wily creatures.

The domestic turkey is legendarily stupid. Its brains have waned as its breasts
have waxed. The wild turkey, on the other hand, is smart, though given to
occasional lapses. Sometimes the hen leads her brood through the woven wire
fences. She knows the route, but one or two of the poults will find themselves
barricaded from the flock. They set up a wail. The flock comes to a nervous
halt. After a while, the spectator -- me -- can't endure the tension. I slowly
head over to see what I can do, trying not to alarm the lost fowl -- whereupon
the poults suddenly remember that they know how to fly. Unlike their domestic
cousins, they're strong fliers. They clear the fences with ease.

I now understand a few words of Turkeyish. The male gobble: "I am very large and
handsome; come mate with me."  The poult peep: "I'm lost.  Where is everyone."
The hen cluck: "Come along with me." The double cluck: "Everyone fly into the
trees."

Here's what worries me. Every year there are more and more turkeys. Even the
hunters can't keep up with the population explosion. Will the turkeys turn into
a rural version of pigeon? Overrun our gardens and fields?

Where are the fisher-cats, the foxes, the coyotes, the hawks?  Get to work,
guys. While turkeys are not exactly sitting ducks, they're still very tasty.

Source: 2007/09/worlds-finest-n

Title: Tolstoi's Moth
Date: September 24, 2007

A third of the way through Anna Karenina -- the finest novel in this or any
other universe -- Anna's deceived husband Karenin reluctantly brings himself to
consult with a famous divorce lawyer.

The lawyer was short, stocky, and bald, with a dark, reddish beard, long light
eyebrows, and a bulging forehead.  He was dressed like a bridegroom, from his
cravat and double watch chain to his patent leather boots.  He had a clever,
rustic face, but his clothes were dandified and in poor taste....  Won't you
sit down?"  He indicated an armchair beside a writing desk covered with papers,
and sat down himself behind the desk, rubbing together his little hands with
their short fingers overgrown with fair hairs, and leaning his head over to one
side.

The lawyer's "clever rustic face" is the tipoff that he's of peasant origin
and probably only a generation or two away from scythe and flail. With his
pretentious get-up and his bulging forehead and his stubby hirsute fingers, he
is repulsive, even brutish. O, the indignity of it all -- an aristocrat like
Karenin having to seek help from such a pretentious upstart!

And there's worse. The lawyer is not only a social-climber; he's also a ruthless
opportunist.

He had just settled into this pose when a moth flew over the table:  with a
rapidity it would have been impossible to expect, the lawyer unlocked his hands,
caught the moth, and again assumed his previous posture.

I would not want to assert that Karenin is precisely a moth. Nevertheless,
Tolstoi certainly suggests that, given half a chance, the lawyer would not
hesitate to strip his client's wings. It's clear that the awkward relations
between the lawyer (whom Tolstoi never even bothers to name) and Karenin are
governed by centuries of master-serf antagonism and by the prospect of revenge.

Tolstoi quickly brings this episode to a close and never brings the lawyer back
on stage. But he lets him exit exultantly.

He bowed deferentially, showing his client out the door. But once he was alone,
he abandoned himself to his glee.

Our lawyer now decides that it is time to give up moth-catching.  Instead,

he had definitely made up his mind to have his furniture reupholstered in plush
the following winter, like Sigonin's.

The dog-eat-dog lawyer is convinced that he can transform Karenin's distress
into hard cash. The fees, which he savors prematurely, will allow him to catch
up with his rival.

The world of Anna Karenina is both tough and unsentimental -- and revealed with
great economy by its accomplished creator. It's a long novel, but packed with
significance, every rift loaded with rich shining ore.  olstoi takes on all the
great perennial and nineteenth-century issues -- class, wealth, family, labor,
spirituality, city and country, science, women's rights, royalty and democracy,
agricultural reform, bureaucracy, sexuality, etc. -- but he still manages to
extract significance even from the lowly, Czarist moth.

It had been thirty years since I re-read Anna Karenina. Now I've resolved to
make it at least a biennial event. It's too astonishing a novel to let lie
fallow.

Source: 2007/09/some-nights-ago

Title: No Words, No Words?  Hush.
Date: September 27, 2007

A few nights ago, I attended a performance by our local treasure, the ever-
glorious Takacs Quartet. Without asking my leave, they chose to play works
by Aarvo Part and Philip Glass. I suppose that there must be virtues to
"minimalist" music, but a single motif played over and over again in the same
tempo, with the same unvarying dynamics, and in the same non-key -- what's the
point? Music without melody, harmony, or rhythm is like a novel without a plot
or like a severely abstract painting. Sorry folks, I'm antediluvian. A relic. I
want a story and I want it dressed in rhyme and meter. It's exhilaration that I
crave, not forty-five long minutes of total ripvanwinkleization.

I was already in a sulky mood at the intermission when Mr. and Mrs. Talkative
behind me, after gushing over the minimalists, directed their intellects toward
Shakespeare. Mrs T. announced, "You don't need to read a Shakespeare play before
seeing it. Just read a plot summary so that you know what's happening." Mr. T.
agreed:  "Absolutely. Going to the theater is all about the costumes and the
set and the business. As long as you have a general idea of the story, you don't
need to understand the words."

No need to understand Shakespeare's words?  Go to the theater and ignore the
words of the finest poet in human history?  What are the Talkatives thinking? 
The costumes are the work of the costumer; the business is the work of the
director and the stage designer. The only part of the performance that is
Shakespeare's is the language.

One of the teachers of my youth, the late and much lamented Alfred Harbage  --
the finest Shakespeare scholar of his generation -- used to say that he didn't
care what the actors did on stage as long as he could hear the words.  I'm not
nearly so tolerant. I don't want Rosiland and Orlando to send email messages to
each other -- I want them to articulate. I don't want Cinna and Metullus Cimber
to be dressed as blackshirt fascist thugs. And I certainly don't want Snug and
Bottom to ride to the Duke's Oak on motorcycles. Such antics are stupid and
distracting.

The performance for which I'd pay a premium price is one at the Theatre, or
at the old Globe, or at the Blackfriars during the years when Shakespeare was
teaching the parts to Burbage and Hemmings and Kemp. Dollars to doughnuts he
insisted that the actors pronounce the words distinctly.

After the grating intermission, the Talkatives ran out of insights and my
indignation began to wane. Eventually Ed, Andras, Karoly and Gerry returned to
the stage and played one of Haydn's great Opus 76 quartets. It was transcendent
-- melodic, intelligent and intelligible, warm, robust and sensuous. It was
music.

Source: 2007/09/just-checking

Title: A Scene from my Youth
Date: September 30, 2007

This Here is a photograph of Coney Island Avenue, the grim commercial
thoroughfare along which I crept to school unwillingly like snail between the
years 1944 and 1952. The unknown photographer who left us this record stood at
the corner of Newkirk Avenue, just in front of the P. S. 217 schoolyard, and
pointed his camera north toward Ditmas Avenue. It's the east side of the street;
on the west side stood a used-car lot and a gas station, where, if the view were
more panoramic, signs reading "Veedol" and "Mechanic on Duty" would have been
visible.

It takes only a few seconds of detective work to date the photograph. In the
center is the marquee of the Leader Theater, which advertises the 1947 release
It Happened in Brooklyn, a soldier-returns-home musical with Frank Sinatra,
Kathryn Grayson, Peter Lawford, and especially Jimmy Durante, who was clearly
the neighborhood favorite.  The second feature, Undercover Maisie, a policier
with Ann Sothern and Barry Nelson, was released in the same year. (The double
bill was standard -- and at 14 cents for kids and a quarter for adults, a darn
good value). It's early autumn not only because the ivy and, in the distance,
a Norway maple are still in full leaf, but because the Casa del Rey advertises
High Holy Day services (the orthodox congregation's synagogue on 18th Avenue
had not yet been constructed). I would guess that the large traffic sign that
dominates the frame has something to do with the fact that the old trolley
tracks had recently been removed. The shops near the Leader are too small to
identify, but I remember Singer's drug store, Safier's candy store, a shoe
repair place, a small liquor store owned by P. V. Melia, and Joe Montuori's
barber shop.  At the moment the camera snapped, I was eight years old, in Mrs.
Sherwood's third grade class at P. S. 217.

The architecture is hodge-podge -- the featureless apartment house and shops,
the vaguely deco Leader, and then, closer to the camera, the what-the-heck-is-
it-doing-there Moorish Casa del Rey (for weddings and other gatherings;  I
passed it thousands of times but never once entered).

The man at the right of the frame, jingling his car keys in the pocket of his
voluminous slacks, stares at the camera unenthusiastically.

It's a dreary picture, I'm afraid. Gray. A nondescript street in a nondescript
neighborhood.

I'm trying, but I just can't seem to work up the requisite nostalgia for the old
country.

Source: 2007/10/jane-austen-nud

Title: Jane Austen Nude
Date: October 10, 2007

Today's posting is contributed by the art historian, Alan Saxe-Popette.

Jane Austen's quiet private life has been thoroughly explored for events of
emotional import. It is therefore a wonder that there has been such inattention
to the portrait, identified some forty years ago,in which the novelist,
nude, reclines on a green baize fainting couch. One would have supposed
that writers of fiction and especially film directors would have seized on
the opportunities that the portrait presents, especially since the only other
surviving representation of Jane Austen is her sister Cassandra's amateurish,
unflattering, and essentially asexual sketch. The Austen nude has faded
inexplicably from view. Older readers of this blague will surely remember the
mid-1960s flurry of journalistic interest, some of it nasty and anti-feminist
-- a cover story in Time ("Did Jane Disrobe") as well as the scandalmongering
reportage of Huntley and Brinkley.  But just like the revelations concerning
Wordsworth's French mistress and like the notoriety that greeted Edith Wharton's
pornographic short story Beatrice Palmato, the brouhaha over the Austen nude
quickly evaporated.

The portrait itself, a full-length study in chalk and colored pencils, resides
in the Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley and his Circle, which is
housed in Room 319 of the New York Public Library, and  may be viewed upon
request. Perhaps it is unfortunate that the first account of the Austen nude
appeared in the pages of the Keats-Shelley Journal, a publication sponsored
by the Pforzheimer.  More scholarly attention might have been paid if the
identification of the portrait had been announced in a journal of larger
circulation, such as Nineteenth-Century Fiction or Romantic Studies.

The late R. W. Chapman, who knew more about Jane Austen than any scholar of his
generation, resisted the idea that the portrait was genuine. His attack on its
authenticity, published as an appendix to the revised edition of the Complete
Works of Jane Austen, is scathing, but is rather a reflection of Chapman's
Victorian prejudices than of the facts. Chapman was a traditionalist who
believed that young females, even brilliant female novelists, should be, above
all, decorous. His Jane Austen was a bulwark of conservative and hierarchical
values and he would certainly not have recognized the modern revisionist
conception that situates the novelist in an uneasy alliance with transgression
and subversion. In private, moreover, Chapman was notoriously prudish. He is
reported to have confessed to his great friend Kathleen Tillotson (herself a
well-known scholar of English fiction) that "I just don't want to go to my grave
thinking that I've looked upon dear Miss Austen's pubic hair."

In the 1960s, there was considerable resistance to the authenticity of the
portrait, perhaps because, compared to Cassandra's prim drawing, the new
rendering revealed a young woman in full beauty and bloom. Jane retains the
familiar apple cheeks and the dark hair, but her eyes are knowing and forthright
rather than subdued, and her long, glossy and loose black locks, secured only by
a single cherry-colored ribbon, appear as they were described by Jane Austen's
grand-niece, who recalled her aunt having "large dark eyes and a brilliant
complexion, and long long black hair down to her knees." Opinions will of course
vary, but many will find that in this portrait, Jane looks somewhat Italian
or Gypsy or perhaps even Levantine. Her expression is eager, her waist slim,
her legs short but shapely, and her breasts, despite their surprisingly large
aureoles, magnificent.

Misgivings about the portrait's authenticity survived even until the 1970s. But
then it was established that the chamber in which Austen posed was the drawing
room at Steventon that she shared with Cassandra. There's a useful description
in Constance Hill's Jane Austen, Her Homes and Friends (1902). Hill, it is well
known, had access to the Lefroy family papers. The Lefroys were important
connections of the Austens. It was James Lefroy who wooed Jane and then
inexplicably broke off his relationship with her and retired to Ireland. Jane's
brother James Austen's daughter married a Lefroy; Jane's grand-niece Anna
Lefroy, the child of this union, left a remembrance of her great-aunt's sitting
room. "I remember," wrote Anna, "the common looking carpet with its chocolate
ground that covered the floor, and some portions of furniture. A pointed press,
with shelves above for books, that stood with its back on the wall next the
Bedroom, & opposite the fireplace; my Aunt Jane's Pianoforte -- & above all, on
a table between the windows, above which hung a looking glass, 2 tonbridge-ware
work boxes of oval shape, fitted up with ivory barrels containing reels for
silk, yard measures, etc." In the portrait, these two same oval Tunbridge work-
boxes appear just to the left and behind Jane Austen's head; the keyboard of
"Aunt Jane's Pianoforte" is in part visible to the right; the oval cheval-glass
is exactly as Anna described it. Moreover, the ingenious young art historian
Oksana Sartry, who, using powerful magnifiers, was able to identify the books
in the press, discovered not only Richardson's Sir Charles Grandison and Robert
Bage's Hermsprong, both novels known to have been much studied by Austen, but
also a folio with the words "Volume the Second" inscribed on its spine. "Volume
the Second" was the name that the novelist gave her manuscript collection of
early works (which included the unfinished novel, The Watsons). With this
confirmatory evidence, skepticism was at last dispelled. Austen's remark to
her sister Cassandra (reporting on a day spent with James Lefroy), "imagine to
yourself everything most profligate and shocking" took on new meaning.  And
what did Jane mean when she wrote to her sister, "here I am once more in this
Scene of Dissipation & vice, and I begin already to find my Morals corrupted."

What was the exact occasion for the portrait and why was it found among the
Lefroy papers? There are two views. The first is that Jane sent it to James
Lefroy as part of the courtship process: "here's what you get if you marry
me." This explanation is certainly possible, but the greater likelihood is that
it was a "revenge" portrait: "here's what you have scorned."

That the drawing has sexual content is undeniable, but it is absurd to think,
as some have suggested, that Jane Austen would allow herself to be depicted in
a post-orgasmic state. It is true that Jane's skin is rosy and flushed and
that her plump nipples are erect, but the placement of her hand just above
the tendrils of abundant black hair is traditional and would not seem to
indicate that she had pleasured herself. Those who argue that Jane had recently
masturbated seem, frankly, to have surrendered to prurience. I myself, after the
very closest scrutiny, can discover no evidence whatsoever of what one writer
has called "a clitoral cleft in arousal." Jane Austen was bold, but she would
never, ever, have exceeded the bounds of modesty.

Source: 2007/10/robert-bages-he

Title: Robert Bage's Hermsprong (1796)
Date: October 13, 2007

Back in the early '60s, when I was just beginning to learn about literature,
I enrolled in a course on the eighteenth-century English novel. I diligently
worked my way through an ambitious syllabus. There were more than twenty novels,
some of them monumental in size, like Clarissa and Tristram Shandy;  and others
blessedly brief, like Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield and Mackenzie's Man of
Feeling. Diligent lad that I was, I read every single word, every syllable.
In addition to the required reading, there was also an extensive register of
recommended works. On this intimidating list was Robert Bage's Hermsprong,
which, forty-five years after the fact, I've at last read. Better very very late
than never at all.

It's a good book -- not a masterpiece, but very fine, very enjoyable. The plot
is  unoriginal. An heiress falls for a fortune-hunter, elopes to the continent,
but is rescued just before the threatened deflowering; a domineering wicked
old guy forces his unwilling daughter into marriage with an idiot aristocrat;
a man of mysterious origin turns out to be the estate's true heir -- that sort
of thing. But other elements are less cliched. Charles Hermsprong, raised among
Indians on the banks of the "Powtomack," is a plain-spoken 'merican radical;
Maria Fluart is as witty and defiant and independent as Benedick's Beatrice --
sometimes it seems as though her lines could have been composed by Oscar Wilde
himself. Maria is by far the most vibrant character in the novel. If Bage were
as advanced a thinker as he sometimes pretends to be, he would have let his hero
marry her.It's disappointing that Hermsprong falls for a conventional dutiful
young simperer, while Maria, too strong for any man in the novel, is left on the
putative shelf.

Here's a passage that jumps out at the reader. It's from a description of two of
the novel's minor characters:

"But the tender interest they had in each other was torn asunder by pride and
prejudice, and this pride and prejudice, she feared...."

Whoa, daddy!  Jane Austen's novel was originally named "First Impressions" and
only borrowed its familiar title from Bage late in the game. It is obvious that
right there on Jane's bookshelf, next to Sir Charles Grandison and Tom Jones and
the novels of Frances Burney, was a copy of Hermsprong, which Ms. Austen (unlike
your dilatory '60s student) was smart enough to read in a timely manner.

Source: 2007/10/im-trying-to-re

Title: More on Religion and the Rockies
Date: October 18, 2007

I'm trying to remember the name of the superstitious 1940s Dodger pitcher, who,
when the inning ended, would flip his mitt into the first base coaching box,
then walk over and reposition it so that the fingers pointed directly toward the
mound.  (I'd better stop here and remind the young folks that in days of yore,
players left their gloves out on the field when they came in for their turn at
bat. I can't remember exactly when the Commissioner prohibited this harmless,
colorful custom -- was it in the late 50s?)

Baseball players have always been notably superstitious. They don't step on foul
lines or talk about no-hitters in progress.  They wear the same underwear or
socks for the length of a winning streak.  Turk Wendell had to brush his teeth
and chew licorice between innings.  Wade "Chicken Man" Boggs, a good enough
hitter not to solicit divine intercession, had to eat a meal of chicken before
every game.  Craig Biggio refused to wipe the dirt or the pine tar off his
helmet for an entire season.  Baseball is where the Curse of the Bambino and
the Curse of the Billy-Goat are items of faith. It's also where players wear
gold crosses in their ears and ostentatious floppy crucifixes around their necks
and point triumphantly to the sky when they bloop a single to center.

Chewing licorice and making the sign of the cross are equally effective
procedures, as far as I can tell.  The only difference is that one is a private
superstition while the other has the sanction of religion.  It's individual
delusion versus mass delusion.

At this writing, the biblethumpatudinous Colorado Rockies, baseball's most
Christian-y organization -- the only team with a chaplain on its payroll -- have
won twenty-one of twenty-two games and will (after an eight-day timeout) head
for their first-ever Series.  It's astounding and wonderful, and I'm rooting
for the home town boys.  But my enthusiasm is tempered because fanatics are
already calling it "a miracle," or "destiny," or claiming that "it's meant to
be."  Baseball's a gritty, subtle game, and the Rocks are winning because
they're playing excellent defense, getting timely hits, making great pitches
at the crucial moments, and committing very few mental errors -- not because
of their prayer circle or their morning bible study or because the Great
Signifier in the Sky has decided that this year, the Rockies are kosher and the
Diamondbacks are treyf.

But, say the superstitious, it's unlikely that any team could take twenty-one of
twenty-two.  Of course it's unlikely.  But if statistics tells us anything,
they tell us that even unlikely events will occur some of the time.

Here's what's genuinely unlikely:  that the Rockies' shortstop, Troy
Tulowitski, who (if there's any justice under the heavens) will be soon named
rookie of the year, has a "Christian" name that is an acronym for The Rookie
Of Year. What, pray tell, are the odds?  And also, that the Rockies' have a
catcher, Yorvit Torrealba, whose name is an anagram for "real toy vibrator." 
Such an extraordinary unlikelihood has never happened before and it's never
going to happen again, and it's entirely more remarkable than any winning
streak, however extended.  Yorvit Torrealba is one of those gosh-darned
superstitious sky- pointers.  It would suit my Manichean view of the world
if Yorvit would also point downward, toward Sheol or Gehenna or whatever is
supposed to be down there, every time he futilely chases a high fast ball, which
he does far too frequently.

I would also like to point out that the Rockies have a reliever named LaTroy
Hawkins, whose name would also anagrammatize into "real toy vibrator" if he
would simply rechristen himself LaTroy Riverboat.  Coincidence?  Or destiny.

Go Rockies!

Source: 2007/10/real-live-dialo

Title: Real Live Dialogue
Date: October 28, 2007

First the exchange, exacty as it occured in real life, and then the gloss.

The cashier: "Breakfast of Champions?"

Me: "Well, I'm a vegetarian."

The cashier: "Yeah, I know, all organic."

So here's the story. We were driving across the western, uninhabited part
of South Dakota, heading toward the glorious Black Hills and the Badlands.
Somewhere out there, I stopped for gas. It was about 9:00 or 9:30 in the
morning.

As a general rule, I don't drink coffee or other caffeinated liquids, but when
I'm driving long distances, I keep a Coca-Cola by my side on the conservative
principle that whatever damage the caffeine might do to my eccentric heart,
it will be probably be a lot less dangerous than falling asleep, crashing the
car, and mangling myself and my passengers. Moreover, I'm not a consumer of
candy bars, but the day before, somewhere in Minnesota, A. had treated herself
to a package of M &Ms.  I had wheedled a handful or so from her and I had
decided to make good her loss.  So when we stopped to refill the gas tank in
Somewhere, South Dakota, I purchased, at one of those roadside convenience
stores, a 12 oz bottle of Coke and a small plastic bag of multicolored chocolate
candies, and the friendly, tough, old lady who kept the register looked at
me aslant and said, affectionately, questioningly but also with a touch of
scorn, "Breakfast of Champions." I was feeling defensive and while I could
have responded by explaining that I don't usually eat junky stuff, and that it
wasn't even my breakfast, I didn't feel that I needed to apologize, so I went
the other route and capitulated: "Well, I'm a vegetarian." Which made the lady
smile a bit, as I had hoped, and made me feel as though we were on the same
mock-serious wavelength.  It was a moment of deep communication, far superior
to the commonplace vacant salesperson/customer/middle-of-nowhere encounter.
Feeling a kindred spirit, the lady went along with the game and both assimilated
and expanded on my gambit, saying, "Yeah, I know, all organic' --an expression
that was in part friendly but which also carried a little bite, as if she
detected that I was from some tofu/granola city (which, in fact, is true, even
though I myself am an old-fashioned cheeseburger --as opposed to veggieburger --
kind of guy). Altogether, it was one of the more satisfying conversations I've
had in the last while. A moment of deep and profound understanding, the kind of
intimate communication that we all strive for all day, every day, even out there
on a two-lane in one of the "flyover" states.

Source: 2007/10/my-first-earthq

Title: My First Earthquake
Date: October 31, 2007

Here we are again in Alameda, California.  Last night, just after 8 pm, we were
lying in bed reading (me: Conrad's The Secret Agent;  she, Roth's Exit, Ghost)
and recuperating from the grandchildren's pre-Hallowe'en hysteria, when I said
to A., "Would you please stop shaking the bed."  She, of course, replied, "I'm
not moving," and I joked, "Then it must be an earthquake."  And, much to my
surprise, so it was.  Five point six on the Richter scale, just twenty miles
south of here, five miles underground, along the Calaveras fault.  There's
the possibility of another one, but so far, nothing that we've been able to
discern.  Astonishing to say, but just a few hours ago, the sure and firm-set
earth was feverous and did shake -- which put me in mind of the fragility of our
earthly being and also made me recall some other natural phenomena that I've
witnessed.

All that I can remember of the famous 1945 hurricane was watching at the window
while my father, out in the storm, tried vainly to secure his precious peach
tree, which was being shredded to oblivion by the fierce winds.  I have a vivid
recollection of the great blizzard of 1947, because after the storm subsided,
snow was piled so high on both sides of the sidewalks that, for a small boy, it
was like walking though a canyon -- and great fun to clamber up the mountainous
heaps.  I was a young witness to a sudden squall on Long Island Sound that
sank, if I remember correctly, hundreds of pleasure boats.  Even more serious
was the Connecticut River flood of 1972, which washed out the culverts on our
road, tumbled downstream some hefty boulders, and isolated us for a couple of
days.  Throughout the summer, there were memorable mud stains thirty feet in
the air on the trees that grew in the river valley.  Once in the 1980s, driving
across the country just after the Mississippi had overflowed its banks, we
observed standing water many miles from where water had any business to be. 
We were at Mt. St. Helen's a year after the mountain blew its top, but signs of
the devastation -- bald patches, toppled trees -- were still writ large on the
landscape.  Same with the Black Tiger fire;  we missed the fire but couldn't
ignore the extensive blackening.  In Hawaii once, we walked along hardened lava
flows for a couple of miles to find a standpoint to observe magma, fresh from
the earth's interior, fall steaming into the ocean to create new land.  In
Costa Rica, we visited a dormant volcano -- monumental even in its sleepiness.

Not many such events, but a sufficient number to produce respect for the natural
processes.  No tsunamis or crackings of the ice shelf.  And nothing, thank
goodness, comparable to the explosion of Tambura on the island of Sumbawa that
caused the summer without sun and a crisis of subsistence in parts of Europe
and North America. And certainly nothing whatsoever like the meteor that landed
70 million years ago in the Yucatan, after which the fossil record becomes
a blank for a thousand years and every creature larger than a pussycat went
extinct.  Yesterday's trembling was a good reminder that our mother earth
is a lot more fragile than she appears to be on your average warm, pleasant,
quakeless evening.

Source: 2007/11/joseph-conrads-

Title: Joseph Conrad's The Secret Agent (1907)
Date: November 02, 2007

It sometimes happens that you meet a perfectly decent, intelligent person with
whom you cannot conduct a satisfactory conversation.  He doesn't know when
you're serious or when you're being ironic, doesn't get your jokes, misses your
allusions and references, challenges your assumptions, and repeatedly asks,
"What exactly do you mean?"  You and he are just not on the same wavelength. 
There's no empathy, no meeting of minds.

Joseph Conrad and I have been locked into such an unprofitable relationship
for these last fifty years (although, to be fair, the novelist himself is less
engaged in the standoff than I).  In the 1960s, I embarked on a Conrad tour
and, as is my custom, began at the beginning, reading the first six or so
novels, from Almayer's Folly through Typhoon.  It was hard labor, not love. 
The much- celebrated romantic ornamented prose style settled like thick mist
over my hebetudinous faculties, so much so that I frequently lost track of
the plot, failed to differentiate the characters, felt myself strangled by
the metaphors and boggled by the syntax.  Befogged, miasmafied.  Even the
stories that I dutifully re-read, such as Heart of Darkness, required effort and
discipline.

Hungry for books, last summer, I was browsing the second-hand book shelves.
There aren't many respectable options at the bodice-ripper-rich Bookshelf in
Bradford, Vermont.  Conrad's The Secret Agent seemed like a good choice,
especially since I could dimly recall that in the 1950s, the great mid-century
Khan of English Literature, F. R. Leavis, had placed this particular novel way
up high in the literary firmament.  For $3.50, I decided, what the heck, I'll
try Conrad again.

I felt my way through the Conradian fog for a few chapters, set the book aside
for a couple of weeks, then started once again.  On the second or third try I
finally succeeded and, for the first time in my life, connected to Conrad with
ease and full comprehension.  Here's the key:  The Secret Agent is written in
that familiar grave portentous style, but it's a funny, satirical leg-puller. 
A bunch of incompetents, playing at being anarchists and communists, screw
up their lives and the lives of everyone around them.  The Secret Agent is
a spy novel, a police procedural, a political novel, and a comedy all rolled
into one.  While was stuck thinking, late Dostoevsky, I made no progress,
but when I came to the realization, not Dostoevsky but Coen brothers, the
elements immediately fell into place.  Moreover, The Secret Agent is a novel
not just for the pre-World War I moment, but for this present decade.  It's
extraordinarily keen and insightful about the banality of terrorism.

Now I feel that I can tackle those other Conrad novels that have lain in
wait for me all these years.  Stay tuned, fit audience but few, for further
reports.  Joe C. and I may yet become great friends.

Source: 2007/11/john-galts-anna

Title: John Galt's Annals of the Parish (1821)
Date: November 08, 2007

Annals of the Parish is another book that I've waited far too long to read. 
Purporting to be the reminiscences of Mr Micah Balwhidder, minister of
Dalmailing in Ayreshire, Scotland between the years 1760 and 1810, it's the
most charming and friendly novel that I've encountered in many a day.  The
industrial revolution, with all its good and evil, has found its way to rural
Scotland. In Balwhidder's succinct retrospective summation:  "there was at home
a great augmentation of prosperity and everything had thriven in a surprising
manner;  somewhat, however, to the detriment of our country simplicity." 
 The "country simplicity" seems more than half medieval;  the "augmentation
of prosperity" brings with it such benefits as literacy, London newspapers,
commerce, regular transportation to Glasgow, a cotton mill (not a dark Satanic
one, but a place where a decent livelihood may be earned) but also such debits
as bankruptcies, American and continental wars, and social fissuring.  Annals
of the Parish traces the end of world we have lost and the inception of the
world in which we now dwell.  Galt is good solid Age of Reason optimist, but he
knows enough to mourn the very changes that he appreciates.

The novel is written in Scots;  it's not particularly difficult to understand,
but sometimes Galt lays it on with a trowel.  Mr. Balwhidder tries to persuade
the church elders to repair his "manse":  "I made a report of the infirmities
both of doors and windows, as well as of the rotten state of the floors, which
were constantly in want of cobbling.  Over and above all, I told them of
the sarking of the roof, which was a frush as a puddock stool."  "Frush"
means scratched or crushed;  a "puddock stool" is a toadstool or mushroom. 
My unabridged dictionary does not have an entry for "sarking," but it's not
difficult to guess that a sarking roof is not in perfect repair. The rich
dialect, reported with affection and without condescension, intensifies the
regional flavor.

Galt's Dalmailing was in state of constant flux, while the various villages
of Galt's great contemporary, Jane Austen, are, in social terms, static and
immobile.  Who was more the observant novelist?

Source: 2007/11/words-of-wisdom

Title: Words of Wisdom
Date: November 19, 2007

"Skate to where the puck is going to be, not where it is," said the Great One,
famously.  There you have it: perfect advice for hockey players.  It goes
without saying that Gretsky's sentence applies equally well to entrepreneurs,
intellectuals, artists, and in fact, to anyone who has to cope with a world
in continual flux. Ah, but how can anyone know where the puck is going to be
next second, or next week, or a decade hence?  Gretzky was one of those rare
intuitive geniuses who did it all by instinct.  Ordinary mortals must wrack
their tiny brains until their heads hurt to guess at the trajectory of their own
particular puck.  Most of us, no matter how hard we try, are doomed to skate
counter.  There are other people (alas, I'm one of them) who skate aimlessly,
only dimly aware that somewhere out there on the field of play is a target
puck.  Gretzky's wisdom deserves a prominent spot on the refrigerator of every
moderately forward-looking, ambitious human being, where it can hang as both
goad and frustration.

Here's another brilliant bit of Gretskyiana:  "You miss 100% of the shots you
don't take."

Let us now turn to wisdom from Alan Sillitoe (young 'uns might not remember
Sillitoe, but he was one of the important 'angry' English writers of the
1950s).  Sillitoe blessed us with the forceful and epigrammatic truth that
"all writing is fiction, especially non-fiction."  I particularly savor that
uncompromising, zingy "especially."  If I understand rightly, Sillitoe meant
that a) no matter how faithful to experience a writer wishes to be, the act of
writing inevitably emphasizes or omits or compresses or expands and therefore
transforms experience into a story, a fiction.  And he also implied that b)
no matter how factual the information, if it doesn't tell a story and act as
a fiction it's not going to make its point.   Moreover, and more subtly, he
meant that c) any story is ineluctably influenced and shaped by common modes of
storytelling, and even against a writer's will assimilates itself to existing
genres.  Bloggers, for example, are willy-nilly fictioneers who can't help
writing bloglike posts.  But beware:  Alan Sillitoe most definitely did not
mean to imply that because all narratives are culturally and artistically
determined that they are therefore equivalent in value or truth;  he was a
practiced, practical writer, not some post-modern theory-soaked obscurantist.

Here's wisdom from the great Anatole Broyard.   Of his adolescence, he wrote,
memorably, "if it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely at the mercy of
sex."  "Mercy" is the well-chosen word that makes the sentence so piquant. 
Books, says Broyard, have the power to civilize all of us, even pubescents. 
Books can, and did, rescue him.  As for myself, if I remember accurately,
adolescence was, in spite of extra-large doses of books, merciless.

I don't know who first said that "you can't coach seven feet," but it's a common
enough saying.  It doesn't mean that that you can't coach a seven-footer,
but that no matter how much instruction you offer a guy who's five-ten, he's
never going to be seven feet tall or fill the space on the floor that requires
a seven-footer.  As I once heard a track coach remark, "I can teach them
everything but speed."  A similar sentence, of baseball pitchers: "you have
to be born with the whip."  For those of us who tried to teach less exotic
subjects, I can offer some parallels from my own experience.  "You can't coach
brains";  "you can't coach talent."

But you can do something.  You can, in words of great uncommon wisdom, "play
the hand you're dealt."

Source: 2007/11/empson

Title: Foolish Prudery;  Empson
Date: November 26, 2007

It's easy to forget that our immediate forebears were absurdly prudish. Consider
the case of William Empson, who ran afoul of the sex police in the late 1920s.

Empson may be the most influential literary critic of the previous century.
All "close reading" was pioneered by him. Seven Types of Ambiguity, written
when Empson was twenty-one years old and published in 1930, was the book
with which my teachers were still wrestling well into the 1950s. Prompted
by their puzzlement and by their enthusiasm, I dutifully read all about
"ambiguity" and I also tried my best with the equally influential Some Versions
of Pastoral (1935). In all frankness, both books were far too subtle for my
blunt, unphilosophical brain. In 1961, when I was a graduate student, the
pious and reactionary Douglas Bush, whose course in Milton was thrice-weekly
transporting me to the caves of Morpheus, dismissed Empson's ground-breaking
Milton's God (1961) as the work of the "village atheist."  (Empson thought
that Christianity was a cruel and savage religion because it was grounded
in scapegoating; he demonstrated that Paradise Lost became muddy and opaque
when Milton struggled with the ethical basis of core Christian doctrines. In
later years, the literary leviathanette Stanley Fish made his reputation by
domesticating, diluting, and popularizing Empson's challenging ideas.)

Although I had lived with Empson's work since mid-century, I had absolutely no
knowledge of the author's troubled private life until I read John Haffenden's
William Empson, Among the Mandarins (Oxford, 2005) which at 695 pages is the
first of a projected two-volume biography. (It's far too detailed; let me
confess to skipping and skimming.)

As a student at Magdalen College, Cambridge, Empson was mostly homosexual. 
Haffenden says that he was interested in "male bliss and buggery." The upper-
class students with whom Empson interacted were gay-tolerant and the authorities
practiced a de facto "don't ask-don't tell" policy.  In 1929, Empson was
elected to the prestigious Charles Kingsley Bye-Fellowship, which paid the
then-splendid sum of 150 pounds annually. By that time, Empson had turned
his attention to the other gender and was conducting an affair with a woman
named Elizabeth Wiskemann who was seven years his senior. Somehow or other, a
porter, an employee of the College, "found that Empson had some contraceptives
in his possession." It was a scandal and Empson was arraigned by the college
authorities for "sexual misconduct." He was stripped of his fellowship,
expelled, his name expunged from the college records, and he was even banished
from the city of Cambridge (by what authority Haffenden doesn't make clear).

For using contraceptives! For sexual relations with a woman! For preventing
pregnancy! Clearly, Empson should have stuck to boys or kept clear of condoms.

Let us remember the situation of William Empson whenever conservative
commentators trumpet "family values" and call for a return to the stricter
sexual codes of previous generations. Or when we might be tempted to admire the
wisdom of our ancestors.

Source: 2007/11/roths-portnoys

Title: Roth's Portnoy's Complaint (1969)
Date: November 29, 2007

Philip Roth has written some wonderful books but this particular job isn't one
of them. Portnoy's Complaint is nothing more than a comedian's shtick -- the
undisciplined efforts of a borscht circuit comic "working blue." Poor Philip
Roth. He set to be the heir of Lenny Bruce but accidentally fathered that
unfortunate by-blow, the egregious Howard Stern, who is Portnoy raised to a
power.

Like many nightclub monologists, Roth doesn't bother to develop rounded
characters but relies entirely on stereotypes. The women in Portnoy are types
reduced to their crudest manifestations: the ignorant Appalachian, the upper-
class twit-ess, the sabra soldier. The worst instance of stereotyping: the
narrator himself, Alexander Portnoy, who embodies every single characteristic of
the stage Jew except avarice and accent. Portnoy -- or parts of it -- would make
a great Catskill routine. But a novel it's not.

Is it possible that Philip Roth and Woody Allen are one and the same person? Or
aspects of the same person. Both start out doing sex-obsessed comic monologues
and both develop into great artists. They employ similar plots and characters
(compare Portnoy's gentile girlfriend Mary Jane Reed of West Virginia, whom the
monologist half-heartedly tries to educate, with Annie Hall of Chippewa Falls,
Wisconsin, advised to attend adult education classes at NYU by Alvy Singer).

In the coming weeks, class, we will look at other Roth/Allen identities and
parallels. They're both satirists and we'll explore the theory that Roth is an
acerbic Juvenal while Allen is a genial Horace.

No doubt that Philip Roth is envious of Woody Allen's more distinct features
and more compact body, but has anyone actually seen the two together?  Or even
a picture of them in the same undoctored frame?  Until they're sighted in the
same room, I'll reserve judgment on whether Roth/Allen is one or two persons.

Source: 2007/12/interim-report

Title: Interim Report on P. Roth
Date: December 07, 2007

I've now penetrated halfway into the Philip Roth corpus, reading not
chronologically but as the novels become available in our local public library.
At this moment I’ve interrupted my progress to enjoy DBC Pierre’s Booker
Prize novel Vernon God Little, a virgin copy of which I uncovered in a basement
storage box.

Here's my interim report on the works of Philip Milton Roth. No doubt but
that Roth has created a stunningly original and accomplished body of work:
it's witty, inventive, imaginative and unpredictable. So far The Human Stain,
which I read a couple of years ago and plan to re-read soon, is my choice for
masterpiece, but among the Rothgroup are a number of real dazzlers. Not a
single book has been uninteresting (well, of the very early works, Letting Go
was ordinary and Portnoy's Complaint, though notorious, was not serious). But
everything has been engaging, even if only for the coruscating surface. I'm
genuinely impressed. The Roth guy is good.

But, you ask, Is Roth a writer for all time, or is he a writer for this present
moment?  No one can make a fair estimate until the requisite hundred years have
elapsed. Nevertheless, my great pleasure and admiration for his achievement
notwithstanding, I very much doubt the permanent value of Roth's work. My
provisional opinion is that Roth confines himself to too small a slice of
human experience to sit at the table of the greats. The more I read, the
more conscious I become that his engagement with the world is incomplete and
deficient.

At bottom, Roth's subject is domesticity. His major characters, on the whole,
do not track whales or go to war or cure diseases or wrestle with new ideas or
sojourn in the wilderness; instead, they manage relationships with their parents
and with their colleagues and with their mistresses and ladyfriends. It's no
vice for a writer to choose the domestic arena: it's the domain of Jane Austen
and Henry James, among many others. Roth, however, presents us with a severely
circumscribed domesticity -- a partial and skewed view even of his own area of
interest.

Human social life begins with the family from which we derive, but it culminates
in the family that we create. It's a cycle; we’re born, we mature, we marry,
we bring forth children who themselves mature, and then we shuffle off the
stage. Roth understands and engages the first part of life -- the growing out
of childhood into adulthood. In traditional literature, it's the part of life
that, recorded in the novels of a writer less satiric and more comic than Roth,
might end with a wedding feast and the promise of future fertility. But Roth
does not write traditional comedy, and he's inordinately hostile to marriage and
especially to children. He's an acute observer of both the nuclear and extended
families of his west-of-Manhattan Newark-Jewish roots. But when it comes to the
progenitive phase of life, he has little to offer: incomprehension, or less than
incomprehension -- merely vacancy, a hole, a void. There's no sign that Roth
appreciates that to nurture a family of one's own is for most people a profound
part of the human voyage. His characters don't willingly marry, and if they do,
they don't stay married and they certainly don't reproduce. There are no babies,
no boys or girls, no teen-agers in the homes and streets and schools of New
Rothville.

When we (that is, the plurality of human beings) grapple with parenthood, we
inevitably come to some sort of detente with the generation that begot us.
Not only do we learn about life from our sons and daughters, but we find it
immensely satisfying to do so. But in the fifteen or so of Roth’s novels that
I've so far read, I've yet to find the father who loves his own children. It's
as though Roth were deaf and blind to the profounder half of human existence.
Children are not a fulfillment; they are only a burden and an annoyance -- clogs
to Zuckerman's or Kepesh's or Tarnopol's or Roth's freedom. (Readers of Claire
Bloom's memoir of her life with Philip -- Leaving a Doll's House --will clearly
remember Roth's implacable and inexplicable antagonism to Bloom's daughter.) For
many novelists, the non-existence of paternal affection would not be a handicap
to artistic achievement. But Roth writes entirely out of his own experience;
he’s anything but empathic. Roth cannot conceive of the full adulthood that
comes with mature parenthood. So he doesn't know what he can't know -- that his
various alter egos, even as they age, linger in perpetual frozen adolescence.

Unable to imagine the love of children, Roth also lacks the ability to
appreciate or describe a functioning marriage. For Roth and his multiple
avatars, marriages are similar to children in that they are restrictions on
individual freedom.  And therefore Roth's hostility to husbands is corrosive
and aggressive. Husbands are unmanly, emasculated. Real men have lots of women;
those who pretend to enjoy a permanent partnership with one person are either
slaves or eunuchs.

Roth writes obsessively about Jews and Jewishness and Jewish culture but there's
a core Jewish value that he never acknowledges. It's "being a mensch." A mensch
is a mature man who does right by his friends, his associates, and especially
by his family. He meets, and more than meets, his obligations, especially when
it's rough going. He can be relied upon. He enjoys his life, but he would never
put his own satisfactions ahead of his obligations to either his closest kin
or humankind in general. Of such a traditional virtue, Roth's characters know
nothing. In his novels, Roth's various alter egos not only shirk responsibility
and run from trouble, but they judge it virtuous to do so.  In the world
according to Roth, only a schmuck would be a mensch. But perhaps the satirist is
always doomed to be the malcontent outsider. A happy Rothmensch would be no Roth
at all.

Philip Roth is by all odds the greatest novelist of arrested development ever
produced by the state of New Jersey.

Source: 2007/12/more-on-contrac

Title: More on Contraceptives and Prudery
Date: December 10, 2007

Last week I reported that in 1929 William Empson was expelled and expunged
from Cambridge University for owning a condom, a circumstance that I judged to
be an scandalous instance of ancient prudery. But in thanks to one of those
fascinating moments of cultural convergence, I've just re-read, after almost
fifty years, Philip Roth's Goodbye, Columbus, which also turns on a discovered
contraceptive -- in the latter case, a diaphragm. Readers of the novella will
remember that Roth's Newark alter ago, Neil Klugman, enjoys a summer romance
with rich 'Cliffie Brenda Patimkin and pressures her to obtain a pessary. In due
time the incriminating object is discovered by Brenda's protective, overbearing
mother. Shock and outrage ensues, and the romance founders.

When I read about the Empson-Cambridge contraceptive scandal, I felt as though I
was entering an alien, distant and incomprehensible past. But Goodbye Columbus
appeared in 1959, when I was an undergraduate at Cornell -- and is therefore
very much a part of my conscious lifetime. Nor is Roth inaccurate about 50s
sexual prudery. Contraceptives were difficult to obtain (even for married folk)
and pre-marital sex was still taboo -- though, I must say, a taboo honored
more in the breach than the observance. The old ways were slowly changing. In
1958, I participated in my first political demonstration -- or riot -- when
Cornell authorities tried to prohibit women from visiting men's off-campus
apartments. We staged a late-night moderately out-of-control protest march to
the president's office. It was an all-male event because after 11 pm, women were
confined to their all-female dormitories.(The action is recorded in Richard
Farina's Been Down So Long It Seems Like Up to Me [1966]). It all seems so
positively quaint now -- the university trying to police our sexual life and all
that. Parents nowadays, at least the parents that I know, would be delighted to
learn that their college-age daughters are using contraceptives.

In Goodbye, Columbus, Neil Klugman accuses Brenda of allowing her diaphragm
to be discovered so that she can end the uneasy romance. Neil's argument
seemed rational in 1959, but it no longer does so. From the vantage of 2007,
it's clear that the many Roth alter egos have consistently been able to find
justifications and excuses to end both their affairs and their marriages.
Klugman, and Kepesh, and Zuckerman are never, ever, going to be more than
momentarily and intermittently loyal or satisfied, but on the whole it's going
to be circumstances, not their own volition, which causes them to flee. We
didn't know that then. In 1959, Goodbye, Columbus seemed like a disinterested
clearing of the Victorian air; now it has been transformed into a overture  to
Roth's long and tormented psychosexual opera.

Source: 2007/12/book-report-ver

Title: Book Report:  Vernon God Little
Date: December 10, 2007

At  first I found Vernon God Little to be rough going.  The narrative voice
-- a popcultch-saturated south Texas adolescent idiom -- took some getting
used to. The novel is a post-mass-murder burlesque, hilarious in spots, but
not even remotely credible.  Vernon God Little won the Man Booker Prize in
2003, but I wonder whether the novel would be so highly regarded by English
literati if it had portrayed England the way it portrays the U.S -- as a
country where everyone, every single person, is either a pederast, an idiot,
a con-man, a traitor, an opportunist, an incompetent, or just fat, lovelorn,
vicious and vacant. The pseudonymous DBC Pierre, an Australian, seems to have
acquired all his information about the United States from watching trash TV. 
He's written a funny book, because caricature can be very amusing, but I hope
that unwary Europeans and Asians who read Vernon God Little don't think that
they've entered the heart of America, because they sure as hell haven't.
Caveant lectores. I wonder also about the novel's thick impasto of Christian
symbolism.  Vernon lives on Beulah Lane in a town called Martirio; he calls
himself a "skategoat."  Will he die for America's vulgarities?  And are
we supposed to take seriously Vernon's last-minute conversion to faith?  I
couldn't -- in fact, the last- chapter Hollywood ending seemed to me mighty
meretricious.

Source: 2007/12/shakespeares--1

Title: Some Rituals
Date: December 16, 2007

Shakespeare's audiences were notoriously raucous.  Folks entered and left
during performances, commented loudly on the action and the actors, and ate
oranges and hazelnuts during performances.  (When the Rose Theater was
excavated in 1994, its floor was found to be paved with crushed hazelnut
litter.)  The Rose, the Globe, and the Fortune were noisy, busy, vital places,
far different from today's excessively reverent theaters.  I wish it were
otherwise.  I would be much more interested in live theater if I didn't feel
that I was stepping into a museum or mausoleum.  Why shouldn't we voice our
approval or disapproval?  A vigorous environment did not inhibit gentle Will. 
Nowadays we have more Awe but less Art.

I feel the same about visits to the symphony (but I'm more tolerant, especially
on a Brahms or Beethoven evening).  The ritual of concert-going amuses me: the
various instrumentalists wandering to their places, then the concertmaster, then
at last the maestro, the polite applause, the bowing, etc.  There's an old
story about "the man from Borneo"  -- when Borneo was synonymous with the end
of the earth -- who was taken to the Boston Philharmonic.  After the concert,
the M from B was asked, "Which part of the concert did you like best."  "Before
the man with the stick came on."

Yesterday I went to see our local university basketball team. It wasn't a very
good game and my mind wandered to the elements of the ritual:  first the
warming up, then the teams leave the court, then the Star-Spangled Banner, then
the overexcited introduction of the starters, ("at six five from San Bernadino
California") and of course the blond perky cheerleaders with their theatrical
enthusiasm and familiar tumbling routines.  And the band, playing their hearts
out during the TV timeouts.  It's all so very schematized and overdetermined. 
But exciting nevertheless.

Both the symphony and the basketball game are highly ritualized, but I have to
admit that on the whole, I'm more comfortable at the arena than at the concert
hall.  Especially when I have to cough; nothing more awkward than trying to
suppress a cough during a pianissimo passage -- especially for those of us who
are inordinately sensitive to social censure.

I wish the symphonies could incorporate some of the vitality of basketball.  At
the arena, the members of the band swing their trombones to left and right. 
Why couldn't the violins and violas give us a little of that?  And then we have
the tuba cheer, where the tubists come on court and whirl in rapid circles. 
What an opportunity for cellos and double-basses to show off their skill and add
some visual excitement to the performance.  The cheerleaders regularly climb
each others' shoulders.  Why not the woodwinds?

And the audiences?  They can participate by eating oranges and hazelnuts.  And
shouting approval.  "Go woodwinds!"

Source: 2007/12/flirting-with-i

Title: Flirting with Incest, Part II
Date: December 20, 2007

Yesterday I considered the near-incest situations of Philip Roth and Woody
Allen.  In Roth's My Life as a Man, Roth's shadow Nathan Zuckerman marries
Lydia Kettering and when she commits suicide he takes up with Monica, who is
Lydia's sixteen-year-old daughter by a previous marriage.  When Lydia turns
twenty-one, Zucerkman proposes marriage but she, wiser than her step-father,
declines.  I do not know whether Zuckerman's borderline incest had a precedent
in Roth's real life.  I do know that Roth's doppelganger Woody Allen eventually
married Soon-yi Farrow Previn and that he has adopted two children with her. 
(The woodman now has five offspring in his complex family, including two adopted
and one created in the downright way with Mia Farrow.  Child-averse Roth seems
to have avoided paternity.)

While reading My Life as a Man I've also been watching movies by Nicholas Ray. 
Last night I saw In a Lonely Place (1950) with Humphrey Bogart and Gloria
Grahame.  I recommend it to all who love film.  It's tough and intelligent,
filled with great dialog, brilliant lighting, excellent music and stylish
direction.  Trust me, It will hold your interest and give you something to
admire.  Gloria Grahame steals the show;  she's just as good and much more
subtle than Humph.

I didn't know anything about Grahame's career and life, so I looked her up on
the standard databases.  Her life was so unusual that I might even try to track
down a biography.

With the Roth/Allen/incest theme on my mind, I discovered these facts about
Gloria Grahame.  In 1948, Grahame married director Nicholas Ray and gave birth
to a son who was named Timothy.  She and Ray were divorced;  in 1960, Gloria
married Anthony Ray, Nicholas Ray's son, and subsequently gave birth to two more
boys, Anthony Jr. and James.   She had biological children by both father and
son and has therefore left incest-flirters Roth and Allen in her dust.  What an
achievement!

Query:  Tim, Anthony Jr, and James are half-brothers -- but are they also uncle
and nephew?   Half-cousins?  Cousins?    I never fully grasped the theory
of relativity.

Source: 2007/12/rothallen-doppe

Title: Roth/Allen Doppelgangerism
Date: December 20, 2007

A few days ago, noting that their careers and obsessions converge in ways
that seem uncanny, I suggested that Philip Roth and Woody Allen were not just
doppelgangers, but might in fact be one and the same person.

I've just now read Roth's 1970 novel My Life as a Man, which must be the most
self-consciously narcissistic "fiction" ever written -- at least since Ben
Jonson’s Fountain of Self-Love four hundred and seven years ago. The novel
is a large helping of Philip Roth, followed by more Philip Roth and with a
dollop of Philip Roth to the side. My Life as a Man purports to be drawn from
the writings of Peter Tarnopol, who is one of the Roth’s many alter egos. The
first part of the novel comprises two short stories by Tarnopol, so-called,
about a character named Nathan Zuckerman (the very Zuckerman destined to evolve
into the most highly developed of Roth’s self-projections -- Roth’s very own
alter-ego- issimus). So here's the design of My Life as a Man: Roth, writing as
Tarnopol, writes about Zuckerman, who is Roth himself. It’s a closed loop, a
totalizing tautology, a pleonasm brought to perfection -- a literary eruv with
nothing inside but Roth hisself.

In the latter part of the novel, the psychoanalyst Abraham Spielvogel amusingly
diagnoses Tarnopol as "one of the top young narcissists in the arts." But
gosh, just because R/T/Z can poke fun at his self-love (sometimes called
autoeroticism) doesn’t mean that the novel becomes less oppressively
claustrophobic.

While reading My Life as a Man, I couldn't help thinking, “does Roth do
anything other than act like Belmondo looking at himself in the mirror? does he
have interests other than Roth?”

Like Roth, Woody Allen appears in his own works as a familiar continuing persona
–- he's always more or less the same guy: bespectacled, nervous, death and sex
obsessed, self-mocking, a deliverer of one-liners -- who may not be Allen but is
certainly constructed of woodyallenian raw materials. Allen’s collected works,
like Roth’s, approximate an autobiography.

It's clear that one element of their doppelgangerism is their almost equivalent
obssession with self.  But there are also more precise parallels.

In "Useful Fictions," which is one of the short stories that comprise the first
part of My Life as a Man, Peter Tarnopol tells the story of Nathan Zuckerman's
disastrous marriage to a woman named Lydia Kettering. (It's a most puzzling
liaison, because Zuckerman dislikes -- actually hates -- Lydia right from
the start. Roth/Tarnopol claims that  exogamous Zuckerman is enthralled or
perhaps even hypnotized by Lydia's difference -– by her distinctly unJewish,
unbourgeois, uneducated, undisciplined personality.  But Zuckerman’s
attraction to her is inadequately explicated; it makes him seem not enigmatic
but dull, dense, pathetic and ultimately incomprehensible. It's not the
character who's flawed; it's the artistry of the writer. After some lunatic
adventures, the Zuckerman/Kettering marriage begins to collapse. And then
Zuckerman takes a shine to Lydia's daughter Monica, whom he met when she was
just ten years old. (Cf. V. Nabokov, Lolita, 1959). After Lydia’s suicide,
Zuckerman takes sixteen- year-old Monica to his bed and to Italy. When she turns
twenty-one and is technically no longer his ward, he proposes marriage. She
refuses him. Smart girl.

Here’s the question, class. Can anyone recall the name of a prominent film
writer and director who formed a relationship with the daughter of his longtime
companion?  Let me give you a hint: Roth grew up just west of Manhattan
in Newark; the director in question hails from just east of Manhattan in
Brooklyn. No hands?  No takers? Let me offer another hint: the young lady in
question is named Soon-yi Farrow Previn. Anyone want to take a guess?  Yes,
that’s right, it’s Woody Allen, whose romance with Mia Farrow’s daughter
scandalized the nation in 1992.

Omigod!  Woody did in the '90s what Phil fictionalized in the '70s: he married
his wife’s daughter.

Did Woody read and study My Life as a Man?  Did both men imagine that Lolita
was designed as a how-to guide to sexual manners? Or was there something in
the seltzer that provoked both of these guys to dabble with the incest taboo?
What, in other words, gives? Are Roth and Allen joined at the hip or at the area
adjacent to the hip or are they in fact the same person?  Stay tuned as we
explore this continuing mystery.

Source: 2007/12/not-another

Title: Another Violent Dream
Date: December 22, 2007

Our own dreams are fascinating to ourselves but not particularly interesting to
others (exceptions to the general rule are the dreams recounted and expounded in
Freud's Interpretation).  I know that I presume upon my readers to record the
following nightmare.  I do so only because it's such a shocking fantasia.

I was in a jewelry store with my wife somewhere on the Continent and we were
about to purchase a small gold medallion.  It was tarnished;  I called the
hint of greenness to the attention of the middle-aged, bald salesman.  At his
instruction, I rubbed the medallion with my thumb until it began to shine. 
Just as I did so, I noticed that the salesman's flaccid pecker was hanging out
of the fly of his pants;  I said, "OK, that's too weird, we're out of here." 
We hurried to leave but the door to the shop was locked.  The salesman, who now
looked menacing (the dream began to take on the ambience of a horror movie),
reached into his pocket and pulled out a key --strangely enough, a large,
castle-size key.  He flourished it and opened the door for us to leave, but
there was another locked door behind the first.  He took another key, equally
large, out of his pocket and opened the second door.  There was still another
door and I began to think that we'd never get out of the shop.  Then the
salesman reached deep into his pocket, pulled out a large hunting knife and cut
off his own dingus right at the root.  At this point I decided that I'd had
enough and woke up.

Hey, don't tell me that I suffer from castration anxiety.  I don't, despite
what the dream seems to say.  I hate to give such fodder to Freudians, but I
don't invent these dreams, I just report them.  And yes, I'm well aware that a
key is reputed to be a phallic symbol.

I'd welcome interpretations that don't make the dreamer out to be infantile,
maniacal, or excessively StephenKIngish.

Source: 2007/12/nine-years-afte

Title: Antimylarmonofilamentarianism
Date: December 28, 2007

In 1895, my grandparents wisely left the abysmal, backward Ukraine and struck
out for the new world. Nine years later, my father was born in a cold-water flat
in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. The date of his birth: December 22,
1904, exactly at the winter solstice. "And they called his name, Emanuel, God
with us." If he had been born in the old country, before the Russian authorities
imposed legal cognomina upon us, he would have been named Emanuel ben Isaiah--
his father's name appended to his own as a patronymic.

Despite his traditional moniker and his commitment to the essence of Judaism,
my father was fiercely hostile to the irrationalities of religion. His view --
and my grandfather Isaiah's even more strongly--was that for a thousand years
our lineage had been kept in poverty and darkness not just by the czars but
also by the rabbis. In politics, my father and grandfather began as socialists
and became New Dealers; in philosophy, they rejected theological doctrine and
were among the children of the enlightenment whom Moses Mendelssohn had led
to the promised land of evidence and reason. I doubt that any of my ancestors
knew Karl Marx's sentence that "the criticism of religion is the beginning of
all criticism," but they acted as if they had absorbed it from the cradle. My
brothers and I were taught to resist religious exclusivity, superstition, and
ceremony.

We now have a religious controversy in our peaceful, progressive, and largely
secular western town. A group of orthodox Jews have petitioned the city council
for permission to construct an eruv. What is an eruv?  It’s a “symbolic
boundary that allows orthodox Jews to carry things, including their own
children, outside their home during the Sabbath." (Carrying is considered work,
and orthodoxy's strict interpretation of religious law prohibits any sort of
sabbatical labor.) A latter-day eruv is constructed out of fishing line that is
strung on utility poles; curiously, it may incorporate functioning electric and
telephone wires.

I know that my forbears detested eruvim and similar expressions of irrational
piety. I myself am not enraged by these useless but harmless superstitions. 
Constructing an eruv does not endanger our species; it's not like opposing
contraception or prohibiting stem-cell research. An eruv consoles the believers
and doesn't much bother the rest of us. Yet if there is a spirit in the sky,
which I very much doubt, I would hope that he would not be so small-minded as
to issue ukases about carrying infants on Saturdays; infants should be carried
as much as they want, which is just about everywhere and always. And if any god
were so narrow as to promulgate an inside/outside-the-home rule, I would hope
that he would be intelligent enough not to be flummoxed by such transparent
trickery as hanging mylar filament on poles.

I have no intuitive conception of god, but I think that the orthodox trivialize
our shared longing for transcendence when they sanctify such petty practices. It
would be far more pious for the orthodox to take every nickel spent to appease
the Ancient of Days and bestow it on a poor Jewish family from Tashkent. 
If these folks can't locate eligible Jews, there are Hondurans and Sudanese
a-plenty who deserve their attention. When the orthodox re-direct their
enthusiasm and their resources toward truly charitable enterprises, they will
honor the universal immigrant experience and they will also practice the very
worthy Jewish virtue of compassion. Constructing an eruv is a foolish waste of
time and fishing line.

Here's my father's view:  "It took us hundreds of years to fight our way out of
the ghetto and they want to put themselves back in jail. If the rabbis had their
way," he would say, "Mahler and Bernstein and Gershwin would play accordion in a
klezmer band in Bialystok, Einstein would balance the books for a caftan maker
in Kiev, and a hundred and fifty Jewish Nobel Prize winners would spend their
days davening in some dirty dim synagogue in Vilna."

I think it’s in a Wallace Markfield novel that an old Jewish guy confronts a
group of twenty-something Jewish hippies/slackers in Miami Beach. After a heated
discussion, he admonishes them:  "And don't ever be ashamed that you’re
Jewish. It’s enough that I’m ashamed that you’re Jewish."

Which is pretty much how I feel about the eruvistas. Well, not exactly ashamed.
Embarrassed, perhaps, by their superstitious infatuation with the "dark backward
and abysm of time."

Source: 2007/12/-way

Title: "-way"
Date: December 29, 2007

We were in the car heading toward Palo Alto when I brought up the old bromide
that in the English language, a person drives on a parkway and parks on a
driveway.  Immediately, my fellow-passengers began to list other roadways
that contained the element ”way.”   Highway, superhighway, freeway (and
its opposite, tollway) came immediately to mind.  Then came throughway,
expressway (called in England ‘dual carriageway’), broadway, runway, 
pathway, footway, byway, subway, tramway, and skyway.  After a while, some less
common words arrived:  gangway, passageway, arborway (Boston only, as far as I
know;  Boston has also given us fenway), fairway, alleyway and causeway.  To
what cause does a causeway subscribe?  None; the word ultimately derives from
Latin calx, limestone.  As we came closer to home: doorway, hallway, archway,
entranceway, stairway, breezeway.

Ah, wellaway, there must be many others.

Well, why do we drive on a parkway and park on a driveway?  Hey, why does your
nose run and your feet smell?   Why is catnapping pleasurable but kidnapping
reprehensible?   It’s the way of language; it’s wordway.

Source: 2007/12/predictions-for

Title: Predictions for 2008
Date: December 30, 2007

Diligent readers of this blague will recall that last January, I made a
series of daring forecasts about the year 2007.  It's now time to review
my projections and evaluate my record.  I'm proud to say that a panel of
independent experts has confirmed that I hit the jackpot.  I scored an 8 out of
8, 100%, A+.  I'm now a fully accredited prophet.

These were my 2007 predictions:

"1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market, and, finally,

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East."

Did I score big-time,or what?  Note especially #4.  How did I know that
"wide- stance" would become a household phrase?   Boggles the imagination. 
Moreover, stock market fluctuations have been greater than even I could have
hoped for (same with Mideast turmoil).  Concerning athletes and drugs, just
think "Barry Bonds" and "Mitchell Report."  I knocked that one out of the park.

Is everyone ready for my 2008 predictions?

I'm staying with 1-8.  But I'm going out on a limb with #9:  "A religious
leader will be involved in either a financial or a sexual scandal (perhaps
both)."   And #10:  "Questions will be raised about the accuracy of the vote
count."

You read it here first.  Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2008.  Let's
see if Dr. M. can top his scintillating successes of 2007.

Source: 2007/05/boustrophedonia.html

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."