

================================================================================Source: 2013/01/amnesia-on-film-and-now-ladies-and-gentlemen-2002

Title: Amnesia on Film:  And Now, Ladies and Gentlemen (2002)
Date: January 04, 2013

There can't be a disease in fiction that demands more vigorous suspension of
disbelief than movie amnesia. And Now, Ladies and Gentleman, a latter production
of the great Claud Lelouch, pushes the  disbelievery to the breaking point.
It asks us to accept not one but two identical and fanciful cases of the
affliction. Both Valentin Valentin, played by Jeremy Irons, and Jane Lester,
played by Patricia Kaas suffer from symmetrical "blackout" periods in which
memory evaporates.

What, prithee, are the odds?

Duelling amnesias are mighty unlikely, but such is the premise of the film.
Although I doubt that there's much in the scientific literature about the
romantic potential of mutual amnesia, in this film the disease becomes a mild
erotic stimulant. Why the heck not, I say.

Inasmuch as no one but confirmed amnesiaphiles are ever going to see this film,
let me spoil it at once by saying that both Valentin, a jewel thief, and Jane, a
chantoosie, find themselves in Fez in Morocco. There they are healed, and after
much ado, set out to circumnavigate the earth in a racing boat called Ladies
and Gentlemen (hence the film's odd title). Valentin, a traditionalist, takes
the orthodox medical route and goes to a local surgeon, who shows him and us an
MRI generated picture of his brain disfigured by a great white splotch ("It's
a wonder he can remember anything," says the Doc.) Valentin undergoes radical
surgery but Jane, taking an easier route, is cured by making a pilgrimage to a
local Moroccan saint. How  unjudgmental and egalitarian to equate medicine and
mystery;  and also, by the way, how very nonsensical.

The film is well made --  replete with all kinds of fancy effects and
flashbacks and dream sequences. I love the idea of draining color from the
characters' faces to signify that they have begun another of their symmetrical
"blackouts." But aside from the amnesias, there's not much to wonder at, at
least not if you've seen your share of caper/jewel thief films.

I loved the exotic North African locales. I'm chagrined to report that I didn't
recognize the wondrous Claudia Cardinale, who was 63 when the film was made.
Claudia had been a great friend to my youthful imagination.

The amnesia that afflicts Valentin and Jane is, as far as I know, unique in that
it comes and goes, appears and disappears. Less like an amnesia than an allergy
-- here one moment, then gone. But as a plot device, constant.

Source: 2013/01/tobacco

Title: Tobacco in My Life
Date: January 06, 2013

My lifetime tobacco consumption consists of one cigarette. Actually, half of
one cigarette. I believe it was a Lucky Strike. Or perhaps an Old Gold. It was
certainly one of these:   It was 1952. My older brother came home from a
summer job in the Poconos with a cigarette tucked into the sleeve, like this. So
cool, so macho:

That's not my brother, but it might have been (although he drove a Dodge). A
pack of Luckies in the shoulder was just about the most glamorous thing I had
ever seen.

So I tried one. I stole one of my brother's coffin nails, hid in the cellar, and
lit up.

It was hideous and I was bilious.

I confessed as much to friends who were already secret smokers. The word of
advice -- "After you do it for a while, you get over feeling sick."  Not a
persuasive argument, at least to me. It seemed stupid.

There were some years there when I faulted myself for not being as adventurous
as my peers. Just another example of my conservatism and caution. But now I
think that not finishing that cigarette may have been the single wisest act of
my otherwise brainless adolescence. If I had smoked that cigarette to the nub,
I'd still be fighting the addiction.

I was, in those days, surrounded by smokers. My father smoked an occasional
cigar but mostly a pipe, filled with Prince Albert tobacco.  It came in a can
something like this one:

He was forever fussing with his pipe -- knocking it, grinding out the remnants
of the previous pipeful, refilling, lighting up. It was quite a ritual. But
stinky nevertheless.

My mother smoked cigarettes, lots of them, until she came down with the ulcers.
I was often sent around the corner to the candy store to buy her a pack of
Chesterfields (no problem selling cancer sticks to children in those benighted
days). Our house always stunk, especially when friends of my folks would visit.
Everyone in their crowd  smoked. Mostly chain-smoked.

No air in our home, just smog.

It's hard to know how tall I would have been, or how intelligent, if I hadn't
been raised in a blue haze.

In college, my roommates all smoked. It didn't like it, but I didn't have
the courage to complain. In those days, the deck was stacked in favor of the
smokers, who had the rightaway. To object was to be fussy, or finicky, or
unmasculine. Some of the professors smoked while teaching -- an act which gave
the students permission to light up as well. It was nasty. Abstainers had no
purchase.

Then things began to change.  We went from this

and this

to this (in 1964):

And then throughout the '70s and '80s, there were the constant revelations
about the fakery and lying of the big tobacco companies, who chose profits and
destroying lives over honesty and public health.

Nowadays, no smoking in anyone's home, no smoking in buses or planes, no smoking
in restaurants, no smoking in government buildings, and no smoking (as of next
month) on the mall.

But I'll tell you what still makes me sick. It's a bunch of teen-agers, hanging
out in front of the coffee shop, puffing theatrically and addicting themselves
-- and subtracting an average of ten years from lives. In the old days, when
doctors smoked Camels, or were reputed to do so, there may have been some excuse
for smoking;  but now, when the evidence is all in, a kid who starts to smoke
is a complete raging fool.

I'm sorry but I have no nostalgia for the great age of cigarettes, though they
were, as a Lorillard executive once said, "the perfect product;  make it for a
penny, sell it for a dollar, and it's addictive as hell."

Source: 2013/01/how-rupert-brooke-died

Title: How Rupert Brooke Died
Date: January 08, 2013

From a mosquito bite to his lip.

Rupert Brooke was an immensely talented young poet, best known today for the
hyper-nationalistic World War I sonnet, "The Soldier." He lived for just twenty-
eight years and his death was a tragedy for letters.

It's easy to be skeptical about the mosquito. I've been in the company of these
insects many times, and I've never been bitten on the lip. Mosquitoes seem to
avoid the mouth area -- at least, they avoid my mouth. But then, I don't know
anything about the habits of eastern Mediterranean mosquitoes.

Brooke was a sub-lieutenant with Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve; the mosquito
attack took place while his ship was anchored in the Aegean. He developed an
abscess and sepsis and as a result was transferred to a French hospital ship,
the Duguay-Trouin. He died at 4:46 pm on 24 April, 1915 and was buried in an
olive grove on the island of Skyros.

An unlikely death-- as odd and irregular as that of Aeschylus (struck on the
head by a tortoise dropped by an eagle), or Isadora Duncan (strangled by a scarf
entangled in the wheels of a motor-car). Or the unfortunate composer Jean-
Baptiste Lully, who, while conducting in the traditional manner by beating time
with staff, accidentally knocked his own foot, causing an abscess which became
gangrenous and fatal. Alas, no antibiotics in 1687.

My guess is that if Brooke had not been bitten and had survived Gallipoli (where
his ship was headed), the "pure and elevated patriotism" displayed in "The
Soldier" might have become less enthusiastic. Brooke  might have evolved in a
direction similar to that of his jaded-about-warfare contemporaries Siegfried
Sassoon, Wilfrid Owen, Isaac Rosenberg, Ivor Gurney, and Edward Thomas. But
we'll never know.

Source: 2013/01/edward-thomas

Title: A New Biography of Edward Thomas
Date: January 11, 2013

I've just finished a genuinely wonderful new biography by Matthew Hollis
called Now All Roads Lead to France, a Life of Edward Thomas. I'm dazzled, and
glad to be so. The book is carefully and comprehensively researched, literate,
sensible, and compassionate. Its author is confident enough not to overwhelm the
poor reader with pounds of extraneous detail. I'm not easily rivetted, but this
biography was truly rivetting. Thank you, Matthew Hollis.

I'm a longtime Edward Thomas enthusiast. Thomas learned how to employ the
language really used by men more successfully than some of his highly-regarded
predecessors. I didn't know much about Thomas's life, and therefore hadn't
realized (though I might have guessed had I been more astute) how much Thomas
had learned from Robert Frost. The two became inseparable friends during Frost's
English years and spent hours and hours together, neglecting their wives and
families but talking poetry and poetic language. Clearly, they cross-fertilized.

In fact, if you listen closely, you can hear overtones of Frost in Thomas's
best-known poem.

Yes, I remember Adlestrop -- The name, because one afternoon Of heat the
express-train drew up there Unwontedly. It was late June. The steam hissed.
Someone cleared his throat. No one left and no one came On the bare platform.
What I saw Was Adlestrop -- only the name And willows, willow-herb, and grass,
And meadowsweet, and haycocks dry, No whit less still and lonely fair Than
the high cloudlets in the sky. And for that minute a blackbird sang Close by,
and round him, mistier, Farther and farther, all the birds Of Oxfordshire and
Gloucestershire.

The first line of the poem is so casual and demotic that it sounds like what
later came to be called "found poetry." I'm glad to know that there is an actual
Adlestrop up there in the Cotswolds, though surely Thomas was well aware that
"Adlestrop" sounds as though it were invented by the Ministry of Silly Names.

The poem is a latter-day pastoral which contrasts the hiss of industrial steam
with the with perennial birdsong and cloudlets. A brief ecstatic revelation.

My all-time favorite poem by Thomas is this blank-verse masterpiece:

As the team's head-brass flashed out on the turnThe lovers disappeared into
the wood.I sat among the boughs of the fallen elmThat strewed the angle of the
fallow, andWatched the plough narrowing a yellow squareOf charlock. Every time
the horses turnedInstead of treading me down, the ploughman leanedUpon the
handles to say or ask a word, About the weather, next about the war.Scraping
the share he faced towards the wood, And screwed along the furrow till the
brass flashedOnce more.The blizzard felled the elm whose crestI sat in, by a
woodpecker's round hole, The ploughman said. 'When will they take it away?
''When the war's over.' So the talk began –One minute and an interval of ten,
A minute more and the same interval.'Have you been out? ' 'No.' 'And don't want
to, perhaps? ''If I could only come back again, I should.I could spare an arm,
I shouldn't want to loseA leg. If I should lose my head, why, so, I should want
nothing more...Have many goneFrom here? ' 'Yes.' 'Many lost? ' 'Yes, a good
few.Only two teams work on the farm this year.One of my mates is dead. The
second dayIn France they killed him. It was back in March, The very night of the
blizzard, too. Now ifHe had stayed here we should have moved the tree.''And I
should not have sat here. EverythingWould have been different. For it would have
beenAnother world.' 'Ay, and a better, thoughIf we could see all all might seem
good.' ThenThe lovers came out of the wood again: The horses started and for the
last timeI watched the clods crumble and topple overAfter the ploughshare and
the stumbling team.

Source: 2013/01/sonnet-for-my-father

Title: Sonnet for My Father
Date: January 12, 2013

I did not know that Edward Thomas sometimes made use of the entries in his
journal as the raw material for his poetry.

His practice is not unique. Ben Jonson boasted that he wrote all his poems in
prose first, then re-wrote them into verse.

So I decided to try an experiment. I took a blog post, written some years ago,
called What My Father Ate. For ease of reference, I reproduce it here.

"Sardines, by the tinful. Herrings, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed
never to eat tongue again, and I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken liver.
Steak, when we could afford it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen
meats -- salami, baloney, corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of
Heinz. Apples, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially
white chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, covered with gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. No alcohol, nary a drop. On hot days,
no beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee. Cheese, either Velveeta or
swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb cake direct  from Ebinger's
Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat.
Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning, bagels and rolls, warm from the oven,
eaten while reading the Times (25 cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream,
the more exotic the flavor the better."

And then I turned it into a sonnet, with these results.

Fragrant, oily iridescent sardines,

Herring by the tinful, gefilte fish;

Lima beans, soaked, boiled, mashed and then buttered

Crowding the flesh to the edge of the dish.

Salami, baloney, baked beans, and tongue.

Chopped chicken liver, calf liver with bacon,

Corned beef, frankfurters slathered with mustard

Pastrami -- and anything delicatessen.

Roast pork with applesauce, roasted potatoes.

Black radish, gribbinis, onions, and rye bread,

Cheese -- cream,  Velveeta or Swiss --  on a bagel.

On Sundays, Ebinger’s crumb cake instead.

Apples, core and all, gnawed  down to the stem.

The flesh, the seeds, the skin – all gone just like him.

Doesn't seem to work for me. I guess you have to be a poet, which I obviously am
not. Or perhaps there's a problem with the raw material.

Source: 2013/01/edwardandedna

Title: Edward and Edna
Date: January 15, 2013

Edward Thomas died at the battle of Arras, in France, in April of 1917. He was
thirty-nine years old.

In this picture, he looks intense, suspicious, soulful, possibly even poetic,
-- but not the suffering-soul-kind of poet. When he joined the military, he
transformed himself into the stereotype of an officer. The new "look" was not a
success, in my opinion.

Before he went off to the war, Edward Thomas conducted a flirtation and possibly
an affair but more probably what they called in those inhibited days a "romantic
friendship" with Edna Clarke Hall. She was a beautiful, intelligent woman, an
artist. Here she is looking positively post-Pre-Raphaelite.

And here again -- youthful, delicate and glowing.

After Edward died, his wife Helen, herself a gifted, attractive and certainly
long-suffering woman,  wrote to Edna. "Why wasn't I beautiful to Edward? Oh,
I did so long for your beauty not to take it from him, not take but give, to
have hair & eyes & mouth & that something else....  I remember you so clearly
standing for all I longed to have to give him."

I am moved by Helen's grief and also by her generosity.

Edna Clarke Hall died at age 100 in 1979.

Source: 2013/01/markwayne-mullins-1

Title: Representative Markwayne Mullin
Date: January 15, 2013

I listened to an interview with Markwayne Mullin, a new member of the House of
Representatives, and had a hard time believing my ears. It wasn't that he was
inarticulate or stupid. It was that he was so utterly smug, so absolutely and
entirely certain of himself. He has no doubts. He knows exactly what ails the
country -- too much government -- and he knows how to fix it -- lower taxes,
less regulation, more free untrammeled capitalism. He does not seem to be aware
that the United States of America is a big, complicated, multi-faceted country.
Markwayne Mullin possesses all the arrogance of ignorance, in spades.

Here's some proverbial wisdom: "For every complex problem, there's a simple
solution, and it's wrong."

My father, who was not a military man, always liked to vote for people who had
served in the Army or Navy. "At least," he would say, "they have met people from
other parts of the country. Maybe they've served abroad and seen something of
the world."

Markwayne Mullin hasn't served in the military and there's no evidence on his
website that he's traveled far from his home of Westville (population 1596) in
Adair County in eastern Oklahoma. Here is Main Street, Westville:

He went off to college (Missouri Valley College, which, curiously, doesn't teach
foreign languages) but didn't stay long. His website says he's a successful
businessman, a plumber. More precisely (and I'll let his prose speak for
itself), "Mullin is proud to have turned a family trade into a thriving
business. Mullin Plumbing is most recognized due to its advertising and the
more than 100 employees known for their hallmark red vans visible servicing
Oklahomans across the state. For his part, Markwayne personally promotes the
company through television and radio advertising. One of his favorite jobs is to
produce and host the radio call-in talk show “House Talk.”

His positions are straightforward and clear (and red, red, red) -- an entirely
unoriginal litany of right-wing simplicities and pieties.

We are taxed enough. Cutting spending, not raising taxes, is the answer to
paying down debt.

The 2nd Amendment is crucial to ensuring our freedom.

Excessive government regulations, like those promulgated by the EPA, harm job
growth.

We must restrain an out-of-control bureaucracy.

Life — from the moment of conception to natural death — is sacred. I am a
100 percent pro-life conservative.

Our United States troops must NEVER be under control of the United Nations.

We spend too much on foreign aid. Our challenges here at home must come first.

Private industry creates jobs. The government creates dependency.

Traditional marriage, between one man and one woman, is a sacred institution
that must be preserved. Strong, healthy families are the heartbeat of our
nation.

Parents should have final decision-making authority in the education of their
children, because they know better than Washington, D.C., bureaucrats how to
best educate their children.

ObamaCare must be repealed.

Ensuring access to quality, affordable health care is one of America’s
greatest challenges today. The free market will meet the challenge if the
government will get out of the way. We must cautiously seek comprehensive reform
that protects the solvency of Medicare and Medicaid.

We must protect America’s borders to stop illegal immigration. Amnesty
proposals should be rejected.

Penalties should be strengthened against illegal immigration and law enforcement
given the resources for enforcement.

If it had been one of those call-in radio shows, I would have liked to ask Mr
Mullin a couple of questions, such as, how are we going to get the lettuce
picked and the roof fixed without all those immigrant laborers? How come life
expectancy is lower in the US than in socialist Europe, even though we spend
more on health care? How much do we actually spend on "foreign aid"? Who exactly
wants to put US troops under the control of the United Nations? Are people
like me, retired teachers who worked only for the government, really all that
dependent? and compared to whom? Who's attacking your traditional marriage
that you need to get all in a twist about other people's marriages? How come
when a not-for-profit hospital is taken over by a for-profit hospital, the
mortality rate immediately rises? To whom should we turn when the cantaloupe is
contaminated? Should we worry about global warming? Should we be concerned by
the concentration of wealth among the top 1% of families.What happens when a big
hunking tornado rips through Adair County?

My hope is that Markwayne Mullin, who as he begins his congressional career is
superficial to the very core of his being, will come to Washington, meet some
folks from different parts of the country and from different ethnic backgrounds,
learn a little about the world, come to an appreciation of the complexity of
things, and grow up to be a useful broad-minded compassionate public servant.
It's not impossible, but it's not going to happen until Mullin realizes that
he doesn't know everything about everything, and that the practices that made
Mullin Plumbing such a success may not be the same practices that will promote
the general welfare over all of the US of A.

I'm hopeful, but frankly, I'm not at all optimistic.

Source: 2013/01/large-mammal-news-

Title: Large Mammal News from Boulder, Colorado
Date: January 20, 2013

Mountain lions frequently wander from the foothills right into the heart of
town. It's routine for them to "take" a pet cat or dog. A full-grown mountain
lion can jump over the 8-foot chain link fence behind which you've sequestered
your golden retriever, kill it, and then grab it with its mouth and bound back
over the fence. The young lion pictured above has found itself on someone's back
deck. Good thing that there are no children enjoying themselves on the swings to
its left.

The lion doesn't seem to be fazed by her near-cousinhood to behind-glass-door
domesicated kitty. Stay inside, Muffy! You'll have a better day. .

A few months ago, wildlife officers killed a lion that had followed the deer
downtown and "showed no fear of humans." More commonly, officers shoot the lions
with tranquilizer darts and then banish them deep in the mountains west of town.

Mule deer are totally at home in our city. They're so common that no one pays
them much mind, except when they eat the shrubbery and the early spring flowers.
They're so acclimated to humans that they don't even shy when you come right up
to them. They just stare right back at you and go on eating your tulips.

Black bears are also frequent visitors. They patrol unsecured garbage cans,
especially in the fall when they're fattening up for hibernation. Recently, one
of them became quite a celebrity:

It was shot with a tranquilizer dart and dropped from its perch in a tree on to
a mattress, and was then transported back into bear country.

We have another celebrity animal this week, but the story behind it is not so
felicitous. A bull elk has been hanging out, for the last few years, right at
the western edge of town. He's become a friend, or perhaps a totem, to his human
neighbors. But for some stupid reason, two police officers (one of whom owns
a taxidermy studio) decided to kill it. Which they did, with a shotgun. The
"Mapleton Elk" has been mourned with a candlelight vigil; the police officers
have been charged with "suspicion of forgery, tampering with physical evidence,
attempting to influence a public official as well as unlawful taking of a trophy
elk, conspiracy, killing an elk out of season, unlawful use of an electronic
device to unlawfully take wildlife and first degree official misconduct." I'm
not proud of them.

Our local coyotes have also been in the news. Although we've always known they
were around, they've been discreet. But lately, they've taken to harassing
joggers on the Creek Path.

The plan is to "re-educate" them, but "lethal control" has not been ruled out.

Be sensible, coyotes! Stay out of sight. No nipping at the heels of strollers or
bikers.

Source: 2013/01/terpen

Title: Terpen
Date: January 23, 2013

Before there were dikes there were terpen.

I was disgracefully ignorant of terpen until I read Robert Van de Noort's
North Sea Archaeologies: A Maritime Biography, 10,000 BC to AD 1500 (Oxford,
2011). Van de Noort devotes many pages to terpen, which are artificial islands
constructed between 500 BC and 1000 AD in parts of the Netherlands, Denmark,
and Germany. The earliest terpen were simple mounds on which a house was built;
later several or more would be joined together to form small elevated villages
protected against high tides and flooding. They might be as much as forty
feet high. With the coming of dikes (c. 1000-1200 AD), terpen ceased to be
constructed.

Here's a terp, viewed from above.

And here's another, photographed from ground level.

I've been to the lowlands and might have seen these peculiar topographical
features with my own eyes, but I certainly didn't register them. Even if I had,
I might have confused them with the grave barrows or tumuli that are common
in Scythian Bulgaria, or even with drumlins, which have a similar look to the
uneducated eye -- although drumlins are natural rather than man-made.

I love it that "terpen" retains its ancient plural, along with words such as
oxen and brethren. There aren't many such words in the language (children is a
reduplicated plural, the original "-er" plural supplemented by an -en plural --
and some day to be superseded, I predict, by "childrens").

Van de Noort's book is fascinating reading for those who like terpen and bronze-
age sewn plank boats and such. It's rich in detail but might have been even
richer if the author hadn't felt the need to waste space by calling the seashore
a "place of liminality" and shipboard "a heterotopia sailing upon the Deleuzian
ocean" -- and also indulge himself with many unconvincing  speculations
dependent on such peculiar,  modish, transitory vocabulary.

When it comes to odd words, give me the old ones every time. Here are some
satisfying lovely words that were as new to me as terpen: saltern (an area in
fenlands set aside for salt manufacture); cofferdam (a temporary dam), thwart
(a seat in a rowboat), leister (a two-pronged spear for fishing), dromond (a
medieval galley) and broch (a dry-stone tower).

Source: 2013/01/persona

Title: Revisiting Persona: 1967-2013
Date: January 30, 2013

When I saw Ingmar Bergman's Persona in 1967, I was pretty much baffled. Oh, I
understood the translated dialogue, and I understood the general idea that the
two women were similar and possiby melding into one, whatever that might mean,
but I didn't understand what it all signified, or how the "plot" was related to
the repeated abstract collages and to the heavy-handed religious symbolism. It's
hard to recall whether I was intimidated by the film or resented it -- I think
both, alternately and sometimes simultaneously.  Did I mumble under my breath,
"pretentious fraud?"  I can't say for sure.

I saw Persona again last night. I would like to tell you all, faithful readers,
that I have grown and matured into a discerning viewer, and that the once-opaque
film is now transparent. But I can't. It's still just as mysterious as it was
almost fifty years ago.  And I'm just as slow, or insensitive, or unaesthetic.

Even the "self-reflexive" moments -- i.e. when the audience is allowed to see
the camera -- seem obvious and not especially clever. Everyone has always known
that films are films. So what?

Inasmuch as I've seen many more films by Bergman (and many that I admire
tremendously), I am prepared to indulge the auteur. I think Persona is just so
personal to Bergman that it doesn't communicate. Whatever else it might be, it's
astonishingly self-indulgent. I confess that, at heart, I'm still suspicious of
the people who claim to understand and who are eager to explicate.

To the MGM DVD of Persona, an interview with Bibi Andersson, who spoke almost
all the film's dialogue, was appended. Ms. Andersson said that she knows that
some people considered Persona to be Bergman's masterpiece, but that she herself
didn't understand it.

I admire her candor.

Source: 2013/02/amnesia-on-film-private-life-of-sherlock-holmes

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes (1970)
Date: February 03, 2013

As far as I can remember, and I've read the stories many times, Conan Doyle's
Sherlock Holmes never had to deal with amnesia, which in those days of reading
and writing had not yet become the most routine of plot devices. The Holmes of
Billy Wilder's movie runs into amnesia straight off the bat, when Gabrielle
Valladon, a handsome though mighty bedraggled woman, appears at 221-B Baker
Street apparently suffering a loss of memory precipitated by both a bump on
the head and a near drowning in the Thames. But there's a gimmick within the
gimmick: Mme. Valladon's amnesia is totally fraudulent. The lady is in "fact" a
German spy pretending loss of memory in order to insinuate herself into Holmes'
sympathies.

The audience falls for it, which is not a surprise, because we watchers have
been indoctrinated to willingly and enthusiastically suspend our disbelief at
the slightest hint of film's most common malady. But that Holmes should succumb
-- well, that's a bit of a disappointment. Fictional Holmes would have been a
lot more discerning, amnesia-wise, than filmic Holmes.

Source: 2013/02/helen-thomas-storms-wing

Title: Nineteenth-Century Romance
Date: February 08, 2013

I've several times poked fun at sad instances of Victorian sexual prudery. If,
gentle reader, you doubt that I'm capable of prude-pokery, check here, here and
here.

My mild animosity toward the sexual silliness of our ancestors originated in
my childhood. My father, though in most things a font of good common sense,
was, sexually speaking, very much a old-fashioned dyed-in-the-wool Victorian.
Whenever a discussion of sex or anatomy or reproduction would arise in our
house, he would immediately turn red and stumble out of the room. Early on, I
learned not to ask. On the few occasions when my poor papa mumbled something
before he bolted, his information was always uninformed, frequently wrong, and
occasionally dangerous.

My father inhabited an earlier psychological universe and he couldn't possibly
have imagined how the  invisible worm has turned. If he were alive today, he
couldn't watch movies or TV or read novels. Too much gross language, too much
frankness, too much nudity, too much casual coupling. He would have been aghast
and embarrassed.

Nevertheless, repression has its compensations. It is absolutely clear to me
that people of his generation and earlier experienced pleasures that cannot be
realized now. The brave new libertine world of hooking up and sloppy drunken sex
and XXX sites gratifies the instincts, but at significant cost.

Return we now to the last years of the nineteenth century, when Helen and the
great poet Edward Thomas went a-courting. In their young twenties, a couple of
years into their anguished relationship, they (in Helen's words)

were sitting in the undergrowth of a little copse in a remote part of the
common. Edward had said that he had never seen a woman's body, and I do not
remember quite how it came about, but I quite naturally and simply without any
feeling of shyness, knelt up in our secret bower and undid my clothes, and let
them fall about my knees so that to the knees I was naked.  I knew my body was
pretty, my breasts wre firm and round and neither too small nor too large, and
my neck and shoulders made a pleasant line, and my arms were rounded and white,
and though my hips were small, the line of the waist was lovely.  I was proud
of my body, and took the most innocent pleasure in its lines and health and
strength. So we knelt in the grass and dead leaves of the copse opposite to each
other, he silent and I laughing with joy to feel the air on my skin, and to see
his enraptured gaze. For as he knelt he gazed wonderstruck and almost adoring,
quite still, quite silent, looking now and then in my eyes with a serious
ecstatic look, his eyes full of tenderness and love, searching mine for any sign
of regret or shyness. He did not touch me, but just knelt there letting hie eyes
take their fill of the beauty that was filling his soul with delight. When,
without a word, I lifted my clothes about me, he helping me, he only then said,
'Helen, I did not know there was such beauty.'

Scoff as you will, ungentle readers.

I know -- it's prettified and romanticized. But it's an innocence that cannot
be invented. And I'm not scoffing. I don't think that there's a person on our
continent or in our century as naive as Edward Thomas was in England in 1898.
Nor do I think that there's anyone who could say what he said, and say it with
such bedazzled and wonderful sincerity: "Helen, I did not know there was such
beauty."

It's a world that we have lost.

(Helen Thomas unveils in her memoir, Under Storm's Wing).

Source: 2013/02/bergmans-the-seventh-seal

Title: Ingmar Bergman's The Seventh Seal
Date: February 10, 2013

I remember that my first and until yesterday sole viewing of Bergman's The
Seventh Seal took place in August of 1958 at one of those big old downtown
Brooklyn movie palaces. I was in the company of Leigh Anderson and Alice Bruno,
who might not remember the day -- or remember me, for that matter.

It was a memorable occasion because Bergman mattered, or so it seemed at the
time. Like everyone in my age-cohort, I had grown up on westerns and crime and
horror and musicals. I knew what to expect in a movie theatre. A beginning, a
middle and an end, for one thing. A resolution. But then along came Fellini and
Kurosawa and Bergman and the rules changed. It was exciting and puzzling and
like other observant college kids, I was trying to figure it all out. Movies had
been Saturday entertainment;  I did not know that thee could be "intellectual."

The Seventh Seal took me by surprise in all kinds of ways. It was episodic and
the episodes didn't tie together into a linear narrative. Its emotional range --
from sexy to sordid to brutal to picturesque to ruminative -- was more than I
could fathom or follow. It didn't have a Hollywood plot -- no one ended up with
the money or the girl.  And then there were these long brooding silent shots in
which the point lay in the cinematography (I word I didn't wouldn't learn for
twenty years). I had no vocabulary to help me understand what I saw -- I didn't
even know the word "allegory", or if I did, I didn't connect it with movies.

Last night, The Seventh Seal came around again, this time not in a palace but
right there on the big hdtv.  I was hoping it would still be as magical as
it was in the 1950s, but alas, not so. It seemed, I'm sorry to say, stagey
and contrived and pretentious. The allegory -- the despairing knight's search
for meaning in a godless universe -- came across, last night, as shallow. The
discovery that there ain't a god out there does not shock this born and raised
atheist, although I do feel for Bergman and all those others whom it cost so
dearly to surrender the illusion.

Source: 2013/02/why-we-love-kenneth-faried

Title: Why We Love Kenneth Faried
Date: February 12, 2013

Because he plays with infectious enthusiasm. Because he's undersized for his
position but unfazed. Because he plays a better game today than he did last
week. Because he's so often the first man down the floor, outrunning and
outhustling his opponent. Because he's not the most gifted athlete in the
league, but he makes the most of his abilities. Because he plays within himself
and doesn't force up bad shots. Because he can score fifteen or twenty points a
game without a play being called for him.

Sure, he's occasionally out of place on defense.True, he hasn't yet learned how
to play the pick and roll. His offensive games is limited to putbacks and short
jumpers. And sometimes he has a bad game because the opponent is bigger and
better.

But he's learning. He's coachable.

And because he's the first NBA player to pledge support for gay rights. (Kenneth
has two mothers and he "loves them both.") Congratulations, Kenneth Faried, for
speaking out.

Source: 2013/03/redskins-injuns-native-americans

Title: Redskins /Injuns/ Native Americans/ Human Beings
Date: March 11, 2013

In the beginning there was Tonto, the "faithful Indian companion" and there were
"renegades" who didn't want to live on the reservation. I was a perfectly naive
urban lad, and of course I bought the whole package.

In my defense, I early developed serious qualms at the Saturday westerns
where buckskinned redskins were regularly drilled by six-shooters to fall
picturesquely from pinnacles or palaminos. My first serious movie, Red River,
featured a memorable and even-then-revolting scene in which redskins were
remorselessly and shockingly slaughtered.

I'm proud to say that early on I started to identify with the underdogs.
Renegades indeed? But some of my sympathy was bought with eroticized stereotypes
of women (such as Debra Paget in Broken Arrow). And then there were Rudy York
and Allie Reynolds, who were real people. How to reconcile the stereotypes to
the facts? Beyond my childhood abilities.

It's astonishing how much of my view of our native cousins was generated by the
movies. And by Fenimore Cooper as well, although at this present moment the
only clear remembrance of the Leatherstocking saga that remains in my mind is a
gruesome scene in which fiendish Mohawk "squaws" torture a white captive.

In school there were maps of territory inhabited by the Navajos and the Iriquois
and the Comanche and the Pawnee. All very exotic but I for one had no concept
that these names signfied people with lives and identities and histories. P. S.
217 textbooks certainly did not use the word "genocide."

In the 1960s, I read perhaps a hundred "captivity narratives."  And also
Theodora Kroeber's very moving biography of Ishi. Exposure to these books opened
my mind.

And since then I've visited the cliff dwellings in Mesa Verde and read about
the vast city of Cahokia. But my knowledge remains literary, rather than
experiential. Although I live in the great west (and just two blocks from
Arapahoe Avenue), I've rarely encountered genuine native Americans -- they're
mighty scarse in these parts. And the few folks whom I've met who claim Indian
"blood" are far blonder than I.

Source: 2013/03/neanderthal-news

Title: Neanderthal News
Date: March 15, 2013

We were not always the earth's sole hominid. Neanderthals (and Denisovans, and
Homo floresiensis (if they were truly distinct species) overlapped our time. 
Here are two skeletons, one of ours and one of theirs.

The first Neanderthals appeared perhaps a quarter of a million years ago
and certainly by 170,000 years BP. They seem to have supplanted Homo
heidlebergensis, a more distant cousin of ours, and they flourished from Spain
to Israel, as far north as Finland, and possibly as far east as the Altai
mountains in Siberia. In order to live in cold climates, they would have
clothed themselves, though of course not a trace of a garment has survived.
Neanderthals, it's been newly determined, carried a gene associated with pale
skin and red hair. Their brain cases were slightly larger than ours, but shaped
differently --  bulging at the sides and protruding in the back. Their rib
cases flared at the bottom and their pelvises were broad, which meant that their
strides necessarily involved a lot more hip rotation than our straightforward
gait. They were more robust than we, with heavier bones and muscles, and they
were much stronger. They ate more than we did and matured more rapidly -- their
wisdom teeth developed at six years of age. Earlier Neanderthal populations
appear to have been scavengers, but later ones were predators, capable of taking
mammoths and wooly rhinoceroses. The plaque of Neanderthal teeth reveal traces
of phytoliths which occur in the roots and leaves of plants. It's known that
they ate dates, barley and legumes. Both meat and plants were cooked. There is
some fragmentary evidence that they practiced cannibalism, but, I'd prefer to
think, only "survival cannibalism."  Neanderthals lived in bands or perhaps 8
or 10 members. They occasionally buried their dead, but left behind no evidence
of ritual or ceremony. They knapped chert and flint into scrapers and hand axes
and the knew how to bind stone to wooden handles with adhesives and sinew, but
they did not make use of bone tools.

They were gone from the earth about 20,000 years ago, displaced by homines
sapientes and perhaps reduced by changes in the climate or by other destructive
natural events.

Humans of European origin (but not of African or Asian) interbred with
Neanderthals, so that as much of 4% of human DNA is Neanderthal. On ther other
hand, no Homo sapiens DNA has been discovered in Neanderthal populations. No one
knows why the one and not the other.

This report is filched from Ian Tattersall's Masters of the Planet (2012), an
excellent book that brought me up to date on human origins. I recommend it
with genuine enthusiasm. It's learned, clearly written, and sensible. And it
displaces the cartoon history I grew up with in which monkeys lead to apes and
then to Piltdown (!!!) man and then to insurance salesmen in tie and jacket. 
The modern picture is more complicated and far more fascinating and also replete
with unsolved puzzles.

Source: 2013/04/stephen-maxfield-parrish-1922-2012

Title: Stephen Maxfield Parrish, 1922-2012
Date: April 02, 2013

Now only one of my teachers survives -- and then only because he's a
centenarian. Steve Parrish, next-to-last, who was very kind to me back there
in the 1950s, died a year ago at the age of 90. News travels slowly.  I now
realize that Steve was only a couple of years out of grad school when I met him
(his career started late because of two Navy stints, one in WWII and one in
Korea). He was disarmingly casual, but nevertheless learned and intelligent. In
retrospect, I am stunned that he was able to listen to my adolescent blather
with a straight face. I also remember a dinner at his home where his genial
demeanor was taxed by the ferocity of his then-wife. Of his famous grandfather,I
tried but never got him to say a word. Letters and postcards from him were
appropriately signed, "Affably, SMP.  I remember that he helped me with my
undergraduate thesis, helped me to win a Wilson, and wouldn't let me quit the
"large Eastern university" to which he had sent me when I wanted to come back
home to the alma mater far above Cayuga's waters.

I should have thanked him. Too late.

Source: 2013/04/hyena-news

Title: Hyena News
Date: April 26, 2013

It had been a long time since I'd read a decent hyena book, so I opened Mikita
Brottman's Hyena (London, 2012) with great anticipation.

I'm sorry to report that it was a bit of a disappointment: not nearly enough
biology and too much undigested "reception history."  Yes, it's true that
hyenas are regarded with almost universal fear and revulsion. perhaps because
they dig up corpses and run off with young children. But I knew that. And
although Brottman mentions the unusual sexual apparatus of female hyenas, which
causes so much difficulty with copulation and childbirth, she neglected to
remind us that hyena males lack a baculum.

Good pictures, however.  Here's one.

Not particularly lovable, I think.

I've seen a lot of stuffed animals in baby's cribs, but I've never seen a cute
stuffed hyena. Merely a sampling error, it turns out. Stuffed hyenas suitable
for your newborn are available on the internet,

Nevertheless, I a bit skeptical that hyenas will ever outsell the bunnies and
puppies.

Source: 2013/05/shakuntala-devi

Title: Shakuntala Devi's Brain
Date: May 09, 2013

Shakuntala Devi, who died in India a week or so ago, was an incredible
arithmetician. She once "accurately multiplied two random 13-digit numbers in
a few seconds." "On a visit to this country, an American psychologist set her
two problems: the cube root of 61,629,875, and the seventh root of 170,859,375.
Shakuntala Devi gave the correct answers - 395 and 15 - even before he started
his stopwatch."

No one knows how she did this. No one has even advanced a persuasive theory.

It's difficult for me to remember a thirteen-digit number. I don't think I could
remember two thirteen-digit numbers. It's beyond my imagination to think about
multiplying them (to produce the correct twenty-six digit answer).

I'm wondering whether Devi's abilities seem so astonishing because she's out
there all by herself. If there were a cohort of people who could easily multiply
8, 9, or 12 digit numbers it wouldn't seem so wonderful that she could do 13.
But she's unique.

And intimidating.

But then I'm intimidated by Mozart, whose feats are also beyond imagining.

I wonder whether Ms. Devi carried some sort of genetic mutation. Is remarkable
proficiency at mental arithmetic an inheritable trait?  Which makes me wonder,
when did homines sapientes acquire the ability to learn the times table?  When
did the mutation for that trait first appear?

I telephoned my consultant on such matters, the blogger Political Mammal. He
says that the ordinary brain, yours and mine, does so many calculations just
when we walk down the street and compare this storefront to the one that went
out of business and to the similar one on the next block that, well,  we should
be just as astonished at quotidian events as at mental arithmetic.  I see his
point. Who knows how many synapses are firing now, even as I'm writing this
simplicity-itself post.

But writing a few words is a commonplace miracle;  extracting seventh roots --
now, that's something else.

Source: 2013/05/amnesia

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Vow (2012)
Date: May 20, 2013

Amnesia movies continue to thrive. This latest, The Vow, made a bunch of money
but was widely panned.  And should have been. It's a sad sad day when the
amnesia is more credible than the male lead.

The Vow purports to be based on the story of Krickitt (sic) Pappas, who lost
the memory of eighteen months of her life in a automobile accident. Her husband
re-courted her. and re-won her; they lived happily ever after. They're sticking
to the story that she never regained her memory of those lost months.

i have no particular reason to doubt the tale, improbably though it might seen.
The brain is another country; they do things differently there. And Rachel
McAdams, who plays Krickitt, is the most persuasive amnesia-victim I've yet
encountered. Because she doesn't take the amnesia for granted, Hollywood-wise,
but struggles to figure it all out, she seems to be genuinely afflicted.

Nevertheless, it's incredible that she should be in love with that lump of all
lumps, the lumpish Channing Tatum, who turns his character, Kim Carpenter, into
a affectless lump.  I've encounted talentless actors in my life, but Tatum is
something special.

Nor do I believe that the lovers either met or were reunited at the "Cafe
Mnemonic."

The Vow is pure, unashamed soap opera, although it is more credible about the
disease than most amnesia offerings, perhaps because it offers no cooked-up,
nonce oversimpliication of what's going on in the brain.

Source: 2013/06/fowles

Title: Fowles, Snakes, etc.
Date: June 13, 2013

On the whole, Fowles, as befit his name, was a birder rather than a "snaker,"
so I don't know how he stumbled upon Clifford Pope's The Great Snakes. I am
not surprised that the one fact that Fowles gleaned from Pope's herpetological
knowledge that "snakes copulate for hours, sometimes a day at a time."  A very
Fowlesian piece of information.

I am surprised that he also reported in his journal the same snake anecdote that
Dr. Metablog noted right here on this very blog. Back in 2006, Dr. M.  made
mention of the instructions provided to early African missionaries on the proper
response to meeting one of those 25-foot-long,  300-pound reticulated Burmese
pythons. I found it in a book called Man the Hunted. Here's the story:

Remember not to run away; the python can run faster. The thing to do is to lie
flat on the ground on your back with your feet together, arms to the sides
and head well down. The python will then try to push its head under you,
experimenting at every possible point. Keep calm, one wiggle and he will get
under you, wrap his coils round you and crush you to death. After a time the
python will get tired of this and will probably decide to swallow you without
the usual preliminaries. He will very likely begin with one of your feet. Keep
calm. You must let him swallow your foot. It is quite painless and will take a
long time. If you lose your head and struggle he will quickly whip his coils
around you. If you keep calm, he will go on swallowing. Wait patiently until
he has swallowed about up to your knee. Then carefully take out your knife and
insert it into the distended side of his mouth and with a quick rip slit him up.

In 2006, Dr M. wrote:  "Well-meant advice, I'm sure, but perhaps difficult to
follow. Suppose you're just not in the mood to allow the python such liberties
with your person. Suppose you've forgotten to bring your knife; suppose
the python decides to start with your head rather than a foot. Suppose you
involuntarily wiggle just a teensy bit. Suppose you just don't feel that it's a
good day to be engulfed."  Fowles' comment is shorter but equally pertinent. 
He writes:  "And spend the rest of your life in an asylum."

When I realized that Fowles and I had a common interest in giant man-eating
snakes, I decided that the least I could to honor his memory was re-read The
Magus. Which I did, at first with enthusiasm and then with increasing dismay
as the the novel's flaws began to overwhelm its beauties. The Magus is too
contrived, too obvious. Nicholas Urfe, the naif, is so unsuspicious that he is
fooled by Conchis, the magician, over and over again -- many more times than is
remotely credible. The reader (the 2013 reader, that is, not the 1965 reader)
catches to the repeated gimmickry. But then after Urfe realize that he's been
sadistically manipulated, he stockholm-syndromes his tormentors far too rapidly
and cursorily.  It should take as much time to heal as to be harmed. As a
result the book is out of balance -- too long in the middle, too short in the
resolution. And then on top of that there's the heavy-handed Jungstuff and the
grade-school pop Freudianism!! O my gosh. I was embarrassed. And in addtion,
there is the deeply, unliberated Victorian attitudes toward sexuality in a book
that claims to be "advanced."  Anyway, it just did not work this time through.
What a disappoingment.

And I'm disappointed in Fowles as well. I began to read his journals in the hope
that he would be  complex and philosophical and aware, but, no, he was just
like me -- simple, defensive, insecure.

And what a snob: so much and so often worried about his bourgeois background and
so ashamed of his  well-meaning parents.

Most unforgiveable is not that he ran off with his best friend's wife, but that
he wouldn't let Elizabeth keep her daughter. He made her choose between him and
her own child.  In my view, a man should never come between a parent, a mother,
and her offspring. It's a violation of the natural order, if there is such a
thing as the natural order.

Nevertheless, I'm clinging to my most positive memoriesof Fowles The French
Lieutenant's Woman, which I still believe to be a novel that will last.  But
frankly, I'm just a tad frightened to re-read it.

Source: 2013/06/colloquial-conversation-in-othello

Title: "Colloquial Conversation" in Othello
Date: June 29, 2013

There is an ocean of difference between colloquial conversation in real life and
the dialogue that appears in Shakespeare's works, even when his plays are at
their least artificial and most mimetic.

In its most ordinary use, the word "conversation" means nothing more that the
talk in which real men and women engage in the greater part of their social
lives. These conversations might include formal or semi-formal events such
as oration, debate, interview, negotiation, interrogation, official inquiry,
ceremony , arbitration, sermon, lecture etc. -- all of them linguistic
interactions that are governed by specific although for the most part
unarticulated rules. "Colloquial" conversation, on the other hand, refers
specifically to the wave of informal, unplanned, unregulated and unrehearsed
exchanges that occur over dinner, on the street, by the water-cooler, at the
tavern. Such conversations, although not incapable of eloquence, are on the
whole disorderly, sprawling and haphazard. They are brimful of uncompleted
or suspended thoughts (or thoughts introduced by one interlocutor and then
either completed or re-directed by another), with syntactic collapse and
improvisation, with references to shared experience that may seem to be grand
leaps of logic to an eavesdropper but that are perfectly intelligible to the
participants, with mumbles and grunts, extended pauses (some meaningless, some
momentous), with apparently inexplicable ellipses, with overlaps in which a
number of participants speak simultaneously, with unmediated zigzags from the
profound to the trivial, with repetitions and backtracks, with mis-speakings,
mis-hearings, clarifications, false starts, fragments, non-verbal but sometimes
significant ecphoneses or "response cries" (ooh-ooh), and with a flotilla of
other very ordinary and very natural curiosities. Real colloquial conversation
is spontaneous; it is the activity of two or more intelligences working together
to shape meaning. Real talk is essentially untranscribable, and students of
conversation who have made an effort to set such interactions down on paper have
had perforce to resort to elaborate and imperfect diagrams and codes.

In strong contrast, dialogue in Shakespeare's plays very seldom attempts to
approximate colloquial conversation. And with good reason: Elizabethan dramas
seldom stoop to represent the casual situations in which conversation is likely
to occur. Instead, the circumstances upon which the plays dwell are typically
formal or ceremonial, and the dialogue in which they are enacted consists for
the most part of speeches that delineate an emotion or moral response to a
conflict, of debates over the proper course of action, of reports on past or
distant events, as well as judicial or ritualistic confrontation, soliloquy,
meditation, prayer, boast, threat and counter-threat and various other kinds of
regulated discourse in which the artless and random quality of ordinary talk
would be entirely inappropriate. The dialogue in comedies, though in a different
register, is equally artificial, consisting as it does, of wit-combats, jests,
and the conceits that clownage keeps in pay. Shakespeare's most colloquial
exchanges, unlike real-life conversation, are on the whole orderly, sequential,
composed in intelligible syntax and in complete thoughts. It goes without saying
that dramatic dialogue is, with the exception of the rare improvisational
moment, not spontaneous at all but the studied product of a single controlling
intelligence.

During the first years of his career as a playwright, Shakespeare experimented
with a variety of revolutionary ways to compose dialogue (not generally, but
on propitious occasions) that, although not in any real sense congruent to
actual spoken conversation, nevertheless managed to create the illusion of a
natural and colloquial sound. The employment of dialogue that might pass for
real utterance was not an inheritance from earlier dramatists but was a craft
that Shakespeare had to develop on his own. The fabrication of such dialogue is
an unobtrusive art that does not call attention to itself -- in point of fact,
colloquial conversation is most successful when it is least noticeable. While
the great leviathan examples of Shakespeare's rhetorical mastery have been
subjected to exhaustive analysis, colloquial conversation is so small and so
inconspicuous a fish that it has managed for hundreds of years to slip the nets
of critical analysis.

There is a finely-crafted instance of seemingly-natural colloquial conversation
in Othello.

As Emilia helps Desdemona prepare herself for bed, the two women gingerly feel
their way toward an issue of great sensitivity -- the domination of women by
men. It is a relaxed and intimate conference, all the more obviously so because
it follows in the wake of an anguished and highly-wrought -- and rhetorically
elevated -- scene in which Desdemona has been slandered as an adulterer and as a
daughter of the game.

What techniques does Shakespeare employ to make the exchange between Desdemona
and Emilia appear quite so marvelously natural?

Attempting to console her sorrowful mistress, Emilia offers the opinion that
it would have been better if Desdemona had never known Othello. Desdemona
contradicts her serving-woman:

Des.  So would not I:  my love dost so approve him,

That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns

(Prithee unpin me) have grace and favor.

"Prithee unpin me" comes as a genuine surprise because it is syntactically
discontinuous from the sentence in which it is embedded. It's a separate topic.
Dialogue in Elizabethan drama ordinarily deals with issues sequentially rather
than simultaneously, but dialogue begins to sound a bit like conversation when
the interlocutors engage more than one subject at a time. That the two themes
of the discourse are located on different rhetorical levels (the rather formal
series of nouns in parallel -- stubbornness, checks, frowns-- in contraste to
the offhand parenthetical instruction), suggests that something interesting and
different is about to occur.

The progress toward real or realistic-sounding conversation, initiated with
"unpin me here," continues when Emilia's response engages neither Othello's
mysterious anger or Desdemona's unpinning, but introduces a third subject: "I
have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed."  With this sentence Emilia does
more than simply resume a discussion of so ordinary a matter as bedclothes, she
also replicates a common feature of colloquial conversation -- its practice of
referring without overt signal to a past mutual experience -- i.e. "you bade
me."

Now Desdemona drifts off in a direction of her own.

All's one:  good faith, how foolish are our minds?

If I do die before, prithee shroud me

In one of these same sheets.

"All[s one" -- with its variant "all's one for that" is a common Elizabethan
demotic catch phrase: here it serves a meaningless filler. Desdemona's meander
from death to shrouds to sheets is designed to reflect her own private, internal
non-volitional synaptic leaps. Her apology - "how foolish are our minds" -
reflects both Desdemona's and Shakespeare's knowledge that the sentences violate
the habit of dramatic dialogue in that they are ordered not by logic but by
association.

Emilia's mild but polite rebuke ("Come, come, you talk") is followed by a
sentence in which Desdemona introduces the fourth separate and distinct subject
of this unfolding conversation.

My mother had a maid called Barbary.

She was in love, and he she loved proved mad,

And did forsake her.

Desdemona has fallen into a reverie in which she re-lives an experience of
the childhood that Shakespeare has newly and spontaneously invented for her.
In these two-and-a-half lines, Shakespeare audaciously allows Desdemona to
introduce three new but extremely pertinent characters: Desdemona's mother,
hitherto unknown to the audience, her mother's forsaken maid Barbary, and
the maid's lunatic and inconstant lover. The effect of Desdemona's brief but
poignant recollection is to reinforce the illusion that she is an autonomous
speaker, giving shape to her sentences as they precipitate out of her battered
and not-entirely-disciplined consciousness. An astute audience (or readership)
will certainly notice that Desdemona projects her own plight onto these
imaginary meta-beings, and although the psychological ramifications of their
creation are rich indeed, Shakespeare's use of these improvised beings to mimic
the habits of real talk is as fully wonderful.

Desdemona continues:

She (.e. Barbary) had song of willow.

An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune.

And she died singing it. That song tonight,

Will not go from my mind. I have much to do

But to go hang my head all at one side

And sing it like poor Barbary..  Prithee dispatch.

To enforce the quotidian quality of the dialogue, Shakespeare invokes a
phenomenon familiar to every reader or hearer: the tune that seems to repeat
of its own accord in one's mind. The result: Desdemona has been provided with
a memory, and her memory holds a song, and that song is now apparently going
to sing itself independent of the character's own will. But what occurs is not
only the illusion that Desdemona reveals an inner experience; it is also that
these reflections are cast in such courageously monosyllabic language. And just
to assure us that the characters not not float from their dock in the material
universe, Desdemona's instruction to Emilia --"Prithee dispatch" - sustains the
exact colloquial mode initiated by "Prithee unpin me" and anchors both women in
the real present.

Both song and reverie are now shunted aside as the conversation comes to a small
climax. The two ladies continue to imitate the randomness of real talk:

Emelia.  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?

Desdemona.  No, unpin me here.

This Ludovico is a proper man.

Emilia.  A very handsome man.

Desdemona:  He speaks well.

Emilia:  I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a
touch of his nether lip.

Desdemona and Emilia drift from topic to topic: nightgowns leads by some
unarticulated but easy-to-imagine route to Ludovico and his masculine allure,
thence to Ludovico's habits of speech and at last to the very vivid and
memorable 'lady in Venice" -- a colorful personage who springs from Emilia's
fabricated pre-history, and who flashes across the stage in a hyperbole of
brilliant but unstressed beauty (and whose inexplicable passion asserts that
women can prosecute love-longing fully as irrationally as men). And then, just
when it seems as if the maid Barbary has been left in the lurch and forgotten,
the conversation turns back upon itself and Desdemona breaks into the song of
the poor soul who sat sighing by a sycamore tree. To reinforce the apparent
spontaneity of the moment, Shakespeare makes Desdemona repeatedly interrupt (and
even amend) her own singing :  "Lay by these"... "Prithee high thee;  he'll
come anon"... "Nay that's not next.  Hark who is't that knockes."  This broken
series of syntactically independent units, periodically intruded into the song,
are invented for the sole purpose of giving emphasis to the naturalness and
immediacy of the moment.

Shakespeare has therefore created the appearance of spontaneous conversation
by forsaking the straight path of normative dramatic dialogue. Desdemona and
Emilia intertwine present and past, real and fanciful, public and private, high
language and low, song and speech, understatement and exaggeration, syntactic
coherence and syntactic collapse, all within a context of shared knowledge and
almost sisterly intimacy.

The colloquial moment is fleeting, for even before the scene comes to a close,
Shakespeare returns to a more traditional dramatic idiom. Nevertheless, the
episode has done important work: Emilia's great feminist manifesto ("Let
husbands know,/ Their wives have sense like them") which will follow immediately
after this exchange, has been so effectively grounded in a real, earthy, and
contemporary context that it must stir every sensitive intelligence with its
grand appeal to equity.

It has long been acknowledged that the exotic Moor speaks in a highly
particularized, elaborate, and picturesque idiolect of his own - the music that
sweeps in with the icy currents of the Pontic sea and allows the Moor's great
dignity to find its grand expression. Desdemona and Emilia sing a far calmer
but more original song, and their impromptu domestic duet is surely no less and
perhaps even a greater artistic achievement than Othello's stupendous arias.

More on Othello:  here, here, and here.

Source: 2013/07/translation-conundrum

Title: Translation Conundrum
Date: July 01, 2013

Some years ago, I was doing time at a world-famous research library.  One of
the other inmates posed a problem to the assembled denizens. A Frenchman, he was
translating an American novel into his native tongue and there was a passage
in the book that he could not understand. He thought it might be a joke but he
couldn't make heads nor tails of it. He read us the passage. "Two men are in a
bar. The first man asks, 'What do you do with a giraffe who has three balls on
him.' The second man answers, 'Walk him and pitch to the elephant.'"

As I remember, everyone in the room "got it," but no one could suggest a good
solution to the translation problem. Word-for-word wouldn't do and an equivalent
was impossible to identify. I don't know what the poor fellow decided. Something
elegant, I hope.

Source: 2013/07/a-new-much-ado-2012

Title: A New Much Ado (2012)
Date: July 04, 2013

The new Much Ado is a charming, understated success. The actors are not trained
Shakespeareans; they're tv series folk, and they say the lines conversationally
and casually, paying scant attention to the verse or to the mannered prose
rhythms. It works, on the whole, although some of the great lines are delivered
so unemphatically that they're swallowed and lost. Whoever would imagine that
Benedick's "the world must be peopled' could slip by an audience without e'en a
giggle. The text is judiciously pruned -- the only major omission the nighttime
ceremony for presumably dead Hero -- but that's a scene that has always made
me uncomfortable so I wasn't sorry to see it go. The Dogberry-Verges sequence
is a brilliant deadpan triumph. There's very little added business, thank you,
but what there is, is choice. The actress who plays Beatrice (Amy Acker) has
borrowed so much from Emma Thompson's delivery (in the last filmed Much Ado)
that if you were to close your eyes, you'd think that you'd time-traveled back
to 1993.The director, whom I had never heard of but is apparently famous, is
Joss Whedon. Thanks, Joss.

I've seen many many modern films in which hero and heroine don't get on at first
but little-by-little find themselves in love and in marriage. But Shakespeare
was there first. Beatrice and Benedick are the mom and pop of a half-a-zillion
subsequent comedies. It's good to see them as alive and thriving as they are in
this realization.

Source: 2013/07/a-perfect-sentence

Title: A Perfect Sentence
Date: July 10, 2013

We have goats, two Nigerian pygmies, ex-boys, 9 weeks old.

Ella ((10), returning home from a session with the kids. "The black goat
totally tried to eat my pants."  A perfect sentence, utterly original, utterly
wonderful.

Source: 2013/08/barefoot-to-palestine

Title: "Barefoot to Palestine"
Date: August 30, 2013

I'm enchanted by a sentence in Othello that is spoken by Desdemona's lady-in-
waiting, Emilia. She's helping Desdemona to undress and the two women are
engaged in informal chat. Desdemona, perhaps wondering why she had the
misfortune to fall in love with exotic Othello, allows her mind to wander. It
comes to rest on a countryman of hers, a good-looking man named Ludovico. And
then her interlocutor Emilia praises handsome Ludovico in words that should
compel every sentient being to gasp in astonishment and admiration.

About Ludovico, Emilia makes a remarkable claim: "I know a lady in Venice
would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip."

All that needs to be said is, wow! But let me try to explain why the sentence so
transfixes me.

It's hyperbole, but not the ordinary hyperbole of largest or smallest or coolest
or most awesome. It's a hyperbole beyond hyperbole. A lesser writer might have
said, "I know a lady who would have walked a long way to make love to him." Not
Shakespeare. For "a long way," Shakespeare give us "barefoot to Palestine";
for "make love" he offers "a touch of his nether lip." It's extravagant and
wheeling.

A hike, shod, to the holy land, would have been a long and exacting journey.
Barefoot, beyond belief. The evocative word "Palestine" infuses religion and
sanctity into a sentence about sex and desire -- and therefore generates a love-
longing that is as powerful, as silly, and as ill-planned as a crusade. And for
what aim? Not even, for this mythical lady hiker, a big, zonking, mouth-filling
kiss; simply for the merest contact of lips. No, not even lips, just one lip --
the lower one. It's an hyperbole of minimalism.

In the poetry that Shakespeare knew from his childhood, it was men who would
make the vows and undergo the trials to court their beautiful ladies. But this
lovely sentence reverses the convention. It is, so to speak, Sadie Hawkins day
in Venice.

Emilia elsewhere asserts that women have desires as strong as lovers of the
other sex; here she demonstrates that women's love-longing can be as ridiculous
(and as powerful) as men's.

And everyone who knows Othello will hear in the word "Palestine" an intimation
of the violent act that once, many years ago, shook Aleppo.

Source: 2013/09/yet-another-note-on-nineteenth-century-horsedrawn-vehicles

Title: Yet Another Note on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Vehicles
Date: September 16, 2013

How are we new-millenium readers supposed to grasp the social significance of
nineteenth-century horsedrawn vehicles when even characters in nineteenth-
century novels can be easily baffled?  True enough that Miss Alice Vavasor and
Lady Glencora are both very young ladies, and true also that they've lived
marvelously protected lives, but still -- such appalling ignorance:

" [Alice Vavasor] saw a light stylish-looking cart which she would have called a
Whitechapel had she been properly instructed in such matters, and a little low
open carriage with two beautiful small horses....

"Dear Alice, I'm so glad you've come....  Your maid can go in the dog-cart with
your things!" -- it wasn't a dog-cart, but Lady Glencora knew no better."

A dog-cart was not pulled by dogs. It was an informal vehicle with a recessed
box or cage in which dogs were transported. Trollope lords it over his Lady
Glencora for her ignorance of such plebian matters. And a Whitechapel? There's
no footnote in my edition of Can You Forgive Her and neither google nor
wikipedia hazards a guess (though Wik is well aware of a "deathcore" band of the
same name), so I'll just go with "light stylish cart."

And now add "Whitechapel" to the list: barouche, basket carriage, berlin,
britchka, brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall,
chaise, chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon, curricle, cutter,
daumont, dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, fourgon,
four- wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty car,
jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau, patache, phaeton, pill-box, post-chaise,
rockaway, shandrydan, shay, sociable, spider-phaeton, spring-van, stanhope,
sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika, victoria,
vis-a-vis, wagonette, and wurt.

Source: 2013/09/can-we-forgive-anthony-trollope

Title: Can We Forgive Anthony Trollope?
Date: September 29, 2013

Friends of long standing know that Vivian de St. Vrain, alter ego and nom de
blague, makes two boasts that go a long way toward the establishment of a
substantial worldly identity: a) I've never eaten a McDonald's hamburger,
and b) I've read all forty-seven of Anthony Trollope's novels. Old info for
old friends, but for those internet pilgrims who've just stumbled upon this
website, I know what you're thinking -- what a fascinating personality is Vivian
de St. Vrain!!  What a heady and disorienting combination of discipline and
indulgence and whimsy!!!!  What a guy!!

And not only all of Trollope's novels, but many of them multiple times!!

In fact, I've just now re-read Can You Forgive Her?, the first 800-pager of
the six Palliser novels. This would be either my third or fourth reading -- and
almost certainly, considering my "maturity," my ultimate passage. And what is my
mature judgment, you ask?

I love Lady Glencora more and more. The poor dear was sandbagged into an
arranged marriage but she has spunk and grit. She's attracted to the handsome
sexy guy from the other side of the tracks and she's not going to let him go
easily. Trollope doesn't say so in so many words, and perhaps can't admit it
even to himself,  but she's locked in the classic D. H. Lawrence situation.
She's married to a precious dry article in Planty Pall, a refrigerator of a man
who can't be much fun in bed, no fun at all we think, and she has yearnings. If
it were a Lawrence novel, Lady G. would leave the future Duke and gambol  in
the woods with Burgo Fitzgerald, thread her mound with flowers, live on berries
as long as they lasted, and celebrate her release from prudery in overblown
purple prose. But because it's the middle of the nineteenth century, she is
saved from disgrace -- narrowly -- and learns to renounce her proto-Lawrencian
stirrings. Not without pain.

If there's a miracle in the novel, it's that she gets herself pregnant, and by
her husband. A deus ex machina last-minute rescue! But we readers wonder,
how did it happen?  Plodding Planty Pall doing his duty, meeting his sense of
obligation to his forebears and descendants?  We're surprised that the old
stick had it in him, even though, we're repeatedly told, he's not yet thirty
years old.

Trollope loves his rebellious women, as long as they don't rebel too much, and
as long as they mind that they're subordinate. And also, that they not do much
reading or acquire learning.

And yet I can't help but think how George Eliot would have taken the same
situation and turned it into more than a novel of manners. She would have
transformed it into a critique of the entirety of Victorian culture. Trollope
does not know enough or doesn't care enough to engage the larger issues. But
then, no one, except George Eliot, could do so. Well, there's also Tolstoi.

The novel has its dry spots, but the brilliant parts are absolutely brilliant.
The conversation between Plantagenet and Glencora after the ball, after Lady G.
doesn't run off with Burgo, is utterly scintillating. Trollope is a novelist's
novelist.

He's also good with Alice Vavasor, who like Glencora, goes up to the line but
never crosses it. I think Trollope overdoes it when he turns George into an out-
and-out villain. It's unnecessary and melodramatic. He should have trusted
Alice, and trusted his readership also. We knew that George was a rotter long
before his resort to violence.

And what shall we say about John Grey, Alice's long suffering on-again, off-
again fiance and patient Griseldo. He's just too good for words -- so good
that he becomes otherworldly, almost allegorical. Can a man be so passive and
still be admirable and marriageable, even in an era in which renunciation was
the virtue of all virtues? All in all, John Grey is not credible. Not as a
character, not even as an ideal.

Question of the day for Dr. M?  Should he go on with Phineas Finn and his Irish
friends, or should he stop now?

I think I'll wait and see if I can find someone to tread this path with me. I
don't know that I want to go it alone. Some pleasures should be shared.

Source: 2013/10/an-early-introduction-to-political-foreboding

Title: An Early Introduction to Political Foreboding
Date: October 07, 2013

I was thirteen years old when Eisenhower-Nixon defeated Adlai Stevenson. I
was of course horrified. In what sort of nation, I thought, could a doddering
simpleton with a dark mccarthyite machiavel at his ear defeat an intelligent,
educated, humorous progressive. Ghastly, ghastly.

Mullling this over this morning, I remembered that while Truman was still in
office, postage stamps would be cancelled (hand-cancelled in those days) with
the inscription, "Twenty-five years of Social Security." But right after the
Eisenhower inauguration, the slogan was altered to "Pray for Peace."

A message about a concrete program that actually helped people suddenly turned
into a meaningless, faux-religious instruction. "Pray for Peace" did not seem
then, nor now, like a viable political position. "Pray for Peace" did not speak
to me.

Sixty years later and the Republicans are still beating the same meaningless
drum, still going backwards.

Not only have the damn Republicans not caught up with the age of reason, but
they're still embracing the dark ages. The hole into which they've inserted
their collective heads is not only deeper but considerably more vacuous.

Source: 2013/10/an-incontrovertible-proof-of-evolution

Title: An Incontrovertible Proof of Evolution
Date: October 11, 2013

'The placement of the human male genitalia is ridiculous and ill-conceived.
What in the living heck are such sensitive and vulnerable organs doing right
out there -- in front, dramatically positioned to be bumped by furniture or
careless hands, struck by flying objects, or pummeled by grandchildren. In any
intelligently-designed universe, the penis would be entirely retractable, making
its appearance only when summoned. (Nor would it be a dual-purpose organ. Every
engineer knows that dedicated instruments always perform better than devices
that combine functions.

Moreover, the testicles would be buried deep inside the body cavity, as, for
example, the spleen or the ovaries -- not hanging loose, ungirded and swattable.

Freud once remarked that the male organs of generation have not evolved in the
direction of beauty. And therefore not even the crassest male flaunts his stuff
to attract a mate. Or never did, not until the coming of the internet. If the
parts weren't intended to beautiful, then they might as well have been concealed
and protected. But not so.

Why are they where they are?  The culprit, obviously, is evolution --
specifically, the shift to upright posture. Four feet on the ground and the
apparatus is tucked away behind the hind legs, way back there in the anterior.
Protected, inconspicuous, and discreet. Stand up, and there they are just where
they shouldn't be. A three-year-old child with a box of crayons could produce a
better design than frontward-facing genitalia.

Instead, we're left with either another example of divine under-achievement,
or further and supererogatory confirmation that the universe is disorderly,
aleatory, and improvisational.

It was when women joined in standing upright that breasts came into prominence.
There is no other  mammalian species in which the organs of lactation are so
clearly displayed. But female breasts had the good sense to evolve into an
essential part of sexual display.  "Hey, mister, look at these. Look how well I
can nurse your babies."

Now there, at last, is an evolutionary outcome that makes sense.One that a guy
can bring himself to endorse and admire.

Source: 2013/10/advice-for-parents-part-one

Title: Advice for Parents, Part I
Date: October 26, 2013

On the telephone, The Daughter (as she sometimes calls herself) was fussing
about her teen and tween children. "I'm on the warpath (her metaphor) about the
mess. I'm tired of cleaning up after them. Right now T. has left a pile of her
homework on the kitchen floor. She's at ballet for two hours. What do I do? 
Walk around it or clean it up. Why does she do this?  And O. has left half a
sandwich and piece of apple on the table. I failed to train them when they were
young and now it's hopeless."

Every parent in North America, and perhaps every parent in the known universe,
might make the same complaints.

I tried to console The Daughter. "If you'd like to take ten minutes to vent, I'm
here to listen."

She vented for thirty seconds, then fell silent. Frustrated.

I said, "Here's the way I think of it now. You lose every battle, but you win
the war."

"Explain," she muttered.

"It's obvious. When you and your brothers were growing up, there was some
sort of conflict every day. One of you didn't show up for dinner. Whoever was
supposed to take the garbage out, 'forgot' to do it. Someone would get into a
screaming fit at someone else over nothing significant. Quarters would be stolen
out of pants pockets. Some inches of liquor would mysteriously disappear. Sassy
words would be spoken to parents and parents would be devastated. Someone wasn't
sleeping at the house where he or she said he or she was going to spend the
night. Mileage on the car speedometer would increase without explanation. There
were horrible scenes when someone was asked to do the most minimal of chores.

And yet, despite it all, despite the fact that every day I lost the battle,
I won the war. Each of you turned out to be what my own father used to call
'solid, taxpaying citizens.' You've all doing good works. All living upright,
moral lives. All creating healthy, functioning families. All of you are
excellent parents. The grandchildren are thriving.

So in the long run, I won. Lost every battle, won the war."

The Daughter said, "Blog it."

Source: 2013/11/post-friendly-skies-reposted

Title: Post-Friendly Skies (reposted)
Date: November 27, 2013

It had been a while since I last flew Frontier --the airline with the cute
furry anthropomorphic talking mammals on their tails. There have been changes
-- all of them for the worse. There's now an extra charge for each piece of
luggage. Those free meals are a thing of the remote past.  So are the days
when you would get the entire can of ginger ale or tomato juice. It's now a
splash of juice in a cup of ice. No free TV -- you swipe your card, they swipe
your cash. The seats are smaller, too. More rows, less leg room.  Wasn't there
a time when air travel was glamorous?  Now it's just a big Greyhound in the
sky, a warehouse on wings.

Not only was my seat compressed, but the back didn't recline. Somehow I had
been assigned a seat that backed onto the emergency exit row. In earlier
planes, such seats used to recline, but I'm guessing that Frontier has gained
a few inches by rendering the backs immobile -- at the cost of my comfort (but
not at reduced cost).

Adding to the insult is an unapologetic sign on the back of the seat in front
of me inscribed with the words  NO RECLINE THIS ROW. I wonder what language
the author of this sign thinks he is using. Not English, that's for sure.  "No
recline this row" does not even come close to parsing. What would it have cost
Frontier to affix a sign that read "the seats in this row do not recline." 
Where do they outsource their signs -- to the writers of 1940s cowboy and faux-
Indian movies?  No recline this row! Come on, frontiersmen; you can do better
than that. If you have no respect for me, at least have a little respect for the
language. The talking animals speak better English.

To the chief of sign-makers at Frontier I say, "No hire this job."

There was another sign for me to stare out while I sat there, miserably
cramped, watching the clock.  "LIFE VEST UNDER YOUR SEAT." Isn't Frontier
banging the frugality drum a little too hard?  The sentence might have read,
"Life vest IS under your seat." How much could a trifling copulative verb
cost?  If Frontier wanted to be truly prodigal, it could even have raised
the cash to provide an indefinite article:  "A life vest is under your
seat."  Wow. A complete sentence!. What a concept!

(Orignally posted 2011:  2013 update: no free beverage at all nowadays;  the
cart is only for paying customers. I didn't bother to ask how much for the
plastic cup of water. My prediction:  next time, there will be a charge to use
the bathroom.)

Source: 2013/12/lucinda-roanoke

Title: Lucinda Roanoke
Date: December 23, 2013

I've been reading Trollope's Palliser novels again -- my third or fourth time
through this series of six great big whoppers.  It's a familiar tour -- but
with enough forgettings and misrememberings on my part to keep me focussed and
surprised.

I finished The Eustace Diamonds late last night. I know that I read this novel
for the first time in 1961 because it was in the curriculum of a course taught
by showman Professor Edgar Rosenberg. I haven't the siightest recollection of
that early reading or of Rosenberg's lectures either, but then, sixty years have
gone by and larger and larger cavities riddle my porous Swiss cheese brain.

The Eustace Diamonds is rich in both plot and character.  In addition to
the usual "who is going to marry whom" scenario (three separate instances
here) and still another version of the handsome but weak  hero who is going
to the dogs but redeems himself in the last installment, there's a genuine
cops-and-robbers mystery along with three separate detectives (none of them
as competent as Mr. Bucket). And then there's also a riotous profusion of
characters. Some, like Mr. Benjamin and Mr. Mealyus, products of Trollope's
uncontrollable disgust with those nasty Semites, merely disfigure the page.
Others are stock characters who appear in novel after novel, the name alone
changed:  in this case the the patient Griselda figure Lucy Morris. But then
there's a glorious almost Dickensian abundance of highly-marked, genuinely
individualized and extremely imaginative, credible inventions.

There's Lizzie Eustace, with her fibs, taradiddles and utterly conscienceless
lies; George de Bruce Carruthers, who has an eye for the main chance but knows
how to protect himself against pretty women; elderly Lady Linlithgow, who's all
tart tongue and selfishness; Lord Fawn, a pitiful small-minded aristocrat; and
the bustling opportunistic hypocrite Mrs. Carbuncle.

And then there's Lucinda Roanoke, who inhabits a corner of the novel but
who is fascinatingly perverse. She's an American, very young and handsome,
impecunious, who's being shopped around to snare a husband. Under pressure,
and against all good sense, she accepts an offer from the brute Sir
Griffin Tewett. Lucinda has no intention of becoming an obedient wife. The
engagement becomes a war of attrition between the "lovers."  Sir Griffin holds
on only because, it appears,  he doesn't like to lose and because he assumes
that he'll be able to control Lucinda once he's married and has legal authority
over her. He looks forward to the only sort of sex that might occur, which
woud be nothing less than rape. Lucinda is sex-averse and finds even a kiss
to be abhorrent. As the wedding day approaches, she announces that she will
never be Sir Griffin's bride. She threatens both murder and suicide. On
the morning of the long anticipated day, she simply refuses to leave her
room. Trollope tells us that she has gone mad. And that's the end of the
affair.

Lucinda doesn't quite fit into the space. On the surface, the episode makes the
point that women were offered no place in society except obedient wife. But
this is not comedy of manners;  it's pathology. Sir Griffin is a sadistic
monster. Lucinda does not want to submit, and therefore "chooses" insanity.
Trollope does not follow Lucinda into her madness; instead, he dismisses her
from his novel in exactly the same way that the English society dismisses such
women. Trollope can't make a drop of sense out of the situation that he himself
created. Lucinda deserves, and will earn, a novel of her own. But it won't be
written by Anthony Trollope.

Source: 2013/12/more-dialogue-transcribed-exactly-from-real-life

Title: More Dialogue Transcribed Exactly from Real Life
Date: December 25, 2013

Foureen-year-old granddaughter (astounded):  "Grandpa, you still get Netflix
through the mail???"

Grandpa:  "Yes, it's a tradition. We'e been doing it this way for hundreds of
years."

Granddaughter:  "Hummh."

Source: 2013/12/another-pearlman-gosse-xmas

Title: Another Gosse-Pearlman Xmas
Date: December 30, 2013

And so we've come to the end of the "holiday season" once again.

Another Christmas, another winter solstice, another St. Lucy's day with
its deepest of midnights. Even here in ever-sunny Colorado, things are a
bit gloomy. However, I have every confidence that another spring is just
around the corner. I don't need to bring greenery into the house in order to
prevent the dragon from swallowing the sun. The days, now so abbreviated, will
lengthen and in five weeks we'll see the first crocuses and a week later the
daffodils and pussy-willows. It's going to happen. But as always, the last
days of the year challenge me.

I'm relieved and happy that Christmas and the whole Christmas business is done
and gone. No one wants to be a scrooge and I don't want to frown on carols and
gift-giving and plum-puddings and good fellowship, but in my heart, let me
confess, I don't like the holiday. I can't make sense of the virgin birth or
the sacrifice of the only-begotten son. I don't even respect the story-- to
me it's just dressed-up scapegoating. Moreover, Jesus' revolutionary message
about caring for the poor seems to be ignored or repudiated by Christianity's
most vociferous advocates. And then there's all that incongruous stuff that
has accreted around Christmas -- the hype and the commercialism and the
religious chauvinism and the reindeer and the tactless triumphalism. It's both
incomprehensible and offensive to me.

And I'm in good company. I have allies. Let us go back to the beginning of
Athe merican experience with Christmas.

If the profoundly religious seventeenth-century founders of our country had
a single favorite Biblical moment, it's when the Lord (speaking through His
prophet Amos) severely condemned the vanity of holidays. "I hate," said
the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies." The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined against the attempt to
placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical concern in Amos's time).
"Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept
them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts." Nor did
He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but He went on to condemn all
musical tributes as well. Nor more chants, glees or carols: "Take thou away
from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols."
Our Puritan forefathers recognized that the Lord opposed not only rituals
and music but all formal observances and rote piety. The Ancient of Days was
moved not by empty ceremony but by right action and good behavior. Instead of
squeaking timbrels and sounding brass, why, "let justice run down as waters,
and righteousness as a mighty stream." Taking these uncompromising sentences
as their guide, our founders dug in their heels against the ostentatious
celebration of all holidays, especially Christmas.

I applaud the old guy, the Father, and I revere Amos. His mantra bears
repeating: "Let justice come down as the waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream."

The neglect of "righteousness" in favor of buying things makes me melancholy. I
would be happy to see fewer purchases and more good deeds. It would help us
through the dark months.

The winter solstice is a sensitive time for me because it's the anniversary
of my father's birthday. He arrived to no poorer family on the planet on the
darkest day of the year, the twenty-second of December, 1904. ‘And they
called his name Emanuel, God with us,’ -- but whether by accident or design, I
have no idea. My father lived a long and just life. He had many virtues -- one
of them that he was the least materialistic person ever. He had no possessions
and craved none. But he was righteous.

I don't know how anyone could write a biography of Emanuel, my father. There
was so little plot, so little conflict in his life. He went about his business,
raised his family, kept to the straight and narrow. His memory is a blessing to
us.

At this time of the year I turn once again to one of the most
challenging fathers in literature. The voluminous works of Sir Edmund Gosse
are not much read nowadays except by specialists in Edwardian literature, but
Father and Son (1907) still stands as one of the world's great autobiographies.

The father in Father and Son is the biologist Philip Henry Gosse, whom Charles
Darwin once called "an honest hod carrier of science." The older Gosse was a
minister and a leader of the Plymouth Brethren, a very strict, very puritanical
splinter of English Protestantism -- one that could easily have taken Amos as
its prophet and leader. According to his son Edmund, P. H. Gosse held that
the celebration of Christmas was "nothing less than an act of idolatry. The
very word is Popish, [my father] used to exclaim, 'Christ's Mass!' Then he
would adduce the antiquity of the so-called feast, adapted from horrible
heathen rites, and itself a soiled relic of the abominable Yule-Tide. He would
denounce the horrors of Christmas until it almost made me [that is, Philip
Henry's son Edmund Gosse the autobiographer] blush to look at a holly berry."

A passionate man, Philip Henry Gosse. A difficult father. Can we Imagine how
Philip Henry Gosse would have suffered to behold a twentieth-century American
Christmas: muzaked "Silent Night" in a shopping mall. Or even --horror of
horrors --the odious, saccharine "Little Drummer Boy." There's not a sappier
song in all of creation.

In Father and Son, Sir Edmund recollects a Christmas of his youth. One
boyish year he defied his father and, putting his immortal soul in danger,
secretly ate some Christmas plum-pudding that had been offered to him by
'rebellious' servants. But then, overcome with guilt and stomach-ache, he flew
to his father, crying out "Oh! Papa, Papa, I have eaten of flesh offered to
idols!" Philip Henry then "ran with me into the midst of the startled servants,
seized what remained of the pudding,... and ran till we reached the dust-heap,
when he flung the idolatrous confectionery on to the middle of the ashes, and
then raked it deep down into the mass."

A frightening episode for a nine-year-old -- but beautifully told. Only an
accomplished writer of comedy (and one who was steeped in Dickens) could
have invented a phrase as marvelous as "idolatrous confectionery," where the
triviality of the noun undermines the high seriousness of the adjective.

Compared to Amos and to the Plymouth Brethren and to Philip Henry Gosse, my
own resistance to Christmas is trivial. I'm a dissenter, but a dissenter in
moderation.

In fact, I'm not even a Puritan -- I'm delighted with the baked ham and the
sweet potatoes. Moreover, I have devised a Christmas custom of my own. Every
December 25, I reserve three hours to listen to Handel's Messiah -- not out of
piety or reverence, but because the oratorio is so marvelous that it's almost --
almost -- sacred.

There are many Messiahs, but In our house, the performance of choice is,
inevitably, the extremely intelligent Pearlman version (Boston Baroque Orchestra
and Chorus-- Martin Pearlman, Conductor [Telarc 80322]). Blessings and honor
and glory and hallelujahs be unto George Frederick Handel and unto his
unsurpassed oratorio.

So this year and every year: rejoice greatly but appropriately, ye sons and
daughters of Zion!

Source: 2013/01/birthday

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."