Title: Amnesia on Film:  Mister Buddwing
Date: July 10, 2011

This 1966 black-and-white oddity boasts a distinguished director (Delbert Mann,
celebrated for Marty) and a group of excellent actresses (Jean Simmons,
Katherine Ross, Angela Lansbury and Suzanne Pleshette). It's ambitious and
sometimes imaginative. But frankly, even more than your run-of-the-mill amnesia
movie, it's a mess.

The amnesiac in this case is a young and puzzled James Garner, who comes to
consciousness in Central Park (there are good historical shots of 1960s NYC
throughout) and takes the nom d'oubli Sam Buddwing. We're not told how he
found his way to a park bench but movie amnesia is so commonplace and so
flexible that the audience has no difficulty going along for the ride. The rest
of the film tracks Buddwing through various encounters until he recovers his
memory with no more fuss than he lost it.

Amnesia is merely a plot device and not the film's true focus. The theme
seems to be "identity," which, if I remember, was a subject much in vogue in
the 1960s. Buddwing says, more than once, "I don't know who I am." But
so did all of us say the same thing, in those ancient days, even without
the provocation of amnesia. Buddwing's specific problem, as it gradually
reveals itself, is that he has made a series of "inauthentic" (as we used to
say) choices. He should have composed the octet rather than have gone for
the commercial money. He shouldn't have encouraged his wife to abort the
baby. And he certainly should have prevented both himself and Grace (note
signficant moniker!!) from drifting into infidelity and alcohol.

More "don'ts." The writer and director shouldn't have tried to imitate
Ingmar Bergman (the excrescent scene with the beggar who thinks he's God is
embarrassingly derivative). And they shouldn't have indulged all the Bergman-
derived religiosity. When a prayer "O God, let her live" is followed
immediately by a resurrection, it's not a film -- it's propaganda. Come to
think of it, the creative team should also have put some distance between
themselves and the Kafkaeque surreal. Moreover, they should not have allowed
the film to slide into an easy, superficial allegorizing. Buddwing may say
"I'm not everyman" -- but the film desperately hopes that he will be taken as
such.

Amnesia, it would appear, has the power to soften the brain of both writer and
director.