Title: Lady Stallions!!!
Date: July 17, 2011

Lady Stallions!?! Not only a New Jersey soccer team, but an oxymoron of
Shakespearean achievement. Not a simple oxymoron either, like Romeo's "cold
fire, sick health," but a figure of speech on the far frontier of Oxymoronia,
along with such classics as Utah Jazz and Christian Science. What, pray tell,
is a Lady Stallion?  Even in an age of gender fluidity, it's hard to get a
grasp on this one. Oh, I understand the principle -- the men's team is the
Stallions, and therefore it follows as night the day that the distaff team
acquires the same name, prefixed with Lady. In the same way, we have, out here,
the Buffs and the Lady Buffs. I would offer not the slightest demurral if the
men's team was called the New Jersey Horses and women's team was the New Jersey
Lady Horses. It's awkward but logical. Lady Horses may not be either a poetical
or an intimidating moniker, but it doesn't boggle the grammatical mind. But
a stallion is archetypically male, the snorting captain of his harem-herd of
equine odalisques, groupies, wives, mistresses, and girlfriends. Against all
challenges, he bites and kicks and if necessary injects himself with steroids
and horse growth hormone in order to maintain his macho primacy. A lady stallion
is therefore utterly impossible both emotionally and linguistically. The term
is a travesty. Better to call them the New Jersey Mares, which makes linguistic
sense. Or even better, the New Jersey Geldings (which are, in an odd  kind of a
way, no-longer-male stallions).

Although I myself would reserve the name Geldings for institutions named after
gentleman who have made the sacrifice and earned the right: the Origen Divinity
School Geldings or the St. Abelard Preparatory School Geldings. But that's a
horse of another color.

Although particularly egregious, Lady Stallions do not stand solitary in their
linguistic purgatory. Also competing are the Lady Rams (suggested alternative:
Sheep), the Lady Bucks, and the Lady Bulls (alternative: Cows). No teams named
the Goats. No Lady Boars (or Pigs either, for that matter). In defiance of
all logic, there are the Oregon Lady Ducks, which is truly an impossibility,
because properly, the men's team should be the Drakes, the women's the Ducks
(or Lady Drakes). There are no teams, as far as I'm aware, named either the
Geese or the Lady Ganders; yes, there are the South Carolina Gamecocks, but I'm
going to guess that the distaff side is not named the Lady Gamecocks. Wait,
I'll google it. OK, the South Carolina women's softball team is named ... the
Gamecocks, which is bad enough, but could have been worse, because in my world
of propriety, "lady" and "cocks" should never inhabit the same sentence.

Dogs are a problem. No one calls their team the Dogs. But there are some breeds
who are allowed to play. Bulldogs and Mastiffs and Greyhounds are in, Poodles
are out. The University of Georgia proffers the Lady Bulldogs, but not one
college, high school, or club has thought to give us either the Lady Dogs, or
whatever is that word by which female dogs are denominated.