Title: My Facebook Friends
Date: June 25, 2008

My Internet consultant, who is forty-something years old, signed me up on
Facebook.  He said that I needed to understand how communication takes place
between young folk in the modern era.  He also thought that I should assemble
some Facebook friends.

He himself concedes that in Facebook years he is an oldster.  "You're on
Facebook?" say his astonished junior colleagues and employees, not shy to hint
that he's a bit long in the tooth for an activity so totally 'with it' as social
networking.  Hey, what about ancient me?  A generation and an electronic
revolution older, I allow my pre-Cambrian self to be Facebookized.

It's a new world.  A "Facebook Friend" is not to be confused with a real
friend.  In the traditional universe (mine), relationships were either intense
or diffuse.  You can enjoy a few important relationships or spread yourself
over many -- say, twenty or thirty -- that are superficial.  It's taken me
a lifetime to acquire and sustain a very small number of genuine, intense
friendships.  But young people seem to diffuse their emotional attachments,
as I discovered by browsing the Facebook site.  They form networks of three
or four hundred or eight hundred fellow Facebookers.  No doubt but that these
young folks possess memories far more retentive and perspicuous than mine -- but
what can it mean to have relationships that number in the hundreds?  "Facebook
Friend" can signify nothing more than someone whose path has crossed your own
sometime, somewhere.

Nevertheless, it's intriguing to be in instant communication with a more-or-less
compatible cohort.  I must say, however, that there are practical limits to
the grandparental Facebookish experience.  Real friends of my own years not
only suffer from limited computer literacy but are natively grumpy and therefore
indifferent to social networking.  They're basically Internet hermits.  When I
stumble upon the page of coevals who are Facebookers (perhaps, like me, because
a young friend or grand-daughter took pity on their Facebooklessness), what
generally appears -- along with a generic subsitution for an actual photograph,
which they don't have the skills to post -- is a dispiriting message such
as "Frank has no friends."  As a result, almost all of my "Friends" are a
generation or two younger than I -- which makes me feel pseudo-youthful but also
as though I've crashed the party but I'm not dancing.

I tried an experiment.  I solicited (is that the word?) Friendship with Zoe,
just entering our local university and whose father I've known since 1969. 
She has not "confirmed me."  I also approached, timidly, Sam K., who's in high
school abroad.  I've been good friends with his grandparents for most of a
lifetime.  Sam also declined to confirm me.  ("Confirm" -- the proper Facebook
locution -- seems both too religious and too 'rite of passage' for me.)  I also
tried Rebecca M., a junior in college -- no confirmation.  Is it possible that
these young people don't want one of Gramp's friends to know who's writing what
on whose Wall?

There seems to be some sort of competition among Facebookers to acquire the most
Friends.  I'm as competitive as the next guy, but, handicapped by my years,
I'm stuck at thirty-five Friends, which is absolutely zip zilch in the galaxy
of Facebook amical achievement.  Moreover, I must confess that one of those
thirty- five Friends is a 6" foam donkey named Lefty who is the miniature mascot
of a Democratic consulting firm.  Zooming ahead, Lefty has left me to choke on
his donkey-dust.  The  donkey has one hundred and twenty-four Friends, all of
them, no doubt, intimate.