Title: Does Religion Rot the Brain?
Date: September 11, 2012

Unaware that I was choosing a splashy and controversial best-seller, I selected
from the library's new book shelf something called Unorthodox (New York, 2012),
by one Deborah Feldman, and a sadder, more dispiriting book I have rarely read.

Ms. Feldman had the misfortune to be raised in the Satmar branch of the Hasidic
movement -- a sect that, at least as she describes it, is unhappy, puritanical,
finicky, repressive, ferociously anti-rational, patriarchal, and bossy. Boys
study Talmud but girls are not educated past a high school -- what would be
the point, when, as Deborah's grandfather once told her, "girls belong in the
kitchen?" Feldman's memoir is not just dreary, it's ostentatiously lurid. Its
subtitle is "the scandalous rejection of my Hasidic roots" -- and the attention-
mongering scandals that she recounts are mostly sexual in nature.

There is a old story that John Ruskin collapsed in a heap when he discovered,
on his wedding night, that his bride had pubic hair. Feldman out-Victorians
the great Victorian, claiming that she did not know that she had a vagina, an
entrance, an opening, "down there." Is such ignorance possible in this age? 
And then she explores her sexual failings, mostly her vaginismus-induced post-
honeymoon extended virginity -- which she blames on her Satmar upbringing
(although want of curiosity might also be a factor).

Feldman's memoir has upset the Hasidic community and there is at least one
website devoted entirely to attacking its veracity. And in fact the memoir does
contain the commonplace omissions and elisions of autobiography --  none of
which seem to invalidate the whole. However, the defenders of the sect miss the
point (as does Ms. Feldman).

The Satmar movement isn't reprehensible because it dishonors brains and women
and especially women's brains. It's reprehensible because it is erected
on a lie. "We learn in school that God sent Hitler to punish the Jews for
enlightening themselves. He came to clean us up, eliminate all the assimilated
Jews...."  What an absurd and odious doctrine! Are we expected to entertain
the hypothesis that six million Jews died for eating lobster?  "The first and
greatest Satmar rebbe said that if we became model Jews, just like in the olden
days, then something like the Holocaust wouldn't happen again, because God would
be pleased with us." So Hitler and the Nazis and the SS and the camps are a) the
fault of the Jews themselves, and b) God can be placated if all Jewish women
wear thick stockings and wigs and cover themselves from collarbone to wrist and
knee.  It's a brainless argument, and one that, if you think about it for a few
seconds, gives the victory to Hitler. Plus, it's an argument that creates a god
who is even crueler and more idiotic than usual.

Indoctrinated with this criminal bullshit, the survivors of the Shoah and their
descendants voluntarily re-ghettoize themselves and, of their own foolish
accord, imprison themselves into a new dark age of their own invention.

Here's what I learned from this book. Satmar is a check-your-brains-at-the-door
cult that controls 130,000 adherents who manifest all the symptoms of obsessive
compulsive disorder. It's "bad things will happen to me if I step on a crack on
the sidewalk" raised several painful orders of magnitude.

Ms. Feldman may have escaped the cult but she's still in the dark. She's left
Satmar behind because she couldn't read the books she wanted to read or wear the
clothes she wanted to wear and she couldn't locate her own vagina. But it's not
her vagina that readers should worry about;  it's her brain.