Title: Puccini, Marion Morrison, John Wayne
Date: January 28, 2011

Yesterday we watched and heard Puccini's La Fanciulla del West imported
digitally from the big apple's Metropolitan Opera. It was shown on the enormous
screen at our local Century Theater. I was overwhelmed. I usually watch opera
from the nosebleed seats, which are expensive enough. With the new technology,
and with the telescopic close-ups, I could look right up Deborah Voight's
nostrils and into her mouth. I swear I saw her well-trained uvula vibrating.

The Girl of the Golden West is a fascinating cultural stew.  t's set in the
gold-rush California of the dime novels. The play on which it's based was
written by David Belasco, a London-born Sephardic Jew. The "West" is not real
but mythological -- replete with gunslingers, a big-time bar room brawl, poker
cheats, a cringe-making Indian squaw and papoose, a tough, mustachioed sheriff
and a Calamity Jane-style heroine. Yet it's sung (sung!) in Italian. "Dick
Johnson," the romantic lead, was performed by Marcello Giordani, a chubby
tenor from  Augusta, Sicily.  Interviewed during one of the far-too-long
intermissions, Giordani was asked if he had any trouble playing a last-century
horseback westerner. "Not at all.  I grew up watching John Wayne movies." I
admit to giggling at his answer, even though giggling is always inappropriate
in Grand Opera. Giordani also claimed that he tried to walk like Wayne.  He
didn't  -- he sashayed.

John Wayne himself didn't walk the John Wayne walk until Raoul Walsh and John
Ford transformed him from Marion Morrison, a furniture mover from Winterset,
Iowa, into a mythological figure.

Nothing in La Fanciulla del West actually touches ground. Or touches any ground
that I recognize.

Except that there are people who don't know it's a myth. Witness the recent
events in Tombstone -- I mean Tucson -- Arizona. At this very moment, the Utah
legislature is about to select its state weapon. The 1911 Browning pistol seems
to be the gun of choice. In neighboring Arizona, it would probably be the Glock
9mm 30-round semi-automatic.