Title: Notting Hill (1990), Two on a Tower (1882)
Date: November 23, 2018

We watched Notting Hill, a cute 1999 "rom-com" or "date movie" with cute couple
Hugh Grant and Julia Roberts. (It's hard to believe that the film is almost
twenty years old. It's so slight and fluffy that I can't remember whether or
not I saw it last millennium, but frankly, it wouldn't make much difference one
way or the other.)  In Notting HIll, Julia Roberts plays a pricey celebrity
actress ($15,000,000 a film) who happens to wander into Hugh Grant's tiny
bookstore and -- a few cute scenes later -- into his tiny Notting Hill bedroom.
It's a slight, unconvincing fairy-tale of a film and I'm giving away no secrets
when I say that the cute apparently- mismatched couple not only overcome all
psychological obstacles and class anxieties in order to marry but that also, in
the cute coda scene, when she's lying in his lap on a bench in the park, she's
well along in her pregnancy. Ah love! Ah romance! Ah idealized domesticity! Ah
cuteness!

Cynic that I am, I'm curious whether she's crammed herself into his narrow
digs (and displaced his second-banana roommate) or whether she's purchased the
biggest finest mansion in the upscale Notting Hill neighborhood and moved the
new husband into it. And closed down the bookstore. The film is wise to sidestep
concerns of such dreary ordinariness.

Notting Hill is a rip-off and inversion of Pretty Woman (1990), in which Julia
Roberts was poor and Hugh Grant was Richard Gere, a mega-billionaire. Notting
Hill might just as easily have been called Pretty Man -- it's that close a
parallel. Only without the shopping.

And Notting Hill, though upscale, is no Rodeo Drive. It's a neighborhood that
has gone through a number of transformations. Once famous for its piggeries, by
the middle of the 19th century, it was on the way up. In 1862, when Thomas Hardy
left Dorchester and his Wessex homeland to apprentice himself as an architect,
he took up residence in Notting HIll's recently constructed Westbourne Park
Villas. And there in Notting Hill he wrote his first novel, never published and
now lost, called with the remarkably appropriate Hugh-and-Julia title of The
Poor Man and the Lady.

Lower class boy and upper class girl was a perennial theme in Hardy's novels. An
obsession, in fact. By coincidence, I'd just finished reading -- on the same day
as I watched Notting Hill -- one of Hardy's most thorough explorations of the
poor-rich theme -- his novel Two on a Tower (1882).

No idyllic pregnancy in the park in the Hardy universe.

In Two on a Tower, Lady Constantine falls in love with Swithin St. Cleeve, an
impoverished amateur astronomer, but Hardy strews their path with one obstacle
after another. For the Lady, a wastrel husband who is missing in deep dark
Africa, and who may or not be dead; an inadvertent pregnancy; a duped second
husband, this time a clergyman; for St. Cleeve, a badly-needed inheritance that
can only be claimed if he remains single, and an extended exile. For both of
them, misunderstandings, accidental damaging eavesdroppings, important letters
gone astray, etc. And finally, when it appears possible that the poor boy and
lady might find solace together, a sudden inexplicable spontaneous death.

Good thing that Thomas Hardy didn't write Notting Hill. Trust me, there would
have been no happy ending. Perhaps Hugh would been disfigured in the fire that
destroyed his bookstore and his livelihood, and Julia, repulsed, would have
returned to her abusive alcoholic boyfriend. But very likely something even more
arbitrary and cruel.