Title: Starokonstantinov
Date: May 05, 2022

Ukraine has been invaded and whole cities have been obliterated by the Putin
dictatorship. It's tragic. Once again, I'm overwhelmingly grateful that my
grandparents chose to pack up and leave the blighted Ukraine. It's a decision
that has looked better and better with each passing year.

My father's family came from a Ukrainian "shtetl" called Starokonstantinov,
or Alt Konstantin ("old Constantine"). As a youth, I overheard but did not
understand conversations in Yiddish about a place that my grandparents called
(phonetically) Xusantine-gebernia, where the X stands for a non-English deep
guttural fricative. Seventy years ago I paid little attention to my eastern
European ancestry. Now I'm fascinated.

Where is Starokonstantinov?  What is a "shtetl?"

I've just read Yohanan Petrovsky-Shtern's new (2014) and highly pertinent
history, The Golden Age Shtetl (an oxymoronic title if there ever was one). Y
P-S defines a shtetl as "an East European market town in private possession of
a Polish magnate, inhabited mostly but not exclusively by Jews, and subject
to Russian bureaucracy." Starokonstantinov, he claims, was a "quintessential
shtetl." "My" ancestral shtetl lies in the western part of Ukraine, about 50
miles south of a line drawn between Lviv and Kyiv. Nowadays, it has a population
of about 30,000 souls.

I know that my grandfather's people lived in Starokonstantinov from the middle
of the nineteenth century, but I have no idea when they first arrived -- it
might have been years or centuries before. The town itself is not an ancient
foundation. It enters history only in the late 16th century when a Polish noble
named Konstanty Ostrogski built himself a castle (which still survives) and took
ownership of the surrounding area. Starokonstantinov was a "private town" --
meaning that it was owned by the Ostrogski family for several hundred years. In
its first years, Starokonstantinov was included in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
In 1569 it became part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In 1793, and for
many years, even after my ancestors had struck out for the new world, it was
a possession of the Russian Empire. Now it's in the independent Ukraine, and
hoping to remain so.

The history of Starokonstantinov is marked by a series of tragedies prior to
the one now in progress. An early disaster was the Battle of Starokonstantinov
in 1648, which was a key event in the Chmielnicki Massacres of 1648-49. Eastern
rite Cossacks broke into the fortified town and killed all of its 130 Jewish
families and as many Polish Roman Catholics as they could find. During the early
part of the 18th century, the Haidamack massacre of Uman by Cossacks spilled
over into other Ukrainian shtetls, including "mine." And then beginning in 1881
came the series of pogroms -- anti-Jewish peasant riots provoked and tacitly
supported by the Russian officialdom. In Starokonstantinov, there were 6611 Jews
in 1847 and 9212 (61% of the total population) in 1897. (There would have been
two more if my grandparents hadn't seen the light in 1895). During the Nazi
occupation in 1942, virtually all the remaining Jewish population (6731 in 1939)
was murdered. It's a troubled, tragic history.

I'm not sure what it means to say that a town was wholly owned by Polish
nobility. Did the Ostrogskis own all the land, or the land and some of the
buildings? Did they administer the public works? The churches? Did they possess
the surrounding farms?  Did they own, until they were freed in 1861, the
serfs?  Most likely, each shtetl had its own particular form of ownership (the
late medieval world was anything but standardized). Y P-S does not explain;
perhaps he assumes it's common knowledge.

Starokonstantinov occasionally makes an appearance in The Golden Age Shtetl.

I had not realized how active my ancestors might have been in the vodka trade.
"In Starokonstantinov, the possession of Countess Rzewuska, about fifty [Jewish-
owned] inns and taverns yielded 67 percent of the town revenues." (Query:
how and when did the shtetl pass from the Ostrogskis to the Rzewuskis, who
were a very prominent and wealthy Polish family)? As far as I can tell, the
"town revenues" went directly into the hands of the Polish overlords. In 1827,
"Starokonstantinov Jews realized the that their efforts to prevent the draft of
men for twenty to twenty five year terms in the Russian army [had failed], and
the Jewish populace turned against their own kahal elders and attacked their
houses." "Local police had to summon an additional army unit to suppress the
outburst." (The "kahal" was a committee of prominent Jewish citizens who were
the nominal governors [under Polish supervision] of the Jewish population.)
In the first half of the nineteenth century, the divorce rate among Jewish
couples in Starokonstantinov, was 16 percent. In larger cities, it was even
higher (in Letichev it was 47 percent). Y P-S attributes the surprisingly
high rate of failed marriages to the relative freedom of Jewish women and
to the breakdown of traditional constraints as the Jewish population became
increasingly urbanized. A major fire in Starokonstantinov in 1835 hastened the
shtetl's decline. Russian travelers found Starokonstantinov and especially its
roads deplorable. "A Russian army officer observed that Starokonstantinov is
dirty beyond any measure: but 'if we bother ourselves to learn the reasons for
this situation, we would perhaps find out that even the Jews, whom are usually
blamed, have nothing to do with it.... To drive through the streets of the
town is a real challenge, as there is no pavement. Stones once paving the road
have long sunk into the soils. When it is raining, they do nothing but prevent
movement.'" Mud season in Starokonstantinov must have been an annual challenge.
Nevertheless, Starokonstantinovites were readers: a merchant estimated that in
the shtetl there were "about 20,000 books, mostly prayer books, bible and bible
commentaries, tractates on the Talmud and the Kabbalah." Y P-S thinks that this
number must be a great exaggeration. But it's on the record that a merchant
named Pinhas Yosef Bromberg from Starokonstantinov brought twenty Hebrew books
with him while traveling on business to St Petersburg.

My great-grandfather was a participant in the commerce of Starokonstantinov.
According to my father, he was a "factor."  A "faktor" (Yiddish from German)
was essentially a middleman. My ancestor had a horse and a wagon (perhaps, I
allow myself to fantasize in a moment of self-aggrandizement, two horses and two
wagons). According to tradition, he mostly dealt in grain, but factors such as
he bought and sold whatever was available: wood, coal, ribbons, calico, mirrors,
bolts and screws, vodka and wine. They did much of their business at fairs and
Starokonstantinov was famous for its very prominent fair.