Title: Neighborhood Movie Theaters
Date: December 19, 2022

When I was an unadventurous Flatbush "yoot" back there in the 1950s, there
were only two movie theaters that mattered: the Leader and the Kent, both
on Coney Island Avenue, and both within an easy walk. The Leader was closer
to my East 9 Street home and it was there that I spent many a rainy weekend
afternoon ostensibly watching a double feature while sprinting in the aisles,
hurling popcorn at the kids who were down in front, and dodging the "matron."
The Kent was more of an expedition but still less than a quarter of a mile
away. I once saw a show there with my father (Bad Day at Black Rock (1955)],
memorable because it was the only time I ever went to the movies with him -- he
was no frivolous moviegoer. In my childish innocence, I assumed that both the
Leader and the Kent had been in place since time immemorial and that moviegoing
began and ended with these two theaters. They were like mountains and rivers,
permanent features of the landscape (or, rather, cityscape). I was very wrong.
All is flux and movie theaters come and go. According to that most valuable
resource, Cinema Treasures, over 27,000 cinemas in the United States have been
closed or demolished, with many more endangered -- killed in the 1930s by the
Depression and then in my time by the TV and DVDs and discs and streaming and
covid. And also by self-inflicted wounds -- the studios and independents have
failed to produce a regular supply of films for grownups and instead fill the
shopping mall screens with CGI effects and infantile fantasies and "franchises."
Nevertheless, the Kent is still in business, as a small-screen "art" theater,
but the Leader long ago devolved into a bowling alley -- the Leader Lanes.
Later it became a pharmacy. I don't know what has become of it lately; probably
something dreadful.

There's much more to the story than the Leader and the Kent. In my youth, there
was also the Culver Theater, the outside appearance of which I knew very well
but never the interior. The Culver was located at the corner of 18th Avenue and
McDonald, just a block away from the McDonald Avenue branch of the Brooklyn
Public Library, where I shelved books for 75 cents an hour all through my
Erasmus Hall years.

The Culver was adjacent to and almost under the Culver Local, the "El" or
elevated subway, that ran along McDonald (formerly Gravesend) Avenue. ("Elevated
subway", by the way, is one of the most fabulous unappreciated oxymora of
our time). The Culver was a big spacious theatre that sat 1445 people. I
imagine that most of the paying customers had a tough time catching the dialog
when a train rumbled by. I wish I could identify what film was playing when
this picture was snapped, but alas the image is blurred. The styles of the
automobiles suggest a date in the late 1930s. The Culver has long disappeared
and nowadays the most prosperous commercial venture on its former block is the
Tashkent Supermarket.

Then there was the Beverly, located at the intersection of Church Avenue and
East 2 Street, just a few blocks from Erasmus Hall High School at Church and
Flatbush.

On the day of this photo, the Beverly was showing Away All Boats, a 1956 war
drama featuring Jeff Chandler, but as we all know, Jeff was in fact Erasmus
alumnus Ira Grossel. The movie in which he starred was playing just down the way
from his old high school -- a marvelous serendipitous coincidence. The Beverly's
second feature, Raw Edge, was a western with Rory Calhoun and Yvonne DeCarlo.
Did I plunk down my quarter to watch a war movie and a western? It was certainly
the kind of programming that would have attracted my seventeen-year-old self. I
have no recollection of either feature but I am able to bring to mind an image
of young lovely Yvonne DeCarlo. The Beverly operated from 1920 to 1981 and has
since, sadly, been transformed into a T-Mobile showroom.

There was also the Rialto

at the corner of Cortelyou Road and Flatbush Avenue. It was directly on my route
as I walked to Erasmus Hall High School with Steve Lewin five times a week
between 1952 to 1956. It was also a block or two from the Sears, Roebuck store,
where in the summer of 1956, I handed out parking tickets to drivers entering
the Sears lot. Their cars looked a lot like the ones in this picture. Last I
heard, the Rialto had transmogrified into the Cortelyou Road Church of God -- a
sorry fate.

In addition to the theaters that I attended or might have attended in the days
of my youth, there were another bunch that had already shut up shop. The most
prominent was the Newkirk Theater on East 16th Street -- and therefore only
five or six blocks from P S 217. It stood just across from Newkirk Plaza, the
shopping center that also housed an express stop on the BMT line. The Newkirk
started life as the TNF, named after the initials of its trio of builders. It
might have been, originally, a legitimate theater.

In 1928 it reopened as a cinema with a performance My Best Girl with Mary
Pickford (who lived for a while with Doug F. at 1320 Ditmas). It closed in
1940 and has since been demolished. It must have been quite an ornament to the
neighborhood, but I rode my bicycle on that street many times and never detected
the least sign that there had once been a handsome theater there. I wonder
also what became of the grand Robert Morton organ that accompanied the silent
films. Later the Newkirk acquired a proper movie marquee as can be seen in this
fragment of an image.

The Newkirk was gone for good in 1940.

Then there was the Dorchester, a the corner of Dorchester and Coney Island
Avenue. Here's how its building appeared a few years ago: