Title: "In This Our Life" -- the Novel by Ellen Glasgow
Date: July 08, 2020

In this Our Life, the novel by Ellen Glasgow is richer, deeper, and less bound
by convention than the film.  Film Life follows the inherited story for its
first forty-five minutes but then sharply diverges.

In the film version, bad daughter Stanley is less conflicted and complicated
a character and eventually devolves into a stereotypical noir "bad girl."
Novel Stanley doesn't drive Peter to suicide, nor does she she bring the film
to convenient closure by driving her car down a cliff. Novel Craig is far
less worthy and more passive than film Craig and doesn't redeem himself by
transforming into a sleuth who exonerates Parry.

Needless to say, the novel offers no Hollywood ending; in strong contrast, novel
Roy rejects Craig's offer of marriage because she knows that Craig is still
carrying the torch for Stanley. Instead, she tries desperately to leave town
and start life anew -- but it's not clear whether or not she will make a clean
getaway. We hope that she will.

The most extensive revision is to the character of the sisters' father, Asa
Timberlake. In the film, he's a uxorious martyred browbeaten milquetoast who is
the long-suffering caretaker of his hypochondriacal bedridden wife. In Ellen
Glasgow's novel, much of which is seen through his eyes, Asa loathes his wife,
knows that he's wasted his life, craves affection, and even admits to himself
that he wants her dead so that he can be free. It's Asa, not Craig, who unravels
the mystery of the automobile accident. Moreover, glory be to the proper gods,
Asa has a secret lady friend, a widow/farmer a dozen years his junior, whom he
visits on his occasional day off. And he nurtures an escapist fantasy that keeps
him sane -- he wants to end his life as a simple farm laborer. He doesn't quite
get there at the novel's end, but there's hope. Kaye, his very healthy, very
appropriate mistress (we think sexual partner, though Glasgow hedges) assures
him that she will always have an opening for a hired hand.