Title: "Negative Bouyancy"
Date: July 27, 2020

Mogambo (1953), directed by John Ford, is an eternal-triangle story in which
earthy Ava Gardner and prim Grace Kelly compete for white hunter Clark Gable.
Unfortunately, it's less engaging as a romance than as a travelogue -- it offers
spectacular footage of African megafauna (hippos, giraffes, lions, gorillas,
etc.).

Whenever I watch classic films set in "the colonies," I'm fearful that the
native people will be exoticized and orientalized and trivialized, but I'm happy
to report that Mogambo is less offensively Tarzanish than most -- setting aside
a couple of embarrassing "fakelore" episodes. I would have been even happier if
the Africans weren't just animated wallpaper -- bearers or rowers or dancers
or spear-throwers -- and that they weren't depicted as entirely subservient to
their white overlords. Mogambo is based on Victor Fleming's pre-Code Red Dust
(1931) -- a much more sensual film than Mogambo and one which allowed Jean
Harlow lots of room to wink and flirt. It's most odd that the glamorous sexy
hunter in both Red Dust and Mogambo is played by Clark Gable - a rare example
of filmic auto-reprising. He's hyper-masculine, at age 30, in Red Dust but in
Mogambo it's too too obvious that his hair has been dyed a shiny black. When he
pounces on Ava and Grace and mashes their mouths with unpersuasive 50s kisses,
it is taken for granted that both ladies will immediately grow weak in the
knees.

I grew even less Gable-dazzled when I discovered a weird anecdote in Donald
Sinden's recollection of the filming of Mogambo. (Sinden played the part of
Grace Kelly's spineless, intellectual, oblivious husband). Sinden reports that
(prepare yourself to be stunned and disillusioned):

before leaving camp on the first morning [of shooting] I had been told to report
to the hair-dressing department's tent, where I found the make-up men armed with
electric clippers: 'I have to remove the hair from your chest.' 'Whatever for?'
I asked, 'Orders.' It transpired that Clark [Gable], whose chest was completely
devoid of hair, had always insisted that no other actor should appear on film
exposing a hirsute breast. This included any member of the crew not wearing a
shirt as well. He considered it a slight on his masculinity.

Surely, this is one of the most bizarre anecdotes in movie history. The King of
Hollywood, the legend whose mere presence famously set roomfuls of maidens all
a-quiver, was so sexually insecure that he required mass depilation of cast and
crew! Follicular fragility! Big-time nuttiness?

Question: was it in Clark's contract that he had the right to dictate the degree
of chest shagginess of cast and crew -- or was he just throwing his weight
around?  Suppose Sinden or some sweaty best boy had refused the electric
clippers. Would the production have ground to a halt?

It's well known that since the time of Samson and probably before, male hair
has been associated with strength, but even Delilah didn't set out to defoliate
every man in Gaza.

But Clark Gable's chest hair insecurity is only Donald Sinden's second most
curious anecdote. Even more astonishing, at least to me, is that Sinden suffered
from "negative buoyancy." Negative buoyancy is a condition in which a person is
unable to float in water. In Sinden's case, negative buoyancy was discovered, he
says, while filming a shipwreck scene in The Cruel Sea (1953). Sinden started
to sink and was rescued from drowning by his co-star Jack Hawkins.

Almost all human beings float. Bob like corks. I don't, and neither did my
father nor my male descendants. As a family, we're sinkers. I don't know why,
except that perhaps we have an eccentric specific gravity or because our swim
bladders go on the fritz, like sick fish. We regularly and uniformly plunge to
the bottom, like a stone or a heavy lump of lead.

How wonderful to know that there is a dignified name for our peculiar family
trait: "negative buoyancy."

And now we can be consoled that we're not alone.

There's got to be a support group for the negatively buoyant out there,
somewhere.