Title: Another Visit to the Coffee Shop
Date: January 01, 2010

Reading at one of our local Starbucks, I was, as is often the case, lost in my
book. But I looked up when a late 20s-early 30s blonde and bearded man sat down
at a table across the way. I noticed that he was holding his cup of coffee in an
odd way. And then I realized that where his right hand should have been there
were a pair of stainless steel hooks. Sad, I thought. And yet he seemed cheerful
and optimistic. I wondered if I would be in such good spirits if I had lost a
hand in an accident. I went back to reading, but looked up again when he fumbled
with the sleeves of his jacket. And then I saw that he had no left hand either.
Instead, a  pair of hooks, left and right, where hands and fingers should be.
What terrible accident could have caused a young man to lose both hands, I
wondered. Perhaps I was more sensitive than usual, but I was moved almost to
tears as I watched him manipulate his coffee and his napkin and his muffin with
his mechanical prosthetics. Soon his young and attractive girlfriend joined him.
She came on aluminum crutches. "Must have broken her foot," I thought. Then I
saw that there was no foot and that she had only one leg.

I'm slow, but I figured it out at last.

Soldiers. Home from Iraq. Bombs -- IEDs --  took off his hands and her leg.
They met at a rehabilitation hospital. Fell in love. They're trying to start
life over again.

I'm not ashamed that I turned away and started to cry.

And then grief converted to anger.

That damned useless war! That idiot ignoramus Bush! That villain Cheney!. Those
two megalomaniacs, and their co-conspirators,  who started this war -- they're
sitting pretty right now, aren't they? But these young folks right next to me --
they're not sitting so comfortably. They've paid the price.

Belatedly, I wish them all the joy that life can offer. As for crazy George and
strutting Dick, there's no penalty that they can pay, there's no retribution
sufficient -- but if their pernicious bodies would rot half a centimeter a day,
why, that would be a start.