Title: Anadromous or Catadromous?
Date: February 12, 2021

Until this last week, when I read Patrik Svensson's Book of Eels (2019), I
had never encountered either of these lovely and mysterious adjectives. I'm
delighted to add "anadromous" and "catadromous," along with their cousin
"diadromous" to my vocabulary, though when I'll be able to drop any of these
words into my quotidian or even hebdomadal discourse is not immediately obvious,
especially inasmuch as I'm not all that confident about their accentuation.
Moreover, I rarely get into heart-to-hearts about icthyic migration.

Anadromous fishes hatch and spend their first months in freshwater streams and
rivers but then they migrate to the vasty deep, where they grow and mature.
When they feel ready, they return to the streams in which they were spawned
to deposit and fertilize their eggs. Salmons are famously anadromous (as well
as romantic and celebrated), but equally so are less-heralded smelt, herring,
and shad. Eels, on the other hand, are catadromous. They are hatched deep
in the ocean and then drift and wander to freshwater streams and rivers.
European eels may spend, according to Svensson, as many as fifteen years in the
shallows until they get the urge for going. No one knows what calls to them,
but they plain have to go. Then they set out for the dangerous Sargasso Sea
in the mid- Atlantic. Eel reproduction has entirely evaded the eyes of human
investigators.  Nor has a single eel egg ever been identified. Eels are modest,
private, discreet. No one  knows if or how eels select their mates. Do they
enact elaborate courtship rituals, or do the females simply lay their putative
eggs amidst a cloud of eelish milt?

Eels are not kosher, but not because they are catadromous. The rules, as set
out in Leviticus, are very clear: "Everything in the waters that has fins and
scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, you may eat. But anything in the
seas or the rivers that has not fins and scales is detestable to you."  Why
the Lord of Hosts set His face against shrimp and clams is unknowable -- but it
worked, in the sense that the religion survived and, some say, prospered for
lo these three thousand years. Food taboos are a common feature of religions
-- they help to separate us from them. But shouldn't taboos be minimally
consistent?  If the author or authors of Leviticus had said, don't eat eels,
they're slimy, ugly and tasteless to boot -- well that would be a religious
prohibition I could honor. But the scales thing, I don't know, because it's now
clear that eels do have scales (as well as fins). Eel scales are very small.
They are embedded in the skin, and they are smothered with eel slime. They are
difficult to find, but they're definitely, unquestionably present. Yet the
authorities continue to deride eels as treyf and have added the distinctly
unBiblical gloss that the fish's scales must be visible and detachable without
harming the skin. Unjust to eels, I say. I think they deserve a retrospective
pass and a full rabbinical apology.

My reasons for not eating eels are plain and sincere: eels are hideous beasts.
Even Svensson, who loves eels and eel-fishing, admits that they are loathsome to
any sensible palate.

Query: my daughter was born and lived here in her home town until she was
eighteen years old. Then she left for California, where she birthed and raised
her two fine children. Now she's returned home to her native streams at last. So
is she catadromous or anadromous?