Title: Robert Bage's Hermsprong (1796)
Date: October 13, 2007

Back in the early '60s, when I was just beginning to learn about literature,
I enrolled in a course on the eighteenth-century English novel. I diligently
worked my way through an ambitious syllabus. There were more than twenty novels,
some of them monumental in size, like Clarissa and Tristram Shandy;  and others
blessedly brief, like Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield and Mackenzie's Man of
Feeling. Diligent lad that I was, I read every single word, every syllable.
In addition to the required reading, there was also an extensive register of
recommended works. On this intimidating list was Robert Bage's Hermsprong,
which, forty-five years after the fact, I've at last read. Better very very late
than never at all.

It's a good book -- not a masterpiece, but very fine, very enjoyable. The plot
is  unoriginal. An heiress falls for a fortune-hunter, elopes to the continent,
but is rescued just before the threatened deflowering; a domineering wicked
old guy forces his unwilling daughter into marriage with an idiot aristocrat;
a man of mysterious origin turns out to be the estate's true heir -- that sort
of thing. But other elements are less cliched. Charles Hermsprong, raised among
Indians on the banks of the "Powtomack," is a plain-spoken 'merican radical;
Maria Fluart is as witty and defiant and independent as Benedick's Beatrice --
sometimes it seems as though her lines could have been composed by Oscar Wilde
himself. Maria is by far the most vibrant character in the novel. If Bage were
as advanced a thinker as he sometimes pretends to be, he would have let his hero
marry her.It's disappointing that Hermsprong falls for a conventional dutiful
young simperer, while Maria, too strong for any man in the novel, is left on the
putative shelf.

Here's a passage that jumps out at the reader. It's from a description of two of
the novel's minor characters:

"But the tender interest they had in each other was torn asunder by pride and
prejudice, and this pride and prejudice, she feared...."

Whoa, daddy!  Jane Austen's novel was originally named "First Impressions" and
only borrowed its familiar title from Bage late in the game. It is obvious that
right there on Jane's bookshelf, next to Sir Charles Grandison and Tom Jones and
the novels of Frances Burney, was a copy of Hermsprong, which Ms. Austen (unlike
your dilatory '60s student) was smart enough to read in a timely manner.