Title: My New Mirror
Date: March 22, 2010

There's been some criticism -- justified, I must admit -- about the dexterity
of my shaving. It appears that my face has become more, what shall I say?
intricate over the last years, and has developed some interesting crannies that
resist the approach of the razor. In order to improve my shaving technique, I
bought one of those circular magnifying mirrors that allows you to view your
face in such great detail that you can hunt down and harvest that last otherwise
inaccessible follicle. The mirror seemed like a good idea, but, dear friends
of a certain age, I do not recommend this purchase. Big mistake.

It had been many years since I studied my face so intently. Things have
happened. While I can still locate the remnants of the scar on my forehead,
where, when I was a boy, I was pushed into a subway pillar, the mark used to
reside just at the hairline. Now, the hairline has migrated a good three
inches to the north of the scar and -- thanks to the new mirror -- I can
clearly detect that the first remaining inch or so of brown-gray hair, which
I had thought to be of a healthy bushiness, consists of no more than a few
well-spaced strands. And what's this cross-hatching on my forehead? Not just
the prominent horizontal furrows but new vertical ones as well -- when did they
appear? And the deep gorges around my eyebrows! And the eyebrows themselves --
when did they become parti-colored? Randomly black and white? And how many
years ago did these long recurved eyebrow hairs begin to sprout? Fie upon it
--'tis an unweeded garden that's gone to seed. Why are the eyebrows themselves
so utterly asymmetrical? and what should I make of the thicket of whiteheads
-- or whatever the heck they are -- at all four corners of my bloodshot eyes? 
Was it always the case that my eyes were set so deeply into those wrinkled
dells? And my nose-- thanks to the new mirror, I can plainly see the scars
where the pre- cancerous lesions were frozen off. What in the world has
happened to the tip of my nose?  Was it always so preternaturally pointy? I
could use it as a letter- opener. When I lift my head just slightly, I see
that my nostrils, which I always took to be a matched pair, have set out on
separate paths. The right one now sits at a 45 degree angle to the left. It's
wandered off-center, like the eye of a flounder. And those nasty black hairs
jutting from my nostrils -- I must attend to them. And look, there are long
hairs coming out of my ears as well. And hanging, floppy earlobes marked with
deep lines. What are these fleshy nobs at the sides of my mouth? Were my lips
always covered with white flakes?  How is it that the left side of my underlip
is so much thicker than the right? And my pearly whites? Cracked and chipped
and not much of a row: sixty or so years of gnawing has given each tooth its
own unique size, shape, color, and identity. And what's this under my chin? A
single off-center hanging wattle? No symmetry even in Wattlelandia? Friends,
this magnifying mirror is a disaster. I should have stopped shaving entirely
and grown a camouflaging beard.

But hold on, there's some good news. It may not be a youthful or symmetrical
face, but It's not unfriendly. There's no sneer, or lip curl, or disdain, or
anger. Puzzlement, certainly. Wryness, perhaps. Curiosity, for sure.

Folks, at least we're not in a wicked-Dorian-Gray-kind-of-situation.

Wear and tear, yes; villainy, no. Things could be worse.