Title: Pretty Poison (1960);  Tuesday Weld (1943-     )
Date: March 27, 2010

Pretty Poison was released in 1960 to excellent notices. I remember adding it to
the must-see list. But I didn't get around to it at the time, probably because
the film wasn't widely distributed. But Pretty Poison stuck in my mind -- or
rather it was the combination of Anthony Perkins and Tuesday Weld that excited
my interest. During the VHS years I made another attempt to see the movie,
but it was apparently stuck in some sort of royalty-and-ownership dispute
and never made it onto tape. And then another twenty years elapsed and I tried
again, this time typing the name into my Netflix queue, and, mirabile dictu,
there it was.  So at last, after fifty years, a cd of Pretty Poison appeared
in the mailbox.

It's a fine film, well worth the wait. I don't know what I would have
thought about it in 1960, but in 2010 it seems like a late variant of
1950s film noir and an important but unacknowledged way station on the road
from Double Indemnity to Body Heat. It offers a dangerous jeune fille fatale
in the high school cheerleader Mary Ann Stepanek, some great plot twists, and a
creepy young man who's not as clever as he thinks (very similar to his lineal
descendant, the fatuous lawyer Ned Racine). The photography, all sunlit and
cheerful, disguises the noirish themes and keeps the audience off balance. The
screenwriter, Lorenzo Semple Jr., was, if I remember correctly, just emerging
from the McCarthy blacklist, which may be why the film stresses cold-war themes
-- spies and sabotage and the like. Can it be accidental that, in the last year
of the Eisenhower administration, a well-meaning but ineffective government
employee as given the name Azenauer?

At the very time Tuesday Weld, scion of an ancient Massachusetts family
performed in this film, I was taking courses in Cambridge, in Weld Hall. How
could anyone not be struck by her great name? Tuesday Weld is linked, in my
mind, not only to the Saltonstalls, Peabodys, and Lodges but also to Billy
Sunday, Rick Monday, Joe Friday, January Jones, Fredric March, May West, June
Jones, August Busch, Susan Sontag, Domenico Scarlatti and Jeudi Garland.