Title: In Which the Blogger Loses his Cool
Date: November 02, 2010

The Takacs Quartet graces us with six superb concerts a year.  It's true
that they sometimes hanker after strange new composers -- Psathos, Part etc.
-- whose compositions set my teeth on edge like the vile squealings of the
wry-necked fife or like a brazen canstick turned or like the gratings of a dry
wheel on an axletree  -- but mostly they play what distinguished Quartets are
ordained to play, that is, the great central European tradition from Haydn
to Brahms.  But last night, the Takacs, eek and alas, ventured into new
and grim territory.  Horribile dictu, they offered an original, commissioned
Drama that purported to be Serious and Illuminating.  It warn't.  It was
a interminable playlet about Beethoven's last years founded on the composer's
letters and conversation books.  It was barren.  It was predictable,
uninsightful, reductive, shallow, witless, dull, and pretentious.  I started
to squirm (boredom feeding on embarrassment and embarrassment on boredom)
after a couple of minutes, then broke into a sweat, but after a few minutes
resigned myself to my middle-of-the-row captivity and I did what I always do
in such situations -- recited to myself long-ago-memorized poetry.  When the
Drama mercifully ended, I was consoled to hear the woman in front of me (a
member of the music faculty) say to her companion, "Do you think they know how
bad that was?"

Do they?  I hope so.  I hope that the playwright, a tyro named  ------
Morse, recognizes that he's not Tom Stoppard or even Tom Stoppard diluted to
a 1% tincture, and that he takes up a profession that inflicts less pain on
innocent bystanders.

I left dispirited, especially for the actors, who tried to force a marriage
of Shakespearean style of performance to prosaic vocabulary and sentence
structures.  I do not use the word "Shakespearean" in a good way:  I refer
to that highly artificial, unnatural way of speaking and moving that, inherited
and debased from an ancient tradition, has stupefied and narcotized dutiful
culture- hungry audiences at summer festivals all over America.  Shakespeare
himself was clear that he did not want his actors to strut and bellow, but strut
and bellow was what they did last night.  If the actors did not split the
ears of all the groundlings, they certainly split mine.  Why do they speak
in that ridiculous manner when their aim should be "to hold the mirror up to
nature."  It's wrong of me to say so, but I felt that I could look into the
soul of the actor who played Beethoven and see a man who imagined that  he
was playing Lear at the Old Vic, when he was in fact performing in a play that
might, just might, satisfy the requirements for an M.A. in creative writing
at some off-brand college ("he's worked very hard on this so we might as well
pass him"), and that he was going to show "them" how it's done, but instead he
offered us sufferers a copy of a copy of a pale copy.

Egads, I'm breaking into a sweat again just thinking about it.

I pay good money to hear the Takacs -- and concert after concert, I get my
money's worth, and much more.  I want Schubert.  I want Mozart.  If I wanted
amateur theatricals, I would go to he local dinner theater.  Or to the high
school around the corner.