Title: News from Alameda
Date: March 31, 2008

We’re in Alameda, California, for ten days, visiting the grandchildren and
also their parents. The big news here is that the Alameda public schools
are in a money crunch. The root cause is Proposition 13, the granddaddy of
pernicious tax-limiting amendments (we have one in Colorado, too -- it’s
paralyzed us). The immediate precipitant of the Alameda crisis is Governor
Schwarzenegger’s plan to balance the budget by cutting brazillions of dollars
out of the education budget. Public-spirited citizens in the island city
have responded by proposing a supplementary “parcel tax” -- most people
say property tax –- of $120 per "parcel" of real estate to help the school
district survive these dark days. To me, the tax supplement is an imperfect but
obvious fix.  Public schools must be supported, and if the state shirks its
responsibility, local effort must ride to the rescue.

There’s the usual testy opposition: too much fat in the budget; teachers are
overpaid; school board is incompetent; bad planning. I know enough about public
education's lean diet not to be swayed.

What gets my goat is that some of the arguments against the supplement are just
plain mean. Here’s an example. A local curmudgeon named Guy Smith has written
a guest opinion in the Alameda Journal under the heading: “Make Parents Pay
for Child’s Education,” His gist: “It is no longer appropriate to tax
childless homes for public education.” And also:  people who support such
taxes suffer from “collectivist mentalities."

And here I thought that the American constitution had in its preamble a phrase
about promoting the “general" and not just the individual welfare. No doubt 
Mr. Smith would stigmatize Madison and Jefferson as early collectivists.

The argument that the childless need not contribute to education is flimsy  --
so slight that it’s hard to believe that it’s argued in good faith and is
not just a rationale for skinflintism. Does Mr. Smith think that he shouldn’t
pay for the fire department or the police department, except on the days that he
happens to use them?

Does he think that he doesn’t profit from the educational system because he
has no children in school. He can read and write. Did he teach himself?  He’s
sitting at a computer, designed by someone with an education. His chair and his
table and his coffee and the cup out of which he drinks his coffee were designed
or planned or imported or constructed or distributed by people who could read
and write and figure. Take away the learning of his predecessors and members of
his own age-cohort and Mr. Smith would be out there chasing squirrels with a
flint hand-ax. And whining about the cost of the clan-supplied flint.

The essence of  Mr. Smith’s argument is selfish and narcissistic  --
“I’ve got mine – you take care of  yourself.”  It’s shallow, vulgar
libertarianism.

It's a shame that these nay sayers need to be reminded that we’re all in this
together. We’re interconnected -- a tissue of tessellations.

Even Mr. Smith must know, deep in his heart, that when he promotes the general
welfare, he improves his own lot. In fact, the parcel tax will be the best
investment he’ll ever make.