Title: On Aggasiz
Date: March 29, 2009

Louis Agassiz was, Darwin aside, the nineteenth century's most acclaimed
naturalist. He was the first to speculate about the ice ages and the first
to suggest that mastodons and other giant quadrupeds had become extinct as a
consequence of the deep freeze in Asia and America. Agassiz was much celebrated
in his lifetime, and at his death, Harvard, where he taught, shut down for a day
for his majestic funeral. James Russell Lowell contributed an eleven-page elegy
to the Atlantic. "Seldom, if ever, has the death of a man of science been so
deeply felt," reported The Nation.

These details are drawn from Barry Werth's Banquet at Delmonico's (2009), an
oddly-titled but informative and accessible history of Darwinism in gilded-age
America.

Here's a striking and crowded sentence about Aggasiz, also drawn from
Werth's book. "The son of a strong-willed assistant pastor to the Protestant
congregation of a lakeside village in French-speaking Switzerland who married
well, he was his parents' fifth child but the first to survive infancy."

Agassiz was a therefore a "replacement child" with a vengeance. He "replaced"
four lost siblings (but whether male or female Werth does not say). Imagine his
parents' pain; imagine how young Louis must have been cherished and protected
but also, possibly, afflicted with the 'guilt of the survivor.' Or how he must
have unconsciously competed with his deceased and therefore perfect brothers and
sisters. And then try to imagine both his mother's suffering and also how his
aspiring and apparently devout father might have responded to such an appalling
succession of family tragedies.

Agassiz was America's foremost opponent of evolution. He rejected natural
selection because, he claimed, "Darwinism" led inevitably to "atheism" -- which
hasn't turned out to be the case, although I personally can't imagine why it
hasn't. Agassiz took his own idiosyncratic route and proselytized for the
curious and retrograde doctrine of "polygenism" -- the idea that the various
races of man were separately -- and hierarchically -- created. Agassiz imagined
eight different kinds of humans, ranked according to their "cranial capacity"
-- Caucasian, Arctic, Mongol, American Indian, Negro, Hottentot, Malay, and
Australian (thereby running afoul of both "monogenists" like Darwin and bible-
worshippers who acknowledged only one creation -- that of Adam and Eve). For
Agassiz, each species was "a thought of God." An odd path for usually observant
scientist. Agassiz was the favorite intellectual of slaveholders and their
apologists.

Agassiz was also a virulent and odious racist. Here's what he wrote to his
mother when he stopped at a hotel in which he was served by black waiters. "It
is impossible to repress the feeling that they are not of the same blood as us.
Seeing their black faces with their fat lips and their grimacing teeth, the
wool on their heads, their bent knees and elongated hands, their large curved
fingernails, and above all the livid colors of their palms, I could not turn
my eyes from their face in order to tell them to keep their distance, and when
they advanced that hideous hand toward my plate to serve me, I wished that I
could leave in order to eat my bread apart rather than dine with such service.
What unhappiness for the white race to have tied its existence so closely with
that of the Negroes. God protect us." And so on, and more, and worse. I can't
remember reading a paragraph that more turned the stomach or that more cried out
for psychological analysis.

I cannot help wondering whether there might not be a connection between
Agassiz's status as a replacement child and his embrace of polygenism. Is it
possible that he unconsciously thought that he was a special and superior
person because he, of all his siblings, was chosen for survival?  And that in
the same way, white people were chosen and superior among all the "races" of
humankind. His deeply-held resistance to the evidence that persuaded almost all
of his fellow naturalists is inexplicable -- unless he clung to the doctrine of
special creation for reasons that were fundamentally irrational. Put it this
way: Agassiz's unusual situation required him to believe that he, and people
with whom he could identify, were marked for distinction -- and that all others
were inferior. One of five among the siblings, one of eight among the races.
How else could he free himself of the guilt that he lived and thrived while his
apparently less deserving siblings had perished?

Broad-brush cheap pop psychologizing, to be sure -- but let's reserve
judgment until we find some time to get ourselves to the library and learn a
little about this brilliant, disgusting man.