Title: Slavery in Brooklyn, Oh No!
Date: January 05, 2020

Of all human institutions, slavery must be the most loathsome and soul-distorting (although wars, genocides, massacres, pogroms, and wrongful executions are certainly contenders for worst of worst).

It's easy to think that slavery is something ancient and foreign. Not something to concern ourselves about -- not part our life, nor my life. And yet American slavery was only eighty years into the past -- the blink of an eye -- when I was growing up in the 1940s in Flatbush. At P.S 217 or at Erasmus Hall, neither our textbooks nor our teachers made much of its recency. Slavery was not our past; not here, not in Flatbush. It was a crime of the distant South -- of Mississippi and Alabama, long ago. In the land of cotton, not the land of Coney Island and Jackie Robinson. Slavery was distant chronologically and geographically.

What an unpleasant revelation, then, to encounter the story of Flatbush slavery in Thomas J. Campanella's painstaking and eloquent history, Brooklyn, The Once and Future City (Princeton, 2019).

The facts: "slavery was an essential element of New York life in the 17th and 18th centuries." "Only Charleston, South Carolina surpassed New York (i.e. Manhattan) in the number of enslaved residents." Campanella reports that there was "no place in New York that had more slaves per capita than Kings county, where one in three residents was in bonded servitude." One in three? In my neighborhood?  How could we not have known this?  How have we remained oblivious?

Slavery, I now learn, was especially established in "Dutch towns like New Utrecht, where 75 percent of white households owned slaves." And also "in Midwout [our Midwood] where African-Americans constituted 41 percent of the population in 1790."

In 1790, the population of the town of Flatbush -- my Flatbush -- included 378 enslaved people, 12 free black people, and 551 white people – 75% of whom were slaveholders.The farmers of Brooklyn "formed a Southern planter class in miniature."

And it was the farmlands of Brooklyn -- Flatbush, Flatlands, Gravesend, and New Utrecht -- that supplied Manhattan with grain and fruits and vegetables raised with slave labor. No slaves, no Brooklyn; no Brooklyn, no Big Apple.

In 1799, the New York state legislature passed the Gradual Manumission Act: all children born of slave women after July 4 were to be free though they must remain indentured to their masters until the age of twenty-five for women and 28 for men. Though it seems a weak and toothless compromise, the new laws led to the rapid decline of slavery. In 1827, one hundred and ninety-three years ago, slavery was declared illegal in New York. (Vermont, to its credit, had abolished slavery two generations before, in 1777).

Here's a Brooklyn bill of sale for "one certain neger girl called Anna" to Jan Lefferts for thirty-eight pounds. Her owner, Gilleyam Cornel, was illiterate. He signed with "his mark."



From what I've learned in the past about the history of Brooklyn, and with these revelations, it's undeniable that the haunts of my childhood (East 9 Street, P. S. 217, St. Rose of Lima, Newkirk Station), were not very long ago farmed with slave labor. It's horrible and disillusioning, but it must be acknowledged.