Title: Me and Critters
Date: December 19, 2019

An old friend reminds me that I once kept a cat as a pet. I had forgotten.

Here's the story. There was a cat and I was overfond of her. We left the cat with a friend when we went on a three-week vacation. She refused to eat and starved to death before we returned. I've never owned another animal since. Too much responsibility.

Besides, I was a city boy who had lived a concrete and chain-link-fence childhood. No room for animals except maybe squirrels and pigeons. But because I've owned some rural land in Vermont since the 1960s, a surprising number of critters have passed through my life, though I've never owned a single one of them. Some have made an impression.

There was the pair of geese, Brady and Lady, who liked to peck at the backs of my knees and also liked to frighten the children. I once watched my older son (when he was a small boy) mount a chair and in revenge leak all over Brady, who was sunbathing. A primitive assertion of dominance. There were chickens, many of them. I enjoyed the eggs but I was repelled by chicken sexual mores. And then the ducks. I remember once saying "Those ducks (there was mother and a dozen or so ducklings) are so loud they could be right in the kitchen." And they were. The heifers, July and September; I was very fond of September. I loved the way she cleaned her nostrils with her long tongue. Jackson the runaway horse. A nameless piglet, whom we boarded one summer, and whom the kids tried to teach to play soccer with his nose. Despite being assiduously tutored, he never improved. Rabbits, many of them; pets, not food. The next-door-neighbor's horses, all noble Morgans, both chestnuts and bays, all pastured on our fields: Gillian, the lead mare, Liz a wayward rule-bender; Gabe, an ex-boy, very friendly; Harmony, beautiful as a foal, who liked to look in my pockets for apples. Also in the back pasture: sheep, Scottish Blackfaces, many of them but no more than twenty at a time, with none of whom I ever established a proper one-on-one relationship. Occasionally I helped to track down a stray, but that's the extent of it. Goats, my favorites, with personality to spare -- dwarf Nigerians mostly. Excellent pets, excellent playmates for the grandchildren. The glamorous mysterious rooster who came out of the woods, adopted us, and liked to  tom-peep into our bedroom. And then these last few years, the miniature donkeys, Big Joe and Little Joe, who winter in Connecticut and whom members of the family love for their beauty and the music of their braying.