Title: Can You Believe It?
Date: December 29, 2008

And now a brief quiz for Metablogian readers who are familiar
with nineteenth- century fiction. I will describe the situation and quote a
short excerpt, and you will be required to identify the novelist. Ready? 
Let's go. Here's the story: a clergyman considers whether to commit a
murder.  Although he takes no concrete action, he's overcome with guilt about
what might have been. Here's a sample of his extensive, tortured musings.

He struggled to drive from his mind and from his eyes the phantom of the
terrible deed but that he did not succeed was made evident to himself by the hot
clammy drops of sweat which came out upon his brow, by his wakefulness through
the livelong night, by the care with which his ears watched for the sound of
the young man's coming as though it were necessary that he should be assured
that the murder had in truth not been done.  Before that hour had come he found
himself to be shaking even in his bed; to be drawing the clothes around him to
dispel the icy cold, though the sweat did still stand upon his brow;  to be
hiding his eyes under the bedclothes in order that he might not see something
which seemed to be visible to him through the utmost darkness of the chamber.
Why then, could he not sleep?  Why should he be hot and shiver with cold by
turns? Why should horrid phantoms perplex him in the dark?

And the correct answer is?  Obviously, it's Russian anguish, the novelist is
Fyodor Doestoevsky and the passage is from Crime and Punishment.

Except that it's not. Surprise. It's Anthony Trollope, master of manners,
anthropologist of English civilization. The character who is described is not
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, but Thomas Greenwood, D. D.; the novel is Marion
Fay and the year is 1882. (Crime and Punishment appeared in Russian in 1866,
in English in 1914).

In Dostoevsky's novel, Raskolnikov does the deed right at the outset. There's
no murder at all in Marion Fay. As is common in Trollope's last novels, there's
a flirtation with boundary-breaking (bigamy in Dr. Wortle's School, premarital
sex in An Eye for an Eye, interclass marriage in this particular novel), but
there's also a withdrawal or hesitation.

Marion Fay would have been quite something if Trollope hadn't lost his nerve
and had let Greenwood pull the trigger.

It would have been an even stronger piece of fiction if Lord Hampstead had
actually married the low-born tubercular Quaker lass and if Hampstead's sister
Frances had married the Post Office clerk George Roden before, not after, it was
discovered that he was an Italian Duke by birth. But Trollope drew back from
the dilemmas he created, alas and alack, and as a result there is no  English
parallel to Dostoevsky's radicalism. More's the pity.