Title: Sexual Dimorphism -- What's the point?
Date: April 25, 2017

By all rights I should have been attending to the intricate areas of my face
while shaving, but I lapsed into a reverie. My obsession of the moment--the
beard. Why? Why in the world do human males grow hair on their faces? What's the
point? The beard is completely valueless except to Gillette and Schick and now
Harry.

If the beard had a genuine function and if it honestly kept a person warm in
winter, then for what reason would evolution deprive the gals of equivalent
protection?

Do bearded males garner a larger share of the nubile maidens than the shaved and
beardless? Or a disproportionate share of the wealth? I know of no evidence that
they do so. The fact that most men shave their beards argues that beards lack
power or function.

It's sexual dimorphism without purpose or logic. My guess--and it's only a guess
--is that the beard-gene clung to a gene with a useful male purpose a couple of
hundred thousand years ago and never let go. Accidental hirsuteness.

I suppose that there are times when sexual dimorphism can be useful. Those
magnificent manes sported by the lions of the Serengeti certainly make a
formidable statement--noli me tangere and by the way remember to keep your paws
off the the ladies in my harem. I can see that--but then, the males of the
enormous extinct European lion managed without a ruff, as do Bengal tigers.

The gorgeous display of the male peacock is exuberant but inessential--more
subtle birds manage to signal their gender and their availability without such a
prodigious waste of resources.

I should be relieved that it's only the beard that I have to worry about.
Imagine if by some quirk of evolution, males of my species grew a big rack of
antlers. Way more inconvenient than a mere beard. What a bother!! I can easily
imagine myself lodged in a narrow doorway, or lying in bed trying to find a
comfortable position while the antlers scratch the headboard, put holes in the
pillow, or poke the eye of the beloved.

Perhaps an advanced civilization would demand that we disbud the antlers at
birth? Or we might go the other route and celebrate a magnificent set. We might
have evolved into a society that decorated or colored or polished the antlers.
"How are you wearing your antlers this winter?" "Natural brown, I think, this
year, but with golden highlights." Chains of "Mr. Antler" or "Antler King" shops
("discount on sharpening this week only"). And for guys declined into the vale
of years--prosthetic antlers.

Better a beard than antlers. Definitely.