Title: A Bad Case of Irony Overload (IO)
Date: April 30, 2007

O m' god. I'm having a serious attack of Irony Overload. This is no joke. In the
last few days, the news has been saturated with extreme instances of Natural
Irony. It's dangerous stuff. Left unchecked, you know, IO can progress to Morbid
Cynicism (MC), which is terminal. The cases to which I refer are not your run-
of-the-mill family-values preacher caught pants-down with a male prostitute.
These are more colorful, more exotic performances.

Paul Wolfowitz, World Bank prexy and ferocious campaigner against corruption and
nepotism, "directed" that his very own girlfriend or house mate or whatever she
might be called, be hired at a handsome tax-free salary at a State Department
agency where she's to be guaranteed superior evaluations and inordinately large
salary increases. It's a variety of cronyism that we can call "nepotistical
irony."

Another: Robert E. Coughlin, deputy chief of the criminal division of our very
own US of A Department of Justice, which is overseeing the investigation of Jack
Abramoff, suddenly needs to spend more time with his family when investigators
scrutinize his financial relationship to Kevin Ring, an Abramoff stooge. What
are the odds? The investigator supervising his own investigation! There's
enough irony in this story to fill a barrel with monkeys or, alternatively, an
industrial size hen house with packs of famished foxes. And there's more to the
story. Last year, the very same Robert E. Coughlin received, at the hands of
Alberto Gonzalez himself, the highly coveted Attorney-General Award for Fraud
Prevention.

And just yesterday, when I thought that my IO index couldn't rise any higher,
Global AIDS Ambassador and Deputy Secretary of State Randy (actual name!!)
Tobias, a big abstinence guy and the overseer of a program designed to help
men in poor countries "develop healthy relationships with women" resigned "for
personal reasons" when it was revealed that he had been regularly dialing up an
"escort service" that sent shady ladies to his home.  Asked "if he knew any of
the alleged call girls," Randy replied that in "he didn’t remember them at
all. He said it was like ordering pizza." Women are like pizza?  To a man whose
mission is "to help men in poor countries develop... etc., etc."  In the face
of such a revelation, how's an ordinary guy supposed to keep Morbid Cynicism at
bay.

By the way, Randy T. has chosen to go with the Ted Haggard defense. Yes, he
frequented prostitutes, but not for sex, only for massage.

So here we go again, dear readers. Pop quiz, multiple choice. Your back is
hurting and you need a massage. Whom do you call?  Two choices:  a) massage
therapist, or b) a notorious madam.

If you answered A, you win a lifetime membership in the Committee to Stamp
out Morbid Cynicism.  If you answered B., you receive a lucrative patronage
appointment in the Department of Justice plus a secret e-mail account with the
Republican National Committee.