Title: Sex and the Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Conveyance
Date: April 18, 2007

Regular readers of this blague are well aware that I have repeatedly indulged
my bemusement at the names of extinct or obsolescent horsedrawn conveyances.
My point is that modern readers, who know precisely what is signified  --
in design, in metal, rubber and plastic, and especially in social value --
by such words as Jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, and jalopy, know just about zip about
"fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet," "sulky," "surrey,"
"curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler," "spring-van," "berlin,"
"barouche," "britchka," "troika," "wurt," "tandem," "caleche," "tilbury," "dog-
cart," "wagonette," "go-cart," "victoria," "brougham," "diligence," "clarence"
or "post-chaise."  If we notice these words at all, we tend to savor them as
archaic Victorian music rather than to identify and evaluate them as specific
forms of transportation.

Return with us now to the unthrilling 1950s, before pre-marital cohabitation
became ordinary. In those days, automobiles reeked of sex. Indeed, I can
remember that one sociologist described them as "portable bedrooms" -- a
witticism that produced profound envy in those of us who came from automobile-
less families.  While I knew that Nashes and Studebakers and big ol' DeSotos
could serve as mobile boudoirs, I must confess that I had never suspected that
horsedrawn vehicles could perform the same function. The eye-opener came by
way of some sly and wicked goings-on in Flaubert's Madame Bovary.  Here's the
situation: Emma has been wooed for a hundred or so pages by her young admirer,
Leon. They are both eager to consummate their affair, but there's no convenient
venue. Taking fate into his hands, Leon "pushes" Emma into a cab. "'Where to,
Monsieur?' asked the cab driver. 'Wherever you'd like,' said Leon."  And then
Flaubert describes the route around Rouen taken by coachman, cab, and lovers.
He give us a page and a half of paragraphs like this one:  "The coach promptly
began to move again, passing through Saint-Sever, along the Quai des Corandiers
and the Quai aux Meules, over the bridge once more, through the Place du
Champ- de-Mars and behind the gardens of the Home for the Elderly, where, in
the sunshine, old men clad in black jackets stroll up and down a terrace green
with ivy. It climbed up the Boulevard Bouvreuil, traveled along the Boulevard
Cauchoise, then right over Mont-Riboudet as far as the hill at Deville." 
At discreet intervals, Flaubert interrupts the narrative: "'Keep going,"
cried a voice from inside...."  "'Keep going!' shouted the voice, even more
furiously...."  "The coachman could not understand what rage for locomotion
could be compelling this pair never to stop." Eventually, the cab "drew up in an
alley near the Beauvoisine district, and a woman stepped out, walking off with
her veil lowered, never looking back."

Nineteenth-century writers were not allowed to be explicit about sexual events,
so they had to adopt various circumlocutions and codes. They lacked the freedom
of both earlier (Fielding, said Thackeray, "was the last of our writers who
drew a man") and later (post-Joyce) novelists. To write frankly about the act
of intercourse was absolutely taboo.  Despite the obstacles, Flaubert does a
excellent job of suggesting both the duration, the energy and the jouissance
that Emma and Leon experience while their coach was "tossing about like a ship."

I suspect that Flaubert's readers had little trouble comprehending what is meant
by the passengers' sudden "rage for locomotion."