Title: Innogen
Date: April 10, 2020

In Cymbeline (1611?), Shakespeare, still innovating even at the end of his
career, deepens the character of Innogen by supplying her with an unusual
psychological trait. He presents her to us as an escapist or fantasist who leaps
to imagine herself a different person in a different world. Here's Innogen
early in the play, when she realizes that her cross-class marriage to Postumus
(she's a princess, he's a poor but worthy gentleman) is at risk: "Would I were/
A neatherd's daughter, and my Leonatus/ Our neighbor shepherd's son." She
fantasizes herself surrendering her nobility to become a peasant. A few moments
later, she learns that her lover Leonatus and his rival the clotpoll Cloten have
been in a sword fight and that Cloten has retreated. Innogen's reaction: "I
would they were in Afric both together/ Myself by with a needle, that I might
prick/ The goer-back". Why Africa? Because, among other reasons, it is far from
the British court where Innogen's activities are heavily restricted. So in two
short speeches Innogen has expressed willingness to being transformed in both
class and geography. Shortly afterward, Innogen describes (in another "would
that" imagining) how she would have stared at the retreating ship which takes
Postumus into exile: "I would have broke mine eye-strings, cracked them,/ To
look upon him till the dimunition/ Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle."
Indifferent to physical pain, she now imagines herself transcending not only
class and space, but also the limitations of her own body.

It was no accident that Shakespeare gave Innogen such freedom to re-invent
herself, because in the scenes that follow, she will undergo a series of radical
transformations -- from princess to a "franklin's wife," into a boy cooking
fancy food for three cave-dwelling mountain-men, and then a dutiful page to
the general of the invading Roman army, all the while avoiding betrayal,
attempted rape and apparent poisoning. It's a lot for Innogen to deal with,
but Shakespeare knew exactly what he was doing when he started her off with an
imagination equal to the task.