Title: The Mayflower Hotel
Date: March 28, 2006

We're in Washington  D. C., this week and inadvertently wandered by the
Mayflower Hotel.

A memory: in July of 1952, I stayed at the Mayflower for a few days with my
father's sister, my peripatetic and eccentric Aunt Mollie. It was a rare and
unique event. I came from an automobile-less family, and my parents were not in
the slightest bit adventurous. The trip to Washington was the sole occasion in
my childhood when I was in a city other than New York (and by New York I mean
deepest Brooklyn, with an occasional foray to the Bronx Zoo or to the Museum
of Natural History). It's hard to convey the full measure of the naivete with
which this schoolyard boy approached a new city. I knew that Washington was
smaller than New York and therefore assumed that it would consist of a smaller
Brooklyn, a smaller Manhattan, etc. I had no conception that different cities
had different geographies -- let alone different characters.

Highlights:  the Lincoln Memorial (I was exhilarated), the Jefferson
Memorial, a boat ride to Mount Vernon. My strongest memory is of exciting and
down-to-earth Harry Truman addressing a crowd from the base of the Washington
Monument on the Fourth of July. The result of this voyage into the unknown was
the realization that there were other cities, that they were accessible -- in
short, that there was a world elsewhere.

I'm permanently indebted to my Aunt for allowing me the opportunity to grasp
such a big idea.

And also that there was such a thing as a restaurant. It might seem incredible,
but from birth to college, I didn't enter a restaurant more than a half-a-dozen
times at the very most. In our family, there was neither the money nor the
inclination toward such extravagance. I still consider it a something of a
miracle that a guy like me can walk into a shop, sit down, and that people will
generously put food on my plate. All that I have to do in return is fork over a
few bucks.

Exactly thirty-five years later, I stayed at the Mayflower a second time when
AGP was honored and celebrated. At this Mayflower reprise, it was not Truman
but Ronald Reagan whom we encountered. I remember the dyed hair, the unnatural
orange skin, the ventriloquist's-dummy delivery of the speech that was handed
him, and the undeniable inference that he was already deeply incapacitated by
the Alzheimer's that would eventually kill him.