Title: Beffa -- April 1, 2021
Date: April 01, 2021

Regular readers of this metablague know that Dr. M. has resumed his study of
Italian. Foolish say some, but heroic say others, because to try to master a
language when one is an octogenarian is truly daunting. However, native speakers
of English, even older ones, can, if patient, slowly acquire Italian. Its sounds
are similar and sometimes identical to those of English; the conjugations, only
three of them, are on the whole regular; and many of its words have English or
Latin cognates. For me, pronouns present a problem, because they're sometimes
required when I wouldn't think to use them, and sometimes dropped when I'd
prefer them to be there -- and, moreover, they come in slightly varied direct,
indirect, and reflexive forms. And then there are the pronomi combinati or
double pronouns which are confusing in themselves and which are sometimes but
not always attached to infinitives, gerunds and imperatives as enclitics.
It's probably too late in the game for me to become a fluent speaker, but I
have hopes of becoming a competent reader. I can now read at about the 6th or
7th grade level; I have the grammar under control so it's mostly a problem of
vocabulary and idiom.

For a greater challenge, I've begun to study a little Beffa. Beffa is a
Kartvelian language with admixtures of Cascagian and Ghetti. Fortunately for me,
there's a small Beffan community here in our town. I work with an introductory
textbook -- Pathways to Modern Beffa (2012) by Divino Divano -- and with a
native speaker named Ismail Kartakov. We meet three times a week when he's
available. Sometimes I enjoy a Beffa-speaking dinner with Ismail and his wife
Soraya and their three young children. I've also been to some Beffan parties and
exuberant dances. I sometimes feel odd-man-out but it's been fun. The Beffan
community, reputedly hostile to outsiders, has been very welcoming. And the
goat, mountain oyster, and black radish stew is superb.

Beffa is a bit more complicated than English. For example, while English has
26 consonants, Beffa has 56, including a two kinds of glottal stops that sound
almost like clicks as well as a voiced glottal fricative that resembles a cat's
purr. It also has both a voiced and unvoiced bilabial trill that sound a lot
like an English "raspberry," and an unusual, possibly unique lingual-dental stop
in which the tongue is pushed firmly against not the upper but the lower teeth.
One peculiarity of Beffa is its consonant clusters -- a word may begin with as
many as six consonants yoked together before the first vowel appears. Some words
have an initial six consonants followed by a vowel and then a cluster of five
or six more consonants. This can be strange to English speakers and sometimes
I notice Ismail's younger children giggling at my feeble attempts to replicate
their plosives. (Voiceless plosives are usually aspirated and one must take care
not to insert a schwa between aspirants.) Beffa also has a varied repertoire
of vowels, including a number of diphthongs and a couple of triphthongs. There
aren't any tones, thank goodness. There's one triphthong the use of which can be
perilous, for if you get it wrong the observation "your blue parrot is pining
for the fjords" apparently sounds almost exactly like "my knife is longer and
sharper than yours."

Nouns have both natural and grammatical gender. Nouns can be masculine,
feminine, neuter, ambiguous, common, animate or inanimate. They can be singular,
dual, plural, or paucative (i.e. a few). Neuter nouns rarely have duals. Beffa
has six fully formed declensions, distinguished primarily by the fact that
plurals in declensions 1 and 3 are formed with a prefix, in 2 and 4 by a suffix,
and in 5 and 6 by an infix. There are also some fifteen cases, all useful but
some slightly unusual. There are the familiar nominative, possessive, accusative
and dative (or indirect object). There are also a series of cases that describe
motion: the locative ("the ball that is lying on the ground"), the ablative
(("the ball that is coming in your direction"); the separative ("the ball that
is moving away from you"); the commitative ("the ball that is touching your
hand"); the partitive ("the ball that has left your hand"); the terminative
("the ball that has stopped moving"); the superessive ("the ball that is on top
of another ball"); the penetrative ("the ball that is inside another ball"); the
perditive ("the ball that is lost"); the oscillative ("the ball that is going
back and forth"); the thumpative ("the ball that is bouncing"); the plungitive
"the ball that has fallen into the water"); the remunerative ("the ball that
has been bought or sold"); the joculatorative ("the ball that does not fall
to the ground"); the alfactorative ("the ball that stinks like a corpse");
the perplexive ("the ball that has disappeared"); and the insouciative ("the
ball that has disappeared and no one cares"). Nouns can be either proximate or
obviative; nouns that are central to the discourse (proximate) are declined
very differently than nouns that are of marginal importance (obviative). There
is also an unusual suffix (at least, unusual to me, for I had never encountered
it before) that indicates whether the object specified touches the earth or
is removed from the earth. And an infix which indicates whether the object is
horizontal, vertical, diagonal, spiral, or invisible.

Verbs can be singular dual, plural, paucative, or undetermined: active,
passive or middle. There are five fully-formed conjugations and apparently
remnants of three others that are retained from the past when the language was
more fully synthetic. The most commonly used tenses are present indicative,
imperfect indicative, past imperfect indicative, future indicative, future
imperfect indicative, future perfect indicative, pluperfect indicative, past
pluperfect indicative, future pluperfect indicative, future stative, pluperfect
resultative, present optative, future optative, past imperfect optative, present
subjunctive, future subjunctive, past pluperfect subjunctive, future pluperfect
subjunctive, future pluperfect conditional subjunctive, and future pluperfect
optative conditional subjunctive aorist. Curiously, there is no future imperfect
subjunctive. Moreover, there are two kinds of vocatives: one when a woman
addresses a man; a second when a man addresses a woman or an animal. There
is also votive, a tense that was formerly used for addressing the deities in
prayer, but is now reserved for tribal chiefs, heads of state or royalty. The
votive is very similar to the conditional and the erroneous substitution of
a conditional for a votive was formerly grounds for mutilation but nowadays
leads only to acute embarrassment, or, in the case of a particularly egregious
grammatical lapse, to exile.

Some verbs are ergative so that the subject of either a transitive or
intransitive verb can be in an absolutive case. Some common ergative verbs are
"to become," "to eat,", and "to gouge" (as in, "to gouge out the eyes of an
enemy").

Beffan script is known as "dabbenaggine." This passage comments on the familiar
Beffan proverb, "If you steal my horse, I will steal your wife."

.

Beffa used to be written boustrophedonically, but since the reforms of 1912
has been written right to left. For some reason which I cannot possibly imagine,
dabbenaggine leaves no spaces between words but runs them all together without
breaks, which makes it just slightly harder to master.

Pronouns and determiners are difficult and complicated and perhaps I'll describe
them sometime in the future when I'm more familiar with their multiple and
various forms.