Title: Dumb Luck
Date: April 14, 2021

I can remember five near misses -- five times when through inattentive or
incompetent driving I put my own and others' lives at risk. I give thanks that I
avoided killing or mangling myself or the innocent victims of my failings. What
wondrous life is this I lead -- how fortunate I have been!

The first: it was 1963. I was an inexperienced, overconfident driver, traveling
westward, somewhere in southern Illinois. My first cross-country trip. A two-
lane highway, a downpour, very wet pavement. I saw, or thought i saw, an
oncoming car in my lane. There would have been plenty of time for him to pass
and dive back, but I panicked and braked hard. My vehicle, an old Rambler, not
a great handler in the best of times, swerved into the oncoming lane, then spun
out of control and landed backward in a ditch on the right side of the road. We
sat there, stunned, relieved, because I had been in the left oncoming lane long
enough to have killed ourselves self and others. (Within a minute, a man pulled
up in a truck, attached a chain to our car and winched us out. I'm perpetually
grateful to this Samaritan.)

A second instance: an icy winter day in Boulder, early 1970s. Driving the old
yellow Saab with my sister Phyllis (legally, sister-in-law) in the "death seat"
east on Arapahoe, I hit a slick of black ice and made a bad situation worse
by applying the brakes. The car spun out of control and eventually halted
facing backwards in the oncoming lane. Once again, no one injured or even
inconvenienced.

Another: driving across the USA alone in the clunky blue Camry, doing 80 in a
55 zone, I didn't quite fall asleep at the wheel but certainly lost focus, and
didn't see a car stopped in the parking lane until I was just adjacent to it.
If I had been a bit to the right or if there had been someone fixing a tire,
I would have crippled myself and murdered an innocent. Here's another one,
probably the most idiotic. Driving alone through Chicago in heavy traffic, on
one of those horrible highways where there are eight lanes east and another
eight west, I found myself in the third lane from the right and needed to exit
right. Instead of playing it safe, and continuing on, I impulsively dove across
two lanes and made it to the exit. Angry horns to the right of me, horns to the
left of me. Why did I take such a risk? I don't know but I thank the drivers
around me for being alert. What arrogance, what stupidity! The most recent
event, and most inexcusable, happened just a few years ago. I was returning
home from a very disturbing visit to the "memory care" facility. Somehow, in
my grief, I ignored a prominent red light and sailed right through a busy
intersection -- a gross violation of sense and law. But there was no crash and
no police and I proceeded blithely on my way -- only, after a few moments,
realizing with shock and horror that I had put my own life and that of others at
completely unnecessary danger.

When people two hundred years from now look back on our "civilization" --
assuming that there will be people on this planet two hundred years from now,
which is not a certainty -- they will wonder how was it possible that those
people in our century were able to survive. Dashing 70 or 80 miles an hour in
a tin can just six feet from a line of onrushing tin cans? Weaving among giant
tandem trucks and buses and cement mixers -- and expecting to survive. What sort
of brave or foolhardy individuals were these strange, death-defying people?

For myself, I'm astonished at the dumb luck that's allowed me to preserve my
life and mobility to this advanced age. So far, that is. It's not over until
it's over.