Title: American Journalism Hits a New Low
Date: March 30, 2007

Just when it appears that our corporately-owned pseudo-local newspaper (the
Daily Camera) has hit rock-bottom-nadirhood, it plummets to still another new
low. It's a bottomless cistern.

We're suffering through a horrid local murder. The Camera is covering the story
with rare enthusiasm -- trying to elevate it to JonBenet Ramsey celebrity
status.  (It's the Linda Damm murder. You can look it up here.)

Some days there's no news.  But that doesn't stop Al Manzi and his troops.
Let's try to guess at the four-column headline on the front page of the edition
of March 28. Hint: It wasn't the Iranian capture of British sailors, which
might lead to a wider war in the Levant;  it wasn't AG Gonzalez kayaking the
disinformation rapids;  it wasn't the Senate repudiating the Smirker by setting
a deadline on Iraq. Nope. Here it is, folks. It's (drums and trumpets): FINDING
A NEW HOME:  LINDA DAMM'S DOG ADOPTED BY LONG-LOST FRIEND. Linda Damm's dog! 
Excuse me, but this "news" is not the truth that is going to set us free. This
is poverty-stricken intellectually vacant journalism.

The story itself is heart-rending. One human life has been lost and several
others are ruined. And our newspaper can do no better than run a report on
Linda Damm's dog!  Have the publisher and his reporters no dignity, no sense
of proportion, no shame?  No ethics. I'm embarrassed to be a reader of this
newspaper;  I'm embarrassed to be a fellow-citizen of its publisher.

Is it true that crude, yellow, lachrymose sensationalism still sells
newspapers?  I guess so.

March 31.  I received the following from Spike Schapiro, a friend of my
youth.  As usual, Spike is unhappy with what I've written.  "Viv, you've lost
your bearings.  You've been living in wussy Boulder so long that your brain
has turned to tofu. I'd heard that everyone out there was a fey vegan, but I
didn't believe it until I read the Damm dog story in your local rag. Let's get
this straight. Dogs are not placed in "foster homes" -- they're sent to kennels;
they're not "adopted", they're bought and sold; and they don't have "guardians"
-- they have owners.  Have you people lost the ability to make distinctions? Do
you treat all animals as if they were human infants?  The Camera reporter can't
tell the difference, that's for sure. I have ten bucks that says that she's
twenty-two years old, graduated with a degree in communication from some off-
brand college (probably Bible U.), and prides herself on her "spiritualism" --
by which she means "spirituality."  Plus she volunteers with Squirrel Rescue.

Viv, my friend, get back to your roots! The Camera's story isn't just egregious
journalism -- it's immoral trash. Try to recall the intersection of Newkirk
and Coney Island, where there wasn't the luxury for such foolish, fatuous
sentimentality."