Title: Boustrophedoniana
Date: May 23, 2007

I'm fond of a passage in Gulliver's Travels where Jonathan Swift describes
Lilliputian script. In a single sentence, Swift manages to attack and nail two
of his favorite targets: "ladies" and "England." The Lilliputians "manner of
writing is quite peculiar being neither from the left to the right, like the
Europeans;  nor from the right to the left, like the Arabians; nor from up to
down, like the Chinese, nor from down to up, like the Cascagians, but aslant
from one Corner of the Paper to another, like Ladies in England.

In good satirical fashion, Dr. S. supplements truth with fancy: the
"Cascagians," who write from bottom to top, may sound like the Carpathians or
Sarmatians or some other trans-Caucasus people, but they don't exist. It appears
that Swift invented them in order to complete his survey of the directions in
which writing might flow.

Yet even including the fantastical Cascagians, Swift's list is not
comprehensive. There are other possibilities for writing beside up and down,
right and left or aslant.

In boustrophedon (a lovely Greekish word that signifies "turn like an ox
plowing"), alternate lines move in opposite directions. Lines one, three, five
and seven and so on proceed from left to right; lines two, four, six, and
eight from right to left. Ancient languages such as Safaitic were written in
boustrophedon; some Etruscan inscriptions, still undeciphered, seem to follow
the same pattern. Boustrophedon is not unreasonable, but it's certainly awkward
for those who have made a fetish of left to right.

Here's how Shakespeare transforms boustrophedonically.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,—

!srats etsahc uoy, uoy ot ti eman ton em teL

It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood;

,wons naht sreh fo niks retihw taht racs roN

And smooth as monumental alabaster.

.nem erom yarteb ll'ehs esle, eid tsum ehs teY.

Survival of the fittest, applying even to scripts, no doubt led to the
extinction of boustrophedon.

Query: would our brains be more supple and more imaginative if we had retained
this style of writing? Or would we simply be more perplexed? Or dizzy? And would
we, as a civilization, prize as the peak of wit and award the laurel to the
palindrome?

Incidentally, Rongorongo, the indigenous language of Easter Island, was
apparently written in reverse boustrophedon, i.e. bottom to top -- a
compositional practice that any satirist, even Swift, would have been delighted
to invent.

May 26.  Marion Morrison, Ph.D., an associate professor of English at the
University of Iowa, writes: "I'm confused about 'reverse boustrophedon.' Is it
real, or is it another Dr. Metablog 'invention'?  Is Rongorongo a metablogian
Cascagian?  I'm skeptical. And how does it work?  Can you favor us with a few
lines in so-called 'reverse boustrophedon?'

Vivian replies:

Devoutly to be wish'd....

noitammusnoc a siT' .ot rieh si hself tahT

The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks dne ew yas ot peels a yb dna
;emor oN

And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-

,selbuort fo aes a tsniaga smra ekat ot  rO

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune

reffus ot dnim eht ni relbon sit' rehtehW

To be, or not to be- that is the question: