Title: Favorite Royal Cognomina and Sobriquets
Date: May 13, 2007

Reading an introductory history of Spain (I'm appallingly ignorant about the
Iberian peninsula), I learned of the dark age king with the excellent name of
Wifred the Hairy. Wifred stimulated me to recall other monarchs with colorful
sobriquets: Vlad the Impaler, Ethelred the Unready, Ivan the Terrible, Charles
the Fat, Edward the Confessor, Pippin the Short, Eric the Red, William the
Conqueror, Richard the Lion-Hearted, Joanna the Mad, Suleiman the Magnificent.
When my learning and memory failed, wikipedia rode to the rescue: Sviatopolk
the Accursed, Ismail the Bloodthirsty, Ivailo the Cabbage, Alfonso the Chaste,
Louis the Indolent, Denis the Farmer, Piero the Gouty, Fulk the Ill-tempered,
Edgar the Outlaw, Louis the Pious, Eric the Priest-hater, William the Silent,
Olaf the Stout, Bayezid the Thunderbolt, Garcia the Tremulous, and Alfonso the
Wise. Then I thought, how sad that in this formal age of first and last names we
no longer make use of such picturesque appellations. Let's return to the earlier
tradition. I propose, as a start, Mel the Bigot, Mike the Ear-biter, Rush the
Blowhard, George the Truculent (or George the Decider), Alberto the Forgetful,
and Dick the Dick. Suggestions are very welcome. The world is all before us,
where to seek.

May 15.  Pauline Harlem, acclaimed author of The Joy of Anagrams, suggests
these two: Woody the Perplexed and Warren the Promiscuous.

May 16. Spike Schapiro comments:  "Who in the living heckola is 'Ivailo the
Cabbage.'  Did you make that up, Vivian?  Do the rules of your game allow me
to invent vegetable sobriquets?  Suppose I said, 'Ivana the Beet' or 'Penelope
the Melon'?  Would that be amusing or pertinent?  What's the deal here?

Vivian replies:  Spike -- Ivailo the Cabbage, King of Bulgaria, was also known
as "Ivailo the Lettuce" and "Ivailo the Radish."  Why would I try to deceive
you?  Besides, I'm not nearly so inventive.  For more info, click  here.