Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Bridge of San Luis Rey
Date: May 14, 2007

The Bridge of San Luis Rey, although published in 1927, was still widely read
in the 1950s both by the  general public and by students in classrooms all
over America. It's a fine novel but it's unfortunate that Thornton Wilder's
philosophical premise is so naive and lame. In 1714 a rope bridge over a gorge
in Peru breaks and five people perish. Brother Juniper investigates the lives
of the fallen, assuming that the good lord wouldn't have allowed them to die
without a reason. Eventually, the well-meaning priest learns that the five
victims were no worse and no better than any other quintet of ordinary mortals.
His conclusion is displeasing to officialdom and both he and his compilation of
facts are burnt by the Inquisition.

By the oddest of odd coincidences, I had recently read an essay on the rope
bridges of the Incas, in which I learned that, though brilliantly designed,
these bridges required annual renewal. My reading of The Bridge of San Luis
Rey was therefore colored by questions not of theology but of engineering.
Why didn't they repair the damn bridge?  Why did they think that a fiber
bridge wouldn't rot?  Why doesn't Brother Juniper investigate the bridge
maintenance department? The conclusions to which the novel seems to come --
that a) sometimes good people die for no good reason, b) that god is either
indifferent or not there at all, and c) the Spanish inquisition was unpleasant
-- don't seem particularly challenging. Is it possible that the novel's theses
were daring in the 50s classroom?  They seem mighty tame today.

Though the frame of The Bridge of San Luis Rey is bland, the accounts of
the five people who die are sharp and colorful and imaginative and rather
beautifully written. There are moments, in fact, when Wilder's storytelling
seemed almost post-modern. Here's part of a paragraph about the twins Manuel and
Estaban. To me, it sounds like an extract from The Hundred Years of Solitude.

Because they had no family, because they were twins, and because they were
brought up by women, they were silent. There was in them a curious shame in
regard to their resemblance. They had to live in a world where it was the
subject of continual comment and joking. It was never funny to them and they
suffered the eternal pleasantries with stolid patience. From the years when they
first learned to speak they invented a secret language for themselves, one that
was scarcely dependent on Spanish for its vocabulary, or even for its syntax.
They resorted to it only where they were alone, or at great intervals in moments
of stress whispered it in the presence of others. The Archbishop of Lima was
something of a philologist; he dabbled in dialects; he had even evolved quite
a brilliant table for the vowel and consonant changes from Latin into Spanish
and from Spanish into Indian-Spanish. He was storing up notebooks of quaint
lore against an amusing old age he planned to offer himself back on his estates
outside Segovia. So when he heard one day about the secret language of the twin
brothers, he trimmed some quills and sent for them. The boys stood humiliated
upon the rich carpets of his study while he tried to extract from them their
bread and tree and I see and I saw. They did not know why the experience was so
horrible to them. They bled....

I think if this extract were presented to ten literate readers, nine of them
would immediately guess "Marquez." Of course, its Marquezness would be even more
obvious if Manuel and Estaban would fly up to the ceiling or be transformed into
a thousand glorious butterflies. I don't know whether Marquez ever read The
Bridge of San Luis Rey, but I certainly wouldn't be surprised to discover that
he had done so.

Incidentally, Manuel dies and his twin Estaban wrestles with "the guilt of the
survivor." Is it relevant that Thornton Wilder's own twin died at birth? 
And does it follow that Wilder, despite the fact that he came from a large
and accomplished family, might well be thought of as some curious sort of
replacement child?