Title: Ducks/ Bad Corporate Names
Date: February 23, 2011

It is possible that in the entire history of capitalism in America, the
silliest name that has ever been devised for a business is "Lady Footlocker."
I understand the reasoning behind the name: "Footlocker" was a successful
athletic goods store for men and the geniuses in charge wanted to hive off a
parallel enterprise for women. How to do so? Well, right here, in our state,
as all basketball enthusiasts know, we have the Colorado Buffs and the Lady
Buffs; why not, by analogy, Lady Footlocker -- except for the intractable fact
that footlockers don't exhibit gender. A female footlocker? Goodness gracious.
Not that the name "Lady Buffs" is at all is satisfactory -- although inasmuch
as a female buffalo is properly a cow -- well, things could be worse. Which
inevitably calls up the question of what to call the distaff version of Oregon's
famous Ducks. Lady Ducks? The obstacle here is that "duck" is already female
("drake" the male "duck"), so Lady Ducks would be excessively hyperfeminine.
The finest solution to this onomastic puzzle would be to change the men's team
to Drakes -- and then the female version would be immediately obvious. But what
about the related question: what to do for a mascot for Drake University of Des
Moines, Iowa. My choice would be Drake Monks, but I would accept Drake Drakes.
No such luck; in defiance of all mascot logic, they're the Drake Bulldogs --
and I'm going to guess that the women's team is called the Lady Bulldogs, but
I don't know for sure. It's a horrid moniker, but still orders of magnitude
superior to Lady Footlocker.

But is Lady Footlocker the worst corporate name, as I've asserted? I can offer
two other nominees. The first is Unisys (formerly Sperry-Rand); "siss" is
a syllable that should never be found in any corporation's name (except in
conjunction with -tem) especially if it expects to be taken seriously. My
other nominee:  a cleaning product that I use, which is called "Mr. Leather."
Entirely too S & M for my taste.

The question of worst corporate name is the kind of  topic for which the
internet is designed. If you google "worse corporate names," you find several
lists. Here follow some of my favorites: Casket Basement; Chainsaw Cottage;
Hung Fat Lingerie; Stiff Nipples Air Conditioning (you think that  I'm making
this up; check here; Blood's Seafood and Caterer; B. S. Liquidators;  Dodo
Mortuary; Cramps Liquors; Beaver Cleaners; Lynch Tree; PMS Firearms; Master Bait
and Tackle; Knobs and Knockers. There are dozens more, but none, I think, quite
so quintessentially absurd as Lady Footlocker.