Title: William Merritt Chase;  Makamah Beach
Date: March 22, 2006

The American artist most dear to me is the impressionist William Merritt Chase
(1849-1916). Chase painted plein air scenes in Brooklyn's Prospect Park and
Coney Island and also produced a truly wonderful series of landscapes set in the
south fork of eastern Long Island. I knew nothing of these Shinnecock paintings
nor of Chase himself until one day in 1987 when I happened upon an exhibition
of his work in the National Gallery in Washington. Even though I was much
taken with the paintings, I was too frugal to buy the catalog. By virtue of
Amazon, I've at last located a copy (D. Scott Atkinson and Nicolai Cikovsky, Jr,
"William Merritt Chase, Summers at Shinnecock 1891-1902 [Washington:  National
Gallery, 1987]).

In "At the Seaside" (1892), a group of women and children enjoy a lazy day on
an otherwise empty beach. In the distance to the left is a sailboat and to the
right, almost at the horizon, a sandy point. The costumes are of the 1890s,
but the sea and the surf and the clouds are timeless. It's a busy but very
peaceful scene. Similar Chase landcapes depict sea-grasses, scrubby trees,
sandy beaches, empty roads. Many of his canvasses are populated by his wife and
children.

Fully as idyllic as Chase's "Summers at Shinnecock" were my own Wordsworthian
"Summers at Makamah Beach, 1947-1949." Although Makamah was on the Sound (on the
north shore), it was as like as like could be to Shinnecock in the 1890s. My
family spent three magical summers there -- the best summers and by far the best
times of my otherwise entirely citified, asphalt childhood. We rented a very
simple wood-frame beach house. If my memory is correct, the house was mostly
deck with a minimal kitchen and a few sleeping rooms. It seemed like a great
distance to the nearest neighboring beach house, but, in retrospect, it was
probably no more than five hundred or at most a thousand feet. But to a kid from
the schoolyard, a thousand feet was more than plenty. I loved the emptiness --
no trolleys, no radios, no people. I remember wandering alone for hours at low
tide examining, with the patience of childhood, the crabs, snails, seaweeds and
the infinite variety of dead fish. To my vocabulary, I added such novelties as
inlet, point, cove, high tide, squall, blowfish, starfish, perch, sea urchin,
shiner, sinker, fiddler crab, hermit crab, razorback, softshell, float, outboard
and inboard, "sheared a pin," oarlock, dinghy -- words and concepts previously
beyond the outer limit of my imagination. There were porpoises almost every day
-- once I was all alone on the beach when two of them battled furiously for
several minutes right in front of my astonished eyes. No one else saw them, and
no one believed me. There was also an abundance of horseshoe crabs-- not crabs
at all, as I later discovered, but trilobites left over from the Paleozoic.
I think it was the horseshoes that started me reading about paleontology. I
remember also old Mr. van Etten, already more than a child when Chase was
painting at Shinnecock, who took me out in his rowboat to trawl for bluefish.

Wordsworth wrote about his childhood's "fair seed-time" and that he was
"fostered alike by beauty and by fear." While it's easy to exaggerate the amount
of fear back in 1950s Brooklyn, it's a fact that there was an almost absolute
absence of beauty. Makamah Beach offered not only beauty and variety but also
the possibility of different kind of life.