Title: Sleeping: a History
Date: October 13, 2024

I'm a terrible, terrible sleeper. It's a lifelong plight and a serious
disability. Truth to tell, I'd have more success as a contestant in a tango
contest, or as a heldentenor yodeling in front of thousands, or as a trapeze
artist or as a sumo wrestler than I have as a sleeper.

Bad sleeping runs in my family. I suppose that I inherited the trait from my
father. Growing up, we never knew where we'd find the old guy in the morning,
because during the night he'd wander from room to room and from bed to chair and
even onto that scratchy old green tufted sofa. For me, the hardest part of any
day has always been the night -- and, believe it or not, the problem has become
more severe as I grapple with old age.

My usual routine is to fall asleep prematurely (and unwisely) at 10:00 pm. Then
I wake at 12:30 am, usually in a fright from a ghastly nightmare, my brain
alert, but my body yearning for oblivion. Then I'm up for a while, involuntarily
reprising some atrocious embarrassment or shameful failure in some earlier part
of my life. Unable to find the right situation for my ancient limbs, I twirl
beneath the blankets like a rotisserie chicken. I don't want to disturb my
peacefully-slumbering bedmate, so I wander the residence, finally to settle in
an auxiliary bed. Then my wayward brain starts to ruminate on the state of the
nation, especially on the prospect of a second term for the moronic demagogue.
At this point, I reluctantly surrender to necessity and take a sleeping pill
(the powerful hypnotic ambien). I read or watch a basketball game on the TV,
but after about 45 minutes the drug takes hold and the muscles in my eyes
slacken so much that I can no longer bring the separate images of right and left
eye together. Eventually I fall into "airplane sleep" -- the kind of shallow
surface sleep that we all experience when we fly "economy" or "coach" (better
called "steerage"). At about 6 in the morning, I wake out a second horrid
dream, relieve myself, and try to snatch a couple of peaceful hours --  a hope
which I regularly fail to accomplish. Eventually, "the darkness has passed/ And
it's daylight at last."  I'm foggy-headed for a while but at last I regain my
equilibrium until it's time for another nighttime bout with Morpheus. And that's
how I pass one third of my life.

On the cheerful side, although I'm a bad nighttime sleeper, I'm a fairly
proficient daytime napper. The most wonderful and memorable sleeps of my life
have been afternoon naps. When I was in my teens, back there in the Eisenhower
era, it was my weekend custom to trot to the schoolyard in the morning and play
three-on-three half-court basketball for a couple of hours (in those days I
enjoyed an endless "second wind"). Then I'd come home for a mid-day dinner --
perhaps if the parents were feeling flush it would be a roast beef or roast pork
along with a bounty of potatoes (the most soporific of vegetables). Then I'd
retreat to my room, tune the old wood-cased Philco to a Dodgers game, perhaps
even to a double-header, and allow myself to be soothed by the rhythmic cadences
of Red Barber and Connie Desmond. A deep, profound and most satisfying nap would
then ensue -- the kind of sleep where you're so far gone that you don't know if
it's day or night, summer or winter when, hours later, you crack an exploratory
eyelid.

Where are the sleeps of yesteryear?

In my maturity, sleep has been, as I've said, a combat zone. In these last years
I've achieved weekend afternoon depth just two times. Alas and alack, it was
the drugs, the sedatives for my two surgeries that did the trick. When you're
anesthetized, at least as I experienced it, there's nothing -- no sound, no
dream, certainly no twirling -- between the moment the anesthetic kicks in and
moment it leaves. You're just not there. You're nowhere.

The ancient formula was somnus imago mortis. That is to say, sleep is the
simulacrum of death. Sleep is designed to prepare us for death. There was a time
that I would scoff at such a pious formula -- but not any more. I think that
if death is what I experienced during anesthetized sleep, why, then, there's
nothing to fear. It will be peaceful and long and very boring, but not at all
stressful.

I would like my tombstone to read, "No More Insomnia, Forever."