Title: Small Screen Godlessness
Date: January 06, 2018

We binge-watched the seven-hour mini-series Godless in three marathon nights.

Godless is a Western, or more exactly a fantasia on Western-movie themes and
incidents. To the genre-literate, almost every plot element or character will
be familiar, but shootouts and jail breaks and horse-rustling and miraculously
healing bullet wounds were re-combined in ways that kept our attention. I'm
proud to say that I didn't fall asleep once during the three long evenings,
which is quite a compliment to the series, inasmuch as I've recently emerged as
an Olympic-quality narcolept, prone to drift into sleep at the drop of a hat,
even during the second overtime.

The three most interesting features of Godless, were, in my opinion, a) the
landscape, which, although it surrounds us here in Boulder, seemed particularly
crisp on the hi def screen, b) the horses, which are noble beasts of their own
and were respectfully depicted and admired by the cinematographer, and c) the
character of MaryAgnes, played by Merit Wever, who was rather wonderful in the
role and who was rewarded with a lot of the good lines. MaryAgnes is a tough
young rifle-toting crack shot who plays for the other team but who you want on
your side.

I thought that Jeff Daniels who played the ruthless mass-murderer Frank Griffin
overacted like crazy. If overacting were a crime, he'd be looking at a good
twenty years in solitary. Plus I know it's the fashion that your deranged evil
charismatic lunatic villain always has to be a bible thumper yet let's face
it -- that's a cliche that has served its purpose and earned its retirement.
Speaking of religion -- even aside from the title of the series and the
observation that it's a godless country there's a heck of a lot of religion
stuff both good and bad but mostly bad in this series. For example, much of
the backstory evokes the Mountain Meadow Massacre -- one of the most dreadful
acts of domestic terrorism in our nation's history -- which was perpetrated by
Mormons (although Mormon participation is underplayed and instead the atrocity
is attributed to a nonspecific religious fanaticism). There are frequent scenes
of worship and pilgrimage as well as intermittent focus on the new church that
the villagers of LaBelle are constructing and specifically on the fashioning
of a substantial cross that is photographed as though it were brimming with
significance. Moreover, the inhabitants of LaBelle wait six and seven-eighths
episodes for the new preacher to arrive but when he finally appears he has
only the most banal platitudes to deliver. Frankly, I'm not positive whether
the writer of Godless thought the preacher's speech was genuinely profound or
whether he couldn't give him better words, or whether he was trying to assert
that the pieties of faith offered no consolation whatever to the beat-up
townspeople. It would have been better if the preacher had just sung an
appropriate hymn and let the LaBelleians join in so we could at least end with
good music.

Godless offers a number of revisionist moments where tradition is overturned,
sometimes too obviously. An instance: LaBelle is inhabited almost entirely by
women and it is the women who make the decisions and take the active roles; men
are passive bystanders. Quite an inversion of the usual macho practice. And
also: usually in the westerns when there's the threat of intermarriage between
the races, it's the dark skin who gets killed. This time the commonplace was
turned on its head with the gratuitous killing of he white guy -- but I think
it was a bit too pointed to name him "Whitey." And the Indians: now that we
have the word "orientalism" to describe the mythologizing and falsifying of
people of the east, we could apply the word "Indianism" to the romanticizing
of the Paiutes, who are depicted as repositories of supernatural mystery and
tribal wisdom (which is I suppose is a step up from brutal savages, but still
not respectful or true). "Indianism" leads to a grotesque failure in the story
when the sheriff is accompanied by a lone brave on horseback who may or may not
be a ghost and who should have thudded to the cutting-room floor (along with
some faux-spiritual nonsense, totally out of place, about the sheriff losing and
regaining his shadow).

The series centered on the conflict between father and adopted son -- a
borrowing straight out of Red River, but this time around there's not going to
be a reconciliation. The allegorically-named son Roy Goode winds up shooting his
father, up close, pistol to temple. Which I liked a lot, because, first of all,
I was by this time totally inured to violence, and also because the evil addled
father-villain-prophet repeatedly claimed the ability to foresee his own death
and "this isn't it." "You're wrong," says Goode, pulling the trigger. So much
for prophecy. Immediately afterwards, the hero rides alone into the sunset --
not into a metaphorical sunset but a very real and carefully photographed sunset
-- even though if he had his wits about him he would take his more-than-a-match
lady friend with him. It's a unsatisfying conclusion and one that is dictated, I
think, more by the zillion Saturday afternoon Westerns of my childhood than by
the internal logic of the film. She loves him. But Western heroes named Goode
just plain love their horses more than hearth, home and sex and they are all
secretly afraid that if they marry and allow themselves to become domesticated
they'll wind up like poor uxorious powerless Van Heflin in Shane.