Title: What Happened at the County Assembly
Date: March 16, 2008

At the precinct caucus last month, I was chosen to be a delegate to the county assembly.  The assembly is where we Dems nominate candidates for county-wide offices (and do a lot of other business, using procedures that are obscure to veterans and incomprehensible to first-time attendees).  Yesterday, we filled the Skyline High School auditorium with 1600 delegates, at least three-quarters of whom were young, impatient pro-Obama initiates.  It was exciting and even more chaotic than usual.

All of the local Dem incumbents were re-nominated without opposition, but there were some open and contested seats: a state senator, a university regent, and, the big one, a congressman (our longtime representative Mark Udall is making a run for the U. S. Senate).  And also the Clinton-Obama showdown, but that event wasn't held at the morning county assembly but reserved for the afternoon county convention, to which I was not credentialed.

I was in place at 7:15 A.M, handing out leaflets and stickers for Rollie Heath, a candidate whom I'm supporting for state senator.  Politicking inures you to rejection.  Some delegates for the other candidate, Cindy Carlisle, wouldn't accept my piece of paper; they acted as though it would compromise their integrity to read or even to touch my pamphlet.  Sometimes they were downright and inexcusably rude, even though we're all Dems and all in the same family.

The new attendees didn't seem to realize that before we could get to Obama, we had to carry out the business of local government.  I heard occasional grumbling and a lot of puzzlement and confusion.  But in compensation there were some rousing addresses:  Ken Salazar, our middle-of-the-road Senator, adapting to his audience, emphasized his liberal side.  I'm skeptical of Salazar, but better a centrist Democrat than a benighted Republican.

Eventually we voted.  The morning results were predictable.  My candidate for state office came in second but qualified for the party primary, which is in August.  The race will be a marathon.  But the good news is that whoever wins the nomination won't have a Republican opponent -- the other side is punting on state senator.  The Repubs are also surrending the congressional seat, where Fitz-Gerald won over Polis;  there will be a three-way Democratic primary (Shafroth is "not going the caucus route" but petitioning on -- I said that it's  complicated).

In the afternoon, Obama had a smashing 3-1 win over Clinton.

Here's the million-dollar question:  will the Obama enthusiasm carry over to the general election?  Will the young 'uns who turned out yesterday still be around in October to donate, to walk the precincts, stuff the envelopes, make the phone calls?  Or are they just in it for the glamor of the moment?  Colorado's now in play; it's a swing state.  We could go blue. But not unless Bush-disgust, Obama-love translates into weeks and months hard work.