Title: My Henry James Problem
Date: November 20, 2008

I'm reading, or re-reading (what does it matter when it's been fifty years
since the last go-around) Henry James' The Wings of the Dove. Once again, I'm
variously stimulated, frustrated and infuriated. Has there ever been a writer
who cries out to be parodied more than does Hank the J? Try to resist the
impulse to make fun house mirrors of this representative, convoluted sentence.

"Her welcome, her frankness, sweetness, sadness, brightness, her disconcerting
poetry, as he made shift at moments to call it, helped as it was by the beauty
of her whole setting and by the perception at the same time, on the observer's
part, that this element gained from her, in a manner, for effect and harmony,
as much as it gave -- her whole attitude had, to his imagination, meanings that
hung about it, waiting upon her, hovering dropping and quavering forth again,
like vague faint snatches, mere ghosts of sound, of old-fashioned melancholy
music."

Let me guess that most of Dr. M.'s loyal readers did not finish reading the
quoted bit. They made a good faith attempt at the first few words, then
whistled, threw up their metaphorical hands, and surrendered. Or if they did
get all the way to the end of the sentence, they were certainly puzzled as to
whether they had fully deciphered the Jamesian code. It's not that the sentence
has no meaning, but is it worth a reader's time to parse and disentangle its
many syntactic knots? Now, dear friends, just Imagine 539 small-print pages
of prose, every paragraph on every page loaded with similar abstractions,
assertions, modifications, withdrawals, subordinations, and equivocations. It's
taxing. James takes it out of you, wears you down.

And therefore let me confess that a big chunk of my Henry James problem is that
it's so damn hard to keep the ol' eye on the ball when every sentence is so
laborious to construe. In most novels, readers are pulled along by the plot.
You might have trouble "getting into it," but once you do, your attention is
galvanized and you start to sail. In the case of HJ, there's very little plot,
very little in the way of story. It's all hyper-subtle character analysis and
teasing conversation. I can't speak for every reader, but I must admit that,
while reading Wings, my mind frequently took flight. I regularly had to forcibly
snap myself back to attention. It's anything but effortless to stay with the
Jamester.

But let me return to the exemplary sentence that I quoted above. The two key
words are "poetry' (line 1) and "meanings" (line 5).  To paraphrase: she (i.e.
James's character Millie Theale) has "poetry" and the situation has "meanings."
Underneath all the wobbly circumlocutions, that's kind of it.

But neither of these two crucial nouns gives much away. What sort of poetry
does Millie 'have,' you might ask?' What particular 'meanings' inhere in the
situation? I myself want --crave, in fact -- further definition and explication.
That's the novelist's job. If he wants to keep me happy and focused, he has to
provide considerably more specificity that HJames deigns to supply. Words such
as "poetry" and "meanings" don't constrain a reader;  rather, they are empty
vessels into which I, or any other reader, can pour a variety of significations.
The reader, i.e. me, is simply asked to do far too much of the work. I resent
it, some of the time.

Which takes me back to where I came in, in the 50s and 60s, when James was the
king of the American canon -- or at least he was very much the boss in the Large
Eastern University where I was a graduate student in literature. I don't know
how my ever-so-civilized teachers managed it, but to appreciate and understand
Henry James was framed not as a test of the author's creative skill, but as
a test of the reader's sensitivity. James, it was confidently and regularly
asserted, was subtle, delicate, loaded to the gills with the most exquisite
sensibility. Did I, a kid from Coney Island Avenue, possess the sophistication,
the tact, the sensitivity to grasp James superfine insights and his characters'
inclinations and velleities?

You know what? I didn't.I failed the test.

James portrays a world to which I could not easily relate. No one in Wings of
a Dove works for living.The characters all live off their incomes, derived who
knows how? When HJ has to bring two characters together, he has two choices and
two choices only -- a dinner party or a chance encounter at a museum. Action? 
Yes, the characters travel from one resort city to another. I'm exaggerating
just the tiniest bit. There is one character in Wings who has an occupation.
Although we never see him at work, Merton Densher is a journalist. Which is
precisely his problem. How can he be a suitable mate for Kate Croy if he has a
job? How shockingly vulgar!

It was a chore to take James seriously, especially in 1960 and especially
for someone of my background. But then, not to take James seriously, not to
understand him, was presumed to disqualify a guy from the serious study of
literature. Which turned out not to be the case.

But I'm glad to say that I persevered with Wings. If I hadn't, I never would
have re-read the infinitely splendid, magnificently tawdry piece of dialogue
between Densher and Croy that brings Book 8 to a conclusion -- a conversation
that's as well done as anything in English since WS lay down his quill in 1613.

Coming soon to these pages: my Marcel Proust problem. Hint: way worse than my
James problem.