Title: Up in the Sky, Ever So High
Date: November 16, 2008

Today's essaylet is being composed thirty thousand miles above ground, somewhere
over, it appears from up here, Utah. I'm flying on Southwest Airlines, the
Trailways of the sky -- no frills, no food, no nothing. No passengers to speak
of, either. Big ol' three-quarter-empty jet plane. "Nobody's flying nowadays," a
stewardess told me. Chalk up another one for W.

Air travel was in its florid adolescence when I was a boy. Propeller-driven
planes flew over Flatbush every two minutes on their way to Idlewild (latterly
JFK). But not with me or anyone I knew on board. I can't imagine who traveled
by plane in those days -- probably only the Filthy Rich, certainly no one
from the old neighborhood. In the late 1950s, I remember hearing rumors that
there were Cornell undergraduates so wealthy that they regularly made the
journey from NYC to Ithaca in the air (while I crawled upstate on a smelly
Greyhound that left the Port Authority at midnight and made "rest stops" at East
Stroudsburg, Scranton and somewhere in the southern tier before arriving on
Aurora Street at 8 in the morning). My very first airline flight (it was on an
expense account) took place in 1960 on a 12-passenger Mohawk from Ithaca to NYC.
I was one wide- eyed gawker, let me tell you. There were very few flights for
me during the 60s but by the 70s, I was more prosperous and air travel became
semi-routine. Airlines had once been an upper-class preserve, and there was
still some leftover graciousness, especially on the long haul to Europe. Menus
and decent food and complimentary wine. But little by little, flights became
more expensive and less elegant. Is it my imagination or have they magically
shrunk the size of the seat? I recall a particularly bad run of luck when I was
routinely placed in a middle seat, surrounded on both sides by plump widestance
armrest-hogging smokers.

The extinction of the cigarette is a plus, but it's hard to think of another
improvement. Nothing to look forward to air-travel-wise but "consolidation,"
fewer flights, smaller seats, negative frills, and grubbier planes. The great
age of the airplane has gone the way of the steamship and the railroad. No more
dress up, no more glamor. Just as well, I think, or would be if the decline of
service were reflected in a decline of prices.

There's no first class on Southwest  -- although what would it matter to me?
I never once sat in a first-class seat -- not a single time. In fact, in all
honesty I must admit that I indulge a bit of class resentment that there should
be any distinction of classes. Although I wouldn't mind if someone offered
me something more gracious than one of those nasty mini-bags of over-salted
pretzels -- the kind  you have to be an experienced safe cracker to break into.