Title: Childhood Memory and Prolegomenon to Any Future Epistemology
Date: June 17, 2010

I would have been six or seven years old, so it was 1945 or 1946. I was
visiting the apartment at 334 Eastern Parkway where my grandmother lived
with Aunt Mollie. Mollie and my father were engaged in an earnest conversation
of which I understood not a whit. I suspect that they were speaking the
language of the old country. Very likely they didn't want me to know what they
were saying.

I was on the floor studying what I now realize was some sort of halftone
illustration. Perhaps a magazine illustration -- something from Life or Look or
Collier's. Halftone is a style of reproduction in which a picture is comprised
of a myriad of tiny dots. When halftones are done inexpensively, as in comic
books, the dots are plainly visible. When they're done expertly, they're almost
beyond the perception of the human eye. But they're not invisible to the
inspection of a small child.

I said to my father and to my aunt something to the effect that "if you look
at this picture closely, you can see a lot of dots." I passed the illustration
to my father. He said, "No, there are no dots there." I said, "Look again. I
can see dots."  He looked again and so did Mollie. "Nope, no dots," they both
agreed. They handed back the picture and resumed their discussion. I had been,
in modern terms, totally dissed.

"Who are you going to believe? Me, or your own eyes?" says Chicolini in Duck
Soup.

I was shocked. My father, whom I knew to be correct in all things -- to deny
the existence of something that I could plainly detect. And my aunt as well.
Two adults, neither one who had ever been wrong about anything! What was going
on here? What was a child to think? It was a moment of great revelation, and a
turning point in my worldly experience.

Well, I wasn't about to argue with such formidable figures. But I knew in my
heart that I was right and they were wrong, wrong, wrong.

I also knew that I had to choose between Authority and my own senses. And of
course I chose sensation. The picture was made out of dots, no matter what they
said.

But my infant mind did not rest. At that moment, I knew that I would never ever
put blind trust in authority, never again. If my own father couldn't see the
dots and I could, then how could I believe anything that was contrary to the
evidence of my senses. My infant bosom got its back up, and I became a skeptic
-- and I've remained a skeptic.

It was not until many years later that I realized that the senses themselves
could be untrustworthy.  But by that time, my habits were fixed. In a contest
between authority and the evidence of the senses -- it would be sense all the
way.