Title: "The Small House at Allington" (1863)
Date: July 29, 2020

The nation is in an uproar -- the Covid-19 pandemic, mass unemployment, racial
reckoning, disorder in the streets, Russians sabotaging our elections, ignorant
authoritarian leadership.

We ourselves are sheltering at home, and are healthy, thanks to the masks and
the cooperation of friends and neighbors, but there's little hope of a getaway.
We certainly can't travel. What to do for an escape? There's no frigate like a
book, so it's time to read a long leisurely novel by Anthony Trollope.

The Small House at Allington is the fifth of six in the Barsetshire series. Had
I read it before? Certainly, but it doesn't matter. To read a Barset novel is to
put on well-worn old clothes. Loose slippers. The Small House is comfort food.
It's the mac and cheese of novels.

It's not 2020, it's 1863. Outside of Barsetshire, millions of working-class
Englishmen are living in grinding, soul-destroying poverty. Cholera is rampant.
India is being pillaged. Ireland is trying to recover from famine and mass
emigration. There's a second Opium War in China. British ships are running
the Union blockade of Confederate ports. But all is as ever in the perennial
untouched Allington microcosm.

Should the Dales continue to stay in the dower house even though the squire is
sometimes impolitic?  Should Adolphus Crosbie choose to marry Lily Dale (yes!)
or Lady Alexandrina de Courcy (big mistake)? Will Plantagenet Palliser run off
with Griselda Grantly -- don't do it, Planty Pall!  Should Lucy Dale accept
a dinner invitation from the Earl de Guest? Why won't Isabella Dale agree to
accept her cousin Bernard as a husband? -- everyone in the family thinks it's a
good idea, except Bell herself, who prefers poor but faithful Dr. Crofts.

Political and economic problems do not intrude into the small world of the Small
House. Finding a mate, keeping a mate, repairing a frayed relationship is its
subject; equally important for men, is to locate a woman of means, so that one
can support a comfortable style of life without stooping to real work.

Adolphus Crosbie, although far from our favorite, accurately describes the
three things that he requires in a wife: that she be of a good family, that she
have money, and that she be beautiful. Does Mr. Crosbie possess these qualities
himself?  No. But he does have a handsome set of whiskers, which seems to be
sufficient.