Title: My Life in Coffee
Date: April 04, 2021

Although both my parents were dependent on their morning coffee

percolated out of a can like this one, I myself never touched the stuff until
my first year at college. In the 1950s, coffee was 10 cents a cup and I drank
gallons of it, morning, noon and night. It became essential to my well-being.
Black, no sugar or milk, but in truth, not black but barely brown, weak by
present standards. In the early 60s my hipper than I -- not much of a leap -- 
friend SDS introduced me to the coffee shop. Figaro in Greenwich Village, mighty
sophisticated for a boy from Flatbush. I became addicted to coffee shops as
well as coffee itself for many a year. I couldn't handle any routine paperwork,
or indeed grade a tedious set of papers without infusions of caffeine. With
the Starbuck's revolution, coffee became tastier and more luxurious. But,
conservative as I was, I never succumbed to fancy drinks but kept to what had
come to be known simply and condescendingly as "Americano."

During these thirty-five or so years of pleasant coffee dependence, atrial
fibrillation became an annoying feature of my life. Frequent bouts, longer and
longer. Debilitating, possibly dangerous -- there's a strong association of
fibrillation with strokes. Finally, a doctor suggested that I might consider
giving up caffeine. So I stopped on a dime. It took six weeks to get the
caffeine out of my blood and put an end to the longing for coffee -- but the
atrial fibrillation came to a total halt. Ceased. Not a single episode these
last two and a half decades. Astonishing. I had been poisoning myself -- or at
least, compromising my well being.

Do I miss coffee? Yes, I'm afraid so, every morning. I still love the odor
(which was always better than the taste). More than that, I miss the society
of coffee cup and conversation. In those days, I loved to sit with a book in a
nook, warming my palm with a bottomless cup. Once, only once, about two years
ago, I did venture to order a medium Americano -- but I couldn't stomach more
than a couple of sips. Coffee's an acquired taste, and one that I had I de-
acquired.

Tea? I haven't found one that is more than barely tolerable. Hot chocolate?
Feels juvenile. Acceptable for breakfast but not for Peet's or Ozo or Starbuck's
or the Trident.

On the other hand, a heart that keeps to a regular rhythm and doesn't go
creatively syncopated several times a week is also a pleasure.