Title: Mrs. Peixada by "Sidney Luska" (1886)
Date: May 10, 2010

I've just read, and much enjoyed, a novel called Mrs. Peixada, by one Sidney
Luska. The novel was published in 1886 by Cassell & Company, Limited, at 739
Broadway, in New York City. I had it recalled it from the library's archives,
where, from all the evidence, it hadn't been touched for a hundred or so years.
Why did I read this book? Because a) I'm reading stuff from the last two
decades of the nineteenth century, and b) because the novel is listed in the
bibliography of the wonderful anthology Victorian Love Stories (1996) edited and
illuminated by Kate Flint -- an anthology which persuaded me that although I
think of myself as moderately well read in Victorian fiction, there are untold
riches out there of which I am embarrassed to be unaware.

Mrs. Peixada isn't exactly a shower of gold, but it's a revelation. The author
"Sidney Luska" turns out to be a pseudonym for Henry Harland, who is better
known for his second career as an editor of the Yellow Book. I guess that
Mrs. Peixada falls into the broad category, novel of sensation, but it's also
a mystery story laced with occasional touches of social comedy and progressive
social thought.

The plot could be next year's blockbuster movie. Arthur Ripley woos and falls in
love with the mysterious young widow, Ruth Lehmyl, who has recently moved into
an apartment in his Beekman Place neighborhood. We're treated to the details
their sophisticated and modern courtship  -- music, museums, poetry. At the
same time, Ripley, a lawyer, has been engaged to track down a murderess named
Mrs. Peixada, who fled New York after being acquitted on grounds of insanity of
murdering her husband. Ripley tracks her from Vienna to Rome and to London, but
then loses her trail. He marries Mrs. Lehmyl --  only to discover that she and
Mrs. Peixada are one and the same person.

Although there are holes in the plot through which a daumont or shandrydan could
be driven with room to spare, the novel is engaging and intriguing. But then I'm
an easy mark.

Perhaps our screen writers aught to do some looking at the lower tier of
Victorian novels  -- especially if (as it seems) they're interested in making
lower-tier movies.

But for me -- it's time to learn more about Henry Harland.