Title: Our Lady of Internal Combustion
Date: July 07, 2009

I stopped at one of those highway gas-station convenience stores a few weeks
ago, searching for some invigorating M&Ms. I couldn't find them, but I said to
myself, this is America and I'm an American, and if there's one thing I know
it's that there are going to be M&Ms somewhere in this quickstop. I poked around
a little more and sure enough, just a little out of the way, there they were
-- five different kinds of M&Ms. I went for the classic multi-colored ones. Am
I the kind of person who's going to experiment with peanut butter M&Ms?  It
wouldn't be me.

But I'm off the point, which is, that when you're a native of the place, you
know more or less what to expect. You're not likely to be taken by surprise
very often. But every once in a while, something hits you right between the
eyes, and you say, where the heck am I? I had such an experience today when I
read a flyer from the West Fairlee Center Church, which is right over there on
Middlebrook Road, not more than three or four miles from where we live.

I have no quarrel with the "Old Fashioned Community Hymn Sing" on July 12 or
the "Shape Note Singing" on August 2 -- that's exactly what I would expect
from a church in West Fairlee Center. I'm a little puzzled by the "Blessing
of the Animals" on July 19, but then I remembered St. Francis, in some ways my
favorite saint, and I remembered that he preached to the birds and that when he
was dying, he thanked his donkey and (this is a bit hard to believe but what the
heck) his donkey wept. So I'm OK with blessing the animals, although I myself
would feel hypocritical blessing the particular animals that I was preparing
to transubstantiate into lambchops or hamburger.

But what makes me feel like a stranger in a strange land is the event that
is scheduled for August 9 -- the "Blessing of the ATV's" (sic). ATVs,
for those of you who don't know, are "all-terrain vehicles," and are very
useful if you're out on the range in the vast West patrolling miles and miles
of barbed-wire fence, but which in the crowded East are used mostly for
"recreation," which seems to involve tearing up private land (someone else's
private land, that is) or government land, making a whole lot of noise, and
sometimes driving underage and illegally, and much too fast, on our usually
peaceful "unimproved" dirt roads. No mufflers, no insurance, no license.

So what's with "the blessing of the ATVs?"

St. Francis has become the patron saint of environmentalists. Is
"the blessing of the ATVs" supposed to be a rejoinder to St. F and to
ecological thinking? Are we experiencing a Christian sanction of
anti-environmentalism?  Or have these back-country bible churches long been
blessing tractors and balers and pickups and backhoes, and I've just not
noticed?

WTF is going on? Am I in the America I know and understand?  Why am I
feeling vertiginous?

Would St. Francis have thanked his ATV?  And if he did, would his ATV have
wept?