Title: In Praise of Hands
Date: October 31, 2021

A few weeks ago, I found myself absentmindedly working in the perennial garden.
I had wandered nearby and noted some weeds that needed emergency extirpation.
I had therefore arrived without my usual trine of implements -- the dandelion
puller, the hand shovel, and the Felco #2. Too lazy to fetch them, I began to
tend to the plants toollessly and at the same time to muse upon effectiveness of
hands alone. (Weeding often leads to musing, as every weeder knows.)  Is it not
the case that the best tool of all is the human hand?  Because my garden soil
is so friable, I was able to dig into the earth with my unaided index finger,
grasp the roots of weeds and pull them. I wondered how the hand had come to so
sensitive to small changes in soil temperature or soil moisture. Sensitive also,
to the texture of things, so that I could identify the roots of witch grass, and
remove them, while leaving untouched the very similar but different roots of the
day lilies. For no good reason, my wayward mind wandered to the Houyhnhnms whom
Gulliver outrageously claimed could grasp a needle between fetlock and pastern
in order to sew garments. Amusing but impossible. The hooves of horses are
wonderfully evolved for galloping but not for tatting or crocheting. Besides,
why would a horse want to darn a sock?

Our hands are superior implements  There's not another animal on the planet
that can tie its own shoelaces.

I've just read a fascinating book by paleontologist Madelaine Bohme called
Ancient Bones. Bohme is concerned to argue that the "out of Africa" hypothesis
needs modification. I am not knowledgeable enough to accept or deny her thesis,
but I much appreciate her effort to bring me up to date about the evolution of
our species, which is much more complicated -- infinitely more complicated --
than the story we were told just a generation ago.

Bohme includes a couple of speculative pages about the evolution of the hand.
First came bipedalism, freeing the hands for a variety of new tasks. Bohme
thinks that the development of stone tools and the development of hands went, so
to speak, hand in hand. The need to hold the tool meant that the hand evolved to
hold it properly -- with an opposable thumb of course. More sensitive fingers
conferred an evolutionary advantage. More information from the fingers caused
the somatosensory cortex, which controls the hands, to enlarge and process more
sensations.

So now we can play the piano, thread a needle, throw a ball, type a letter,
weed a garden, and perform a thousand other tasks that even chimpanzees, who
apparently do not have great sensory input from their fingers, cannot do.

Bohme does not discuss the role of hands in human communication, either everyday
or erotic.  A topic for another book, perhaps.