Title: Two Films Written by Lenore J. Coffee
Date: February 06, 2019

Lenore Coffee, born in 1897, wrote 50 or more silent films and any number of
studio productions in the 30s, 40s and 50s. Her most notable achievement at
Warner Brothers was the Oscar-nominated screenplay for Four Daughters, co-
written with Julius J. Epstein in 1938. Epstein, with his twin brother Philip
and Howard Koch, wrote Casablanca. Four Daughters is not on Netflix and not
conveniently available, but I'll continue to search.

In 1951, Coffee wrote Lightning Strikes Twice, directed by King Vidor
and starring Ruth Roman and Richard Todd. In 1952, she authored Sudden
Fear, directed by David Miller, which won both Joan Crawford and Jack Palance
Oscar nominations. Both films are well worth watching

Lightning Strikes Twice starts out as though it will center on Richard Trevelyan
(Richard Todd), who has just been released from prison after a jury failed
to convict him for the murder of his then wife, one juror dissenting. But it
rapidly becomes Shelley Carnes' (Ruth Roman) movie. It's refreshing to see a
film in which a strong woman shows "agency" but I have to admit that it is a
little disappointing when she falls under the romantic spell of Richard Todd,
who is supposed to be charismatic and sexual but who to me is an unappealing
block of wood. Trevelyan's guilt or innocence is the nominal subject but
the film focuses on the struggle between two women (Ruth Roman and Mercedes
McCambridge) who seek his affection. It's a noir-y melodrama with a startling
conclusion.

Sudden Fear is the stronger of the two films. Once again, a conflict between
two women: Joan Crawford, a rich successful playwright, and Gloria Grahame, an
on- the-make unscrupulous hoyden. This time the hypotenuse of their triangle
is Jack Palance, who is more expressive than Richard Todd could ever be, and a
heck of a lot scarier. Joan Crawford has some fine moments: when she realizes
that she's been duped by a gold-digging husband who plans to murder her, she
registers terror, thoughtfulness, resistance and finally resolve using only her
eyes. Unfortunately her intricate plan to save herself goes awry. There are some
unanticipated and surprising twists in the complicated plot.

My guess is that the censors intervened between the author's original conception
and the eventual portrayal, in which Palance and Grahame are disposed of in such
a way that Crawford is left without responsibility and without guilt. I would
have been much more satisfied if Coffee had let Crawford kill her antagonists
with that neat little silver revolver. Revenge would have been all the sweeter.