Title: Sons of Ham, Sons of Japheth
Date: November 23, 2009

In Caroline Hentz's The Planter's Northern Bride (1859), Eulalia, the daughter
of a New England abolitionist, has married a slave owner and traveled with him
to his home in Georgia.  Here's what she sees. Warning: be prepared to be
shocked and revolted.

"All around, far as the eye could reach, the rich rolling fields of cotton,
bearing the downy wealth of the South, stretched out a boundless ocean of green,
spotted with white, like the foam of the wave.  Soon returning in grand march
from the fields, came the negroes, poising on their heads immense baskets,
brimming with the light and flaky cotton. Little children looking very much
like walking semicolons, toddled along, balancing their baskets also, with an
air of self-importance and pride. Eulalia recollected all the horrible stories
she had heard of negro insurrections, and thought what an awful thing it was
to be at the mercy of so many slaves, on that lonely plantation. When she saw
her husband going out among them, and they closed round, shutting him in as
with a thick cloud, she asked herself if her were really safe. They gathered
around him, eager to get within reach of his hand, the sound of his voice, the
glance of his kind, protecting, yet commanding eye. More like a father welcomed
by his children than a king greeted by his subjects, he stood, the centre of
that sable ring. She had never seen him look so handsome, so noble, so good.
As she looked at her husband, standing in their midst, the representative of
the fair sons of Japheth, wearing on his brow the signet of a loftier, nobler
destiny, every lineament and feature expressive of intellect and power, and
then at each of that dark, lowly throng, she felt a conviction that freedom, in
its proudest latitude, education with its most exalted privileges, could never
make them equal to him. She never dreamed that slavery could present an aspect
so tender and affectionate. Do the hundreds and thousands buried in the black
coal-pits and wretched dens of Great Britain, who have never heard, in their
living graves, of the God who created, the Saviour who redeemed them, pass their
sunless lives in greater comfort or fuller enjoyment."

Hey, it's good to be a slave. Apparently. "Tender and affectionate????

I was aware that there were anti-Uncle Tom's Cabin novels, designed to showcase
the glories of slavery, but I had never read one. The Planter's Northern Bride
is supposedly one of the best of the genre. It has the power to make you despair
for the intelligence of the entire human race. Some samples:

"Merry voices singing in the fields of labour or filling up the pauses of
toil...."

"The joyful songs and exhilarating laughter of our slaves...."

"The negro has an intense appreciation of beauty and grace, and feels the
influence of mental superiority."

"You will see the negro, not as he is at the North, an isolated, degraded being,
without caste or respectability, a single black line running through a web of
whiteness, but surrounded with the socialities of life, and though doomed to
labour, yet free from the cares and anxieties that rest so heavily on us."

Here are the words that Caroline Hentz puts in the mouth of one of Eulalia's
slaves.

"I tell you what, Crissy, when de nigger have good massa and good miss, dey well
off. When dey have bad massa and missis, dey bad off. Talk 'bout us being on a
'quality with white folks, no such ting. De Lord never made us look like dem. We
mustn't be angry wid de Lord, for all dat: He knows best, I 'spise. Look a'me,
black as de chimney back, -- dey, white as snow; what great, big, thick, ugly
lips I got, -- dere's look jist like roses. Den dis black sheep head, what de
Lord make dat for?  Dey got putey, soft, long hair, just like de silk ribbons.
Now look at dat big long heel, will you?" added Judy, putting out her bare foot
in the moonshine, giggling and shaking;  "who ever saw de white lady with sich
a heel as dat?  I do wonder what the Lord made us nigger for? I spect de white
dust gin out, and he had to take de black."

Slavery deformed society.  Arguments in support of slavery deformed the
intellect. The attempt to find supernatural sanction for slavery perverted
religion. Slavery incapacitated the slaveholding states. One hundred and fifty
years after slavery, they have still not caught up and they are still pulling
the country down.

Does Caroline Hentz believe the words that she puts on paper?  I believe she
does. I believe that she makes these observations and arguments with total
sincerity. I also believe that the kind of utterances to which she gives vent,
though no longer respectable, no longer made in public, are not dead but
continue to appear in VFW halls, in bowling alleys, in union halls, and in truck
stops all over the land of the free and the home of the brave.