Title: My Life with Museums -- an Introduction
Date: October 30, 2024

In the course of my long life, I've visited hundreds of museums -- more than
I can possibly count or remember. Nor just the famous and glorious ones: how
many times, driving in unfamiliar locality, or wandering in a new city, have
I been irresistibly lured into the local landmark?  Even in the most modest
establishment, there's something new to learn and discover. Nevertheless, my
focus, lifetime, has been on art museums, where even the most iconic, most
reproduced painting or sculpture acquires new life when viewed in the flesh.
Let's face it: copies can be useful and informative, but the real thing is the
real thing -- always revelatory, and sometimes transcendent or sublime. In fact,
let me confess, in the Rembrandt Gallery at the Metropolitan Museum in New York
City, I experienced a transient version of the so-called Stendhal Syndrome. Once
and once only, but never to be forgotten.

I'm dazzled, in memory, by the vast holdings of the Borghese, the Louvre, the
Rijksmuseum, the British Museum, and an early love, the under-appreciated
Brooklyn Museum right there on Grand Army Plaza.

I'm grateful to the exhibitions and the hard-working curators that introduced
me to major painters I wouldn't otherwise have appreciated: Aelbert Cuyp and
Jan Steen at the National Gallery, Camille Pissarro at the Jewish Museum in
New York; many more. And also the specialized museums, chief among them the
Vasa Museum in Stockholm, which taught me more about life in the seventeenth
century than could a fleet of books. And a special favorite, the Corning Museum
of Glass in Corning, New York -- a most wonderful and comprehensive display of
an ancient and modern craft. But also the many local museums that I visited
during my thirty-eight cross-country migrations. Who could ever forget the Donna
Reed Museum in Denison, Ohio, or the Jell-O Museum somewhere near Buffalo, New
York?  Gosh, I'm still hoping that someday I will make it to the National
Museum of the American Coverlet in Bedford, Pennsylvania.

And then there are the troubling museums. I wonder if I will ever have the
courage to enter the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC. It was
disorienting enough to visit an open-air museum, somewhere in Lithuania, where
a variety of preserved structures from that country's miserable past have been
brought together to simulate a peasant village. It was a strange dispiriting
visit. After all, my ancestors as far back as we can know lived and worked in
such a sad little village. My visit was, I suppose, educational -- but also
melancholy and depressing. The village seemed not so much preserved as embalmed.