Title: "Scamels from the Rocke"
Date: September 17, 2010

Not only Shakespeare specialists, but lay readers and playgoers are puzzled by Caliban's mysterious "scamels."

From the context, it's clear that scamels are an easily obtained food. Listen as Caliban lists some of the items he can gather from his island's prodigious storehouse:

I prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow;

And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts,

Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how

To snare the nimble marmoset.  I'll bring thee

To clust'ring filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee

Young scamels from the rock.

Alas and alack, there is no such thing as a "scamel."

Caliban's taste in food is catholic, as is to be expected of a hunter-gatherer. Nevertheless, his is not an appealing diet. "Crabs" could refer either to crustaceans or to crab-apples. "Pig-nuts" are barely edible tubers. A "jay's nest" does not sound gourmetish, and even if Caliban means the jays themselves, he's not chosen a species of bird famous for flavor. The "nimble marmoset" is a small monkey which a 1613 pamphlet (too late for The Tempest, written c. 1611) acknowledged to be "good meat". "Filberts"  Shakespeare's spelling is 'Philbirts') are also called hazelnuts, the North American variety of which -- the unappetizing beaked hazelnut -- is better browsed by our native deer than by homines sapientes. But what, prithee, are these peculiar scamels?

Among the older guesses: shamois (young kids); scannel (a kind of hawk); scams (a dialectical word for limpets, or snails); seamar, or wild trefoil; sarcelle, the French word for the teal; scallion; seagull.

But modern scholarship has coalesced around "sea-mell." It's now thought (by 90% of those who have studied the question) that Shakespeare knew a manuscript report about a shipwreck called "A true repertory of the wreck and redemption of Sir Thomas Gates, Knight, upon and from the islands of the Bermudas...July 15, 1610," which was not printed until 1625 in Purchas his Pilgrimes. Among the details that Shakespeare found in the "true repertory" was a brief account of a bird called a "sea-meawe": "a kind of web-footed fowl there is, the bigness of an English plover... [which] hovering in the air made a strange hollow and harsh howling.... Our men found a pretty way to take them, which was by standing on the rocks or sands ... whereof the birds would come flocking to that place nearer and nearer."

"Sea-meawes"  (a variant of seamell) was the word that Shakespeare encountered in the manuscript letter.

I believe that he read the second letter of sea-meawe not as an "e" but as a "c", or, alternatively, Shakespeare's own ms "e" was misread as a "c" by Ralph Crane, the scrivener who prepared a fair copy of Shakespeare's holograph for publication --  or perhaps even the compositor  who was assigned to set the Folio page A5v misread Crane's fair copy. A "scamel," I'm .9 positive, is a seabird hunted from a rock; it's a sea-mew or sea-mell.

The Tempest is filled with words compounded of the prefix "sea" and a second element: sea-nymphs, sea-sorrow, sea-change, sea-swallowed, sea-marge. Why would Shakespeare not have been enchanted by the fortuitous "seamell?" Scamel indeed!