Title: Ditch the Didge!!
Date: May 09, 2010

The downtown mall is home to a motley assemblage of street buskers. Some
are excellent and welcome performers: the occasional string quartet, the
accomplished visiting bluegrass band, a witty gaggle of a cappella singers.
Others are less excellent but still tolerable; the contortionist, the magician
with the rings that divide and rejoin, the sword-swallower, the zip-code
man, the fire-eater, the too-young violin student supervised by his mommy,
the juggler whose act hasn't changed since the days when he was known as a
joculator. And then a step lower still: that inaudible French girl who struggles
with her ukelele. Less welcome are the drummers: bang, bang, bang with no
discernible rhythm, just noise great enough to set off sympathetic vibrations in
your own personal pancreas. But the worst of the worst is the didgeridoo-master.
After decades of practice, all that the didge player can produce is an ugly
drone. One note. It goes on and on, relentlessly, and it's dull, grating and
loud. If you haven't heard it, imagine a big old bagpipe, playing one note
at the bottom of its range, for ever, and ever, and ever. Worse still are
didgeridoo assemblies: didgetets or didgeridoo chamber orchestras.

The didgeridoo comes to us from northern Australia, where it was invented
more that 1500 years ago. Perhaps it hasn't evolved because it's thought to
be sacred. While the rest of the world developed wind instruments that played
a variety of colorful notes, the non-innovative didge people embraced an
unchanging and exceedingly boring drone. They are patient people. One by one,
native Australians said no to the bassoon, the clarinet, the horn, the sax, the
flute, the piccolo, the trumpet, the tuba, the oboe bright and cheerful, and
decided that a branch of a eucalyptus tree, naturally hollowed by termites,
was all that they needed in the way of wind-instruments. In another fit of
imagination, they invented the bull-roarer, an instrument that hasn't yet taken
a bow on the mall, but trust me, it won't be long.

Let's face it;  the didgeridoo is an instrument that hasn't produced a pleasant
sound in many thousands of years. It has no plans to do so. Didgeridooists are
barking up the wrong tree -- it's never going to be music. It's always going to
be noise.

Which brings me to my point, which is that would-be mall performers should
not be permitted to busk until they have passed a performance test and have
been granted a license. The Board of Acceptability would consist of some of
the more traditionalist faculty of both the Music School and the Department of
Theater and Drama. The chairman would be an open-minded but engaged citizen,
such as Me.  Approval must be unanimous. We (the Board) would strictly enforce
standards of artistic excellence. Life would improve.