Title: Shadowlands (1993)
Date: March 31, 2023

Recently some much-admired old friends recommended a movie called Shadowlands
(1993). They pledged that we'd love it. But we didn't. In fact, we regarded
it as a film that lacked value and integrity. Of course, we won't mention to
our friends that we responded so negatively and that we now question their
esthetics. I'm sorry but it makes me uncomfortable to doubt people whom I
otherwise respect.

But gosh was this Shadowlands a pretentious stinker! It transformed into pure
soap opera the peculiar relationship between novelist and religious apologist C.
S. Lewis and his fan/correspondent Joy Davidman. We were not entranced by the
"white marriage" of a reserved, asexual Oxford don and a smart down-to-earth
Jewish-turned-Christian New Yorker. But the odd couple hardly had time for
an idyllic picnic on the banks of a picturesque stream before Joy developed
a terminal cancer, at which point the movie transitioned from merely dismal
to full bore lugubrious, perhaps because the director relied on the "Pause
Meaningful" (also called the "Soulful Two-Shot") for much of his effects.

Joy Davidman was played by Debra Winger, who had died of cancer ten years before
in Terms of Endearment (1983), so she was on familiar ground when pale and wan
in a hospital bed.

With such a story, a director should make every effort to avoid turning his film
into a tear-jerker. Not this director, not this movie. Shadowlands ended with a
shameless climax in which Lewis (Anthony Hopkins) indulged in prolonged tears,
sobs, and theatrical snuffling. The old manipulative formula: if you want to
make your audience cry, make your leading man weep.

Over the course of Shadowlands' static 131 minutes, I found myself longing for
old-fashioned movie action. If not a car chase, at least a mad dash --with
a couple of fender-benders -- to the hospital. Perhaps Hopkins, excluded by
a Nurse Ratchet from Winger's hospital room, might have gained entrance by
breaking a window in an adjoining room and tip-toeing across a narrow ledge,
twelve stories high.  And instead of yet another tepid scene in the college's
common room, how about letting Hopkins punch a fellow don right in the kisser.
Anything but another long shot of an o-so-green meadow and purling brook.