Title: Horrors of Hellenism
Date: December 17, 2018

I've been reading about the death of Alexander at the beginning of the
Hellenistic period. It's all new to me, and much of it is fascinating,
especially about cultural matters, but there's also page after page of
difficult-to-retain accounts of warfare and of particular battles. Here's an
example of the kind of material that takes up three-quarters or perhaps even 80%
of the book.

"The two armies faced each other quite conventionally, with the phalanx composed
mostly of Lysimachus' and Cassander's troops confronting Antigonus'  phalanx.
On their right, Seleucus and Lysimachus stationed a vast mass of Seleucus'
 light infantry; on the left was their heavy cavalry commanded by Seleucus'
son Antiochus.  Confronting Antiochus was Demetrius in command of Antigonus'
 heavy cavalry. As the battle commenced, Demetrius and his cavalry charged
Antiochus and drove the enemy cavalry off. Demetrius proceeded to commit the
worst blunder a cavalry leader can commit: he over-pursued, leaving the main
battle well behind, instead of turning to attack the enemy infantry from behind.
As soon as Demetrius had disappeared in the distance, Seleucus brought forward
four hundred war elephants and placed them as a screen between Demetrius and his
path back to the battle. Meanwhile Lysimachus' phalanx came to grips with that
of Antigonus, and Seleucus led his light cavalry in an outflanking maneuver to
attack Antigonus' infantry from behind...."  Etc.

Exactly what is at stake in this war? The historian (Richard Billows, Before and
After Alexander [New York, 2018]) leaves us rather in doubt. He puts no emphasis
on the usual economic or ideological issues; the struggle seems to be entirely
about personalities. Will the kingdom be ruled by Lysimachus or Demetrius, by
Antiochus or Antigonus?  It doesn't seem to matter, either to me or to the
historian.

But what of the soldiers?  Whether on one side or the other, they're likely to
be impaled by the dreaded Macedonian larissa, trampled by horses, or squished by
elephants. For what purpose?

I think that at one point in my life I might have been intrigued by these
dynastic struggles, but now, what I feel most strongly is sympathy for the
ordinary soldier and sorrow for the stupidity of my species.