Title: Written in 2009 and Republished Today, as Relevant Now as Then:  As Time Goes By
Date: December 18, 2018

Two nights ago [this would be October of 2009, of course], I watched the
Phillies trounce the Dodgers, 11-0. What a colossal drubbing! HDTV let me
appreciate Cliff Lee's southpaw masterpiece in exquisite detail. But for me
the most memorable moment of the evening wasn't Lee's artistry or 270-pound
Ryan Howard's mad-dash triple to right. Instead, it was the discovery that
the Phillies'  lanky, awkward-but-effective scraggly-bearded right fielder
Jayson Werth sports a noteworthy baseball pedigree. His grandfather was Ducky
Schofield, a good-field no-hit infielder from the 1950s -- from the days,
that is, of my golden youth. Holy jumping jiminy! I saw this young feller's
grandpappy play!

Youch!  More evidence, as if more were needed, of my long-in-the-toothedness.

Why should I be surprised?  I went to my first baseball game in 1946 (at Ebbets
Field -- Cardinals 3, Dodgers 1).  Before there was TV. I've been attending
to the game for 63 years. Close to three generations.  [Nine more years have
passed since I first wrote this;  so 72 years now.]

I've grown accustomed to father-son combos. Bobby and Barry; the Griffeys (who
once played together in the same outfield); Felipe and Moises; huge Cecil
Fielder and his even more enormous son, Prince; the Hundleys, the Stottlemyres,
and many, many others. Sometimes while I'm watching a game I lose track of time.
Eric Young, Jr. looks and runs so exactly like his father that it's easy to
fall into flashback mode. I remember a game in which Pedro Borbon came in to
relieve. Holy moly, I said to myself -- he's a right-handed pitcher. Why the
heck is he throwing with his left hand?  Then after a few seconds of complete
bafflement it came to me: Pedro Borbon, Jr. I had simply lost twenty-five years
-- a phenomenon to which your "mature" brain is occasionally and increasingly
prone.

Jayson Werth isn't even the sole grandson. Aaron Boone's father was the catcher
(and manager) Bob Boone and his grandfather was the Cleveland infielder Ray
Boone, whom I also saw play, but only on the TV. And then there's the Bell
family: grandsons David and Mike, father Buddy, and grandfather Gus, a big
hitter with Cincinnati during the Ducky Schofield years.

So here's the question. Will I hang around long enough to watch the great-
grandsons play? Is Jayson Werth fertile?  Does he have any kids?  Are there
any budding Boones or baby Bells waiting in the wings?