Title: Lost Books
Date: March 01, 2015

If a person could rescue one of the many lost books of the Greeks and Romans,
which would it be? I think most ordinary walking-around-Americans would nominate
the lost second book of Aristotle's Poetics, about which Umberto Eco made such
a fuss, and which is presumed to be a philosophical analysis of the genre of
comedy.

I myself am not enamored of Aristotle's lit crit. I suspect that if the second
book had survived, it would only show that Aristotle had invented a vocabulary
to describe the various elements of comedy -- and as a result generations of
scholars would have felt an obligation to conduct sterile and inhibiting debates
about the precise interpretation of his various technical terms. So, therefore,
if I were interested in comedy, rather than rescuing the second book I'd prefer
to read Homer's lost Margites, famous among the ancients as a comic counterpart
to the Iliad and Odyssey. It might have been fun, and we would certainly learn a
lot more than we now know about the archaic Greek sense of humor. My suspicion
is that we moderns would find the Margites to be a trial, a puzzle, a genuine
challenge.

Not only comedies but tragedies also have perished. Anyone who has been dazzled
by the great Greeks would want to read the 60 or 70 lost plays of Aeschylus,
the hundred or so that have disappeared by Sophocles as well as the 60 or so
vanished plays of Euripides. No doubt our understanding of the great age of
Athens and Athenian religion and art and politics would have to be thoroughly
rethought. Nothing more tragic than the loss of the tragedies.

And then there is Livy's history of Rome in 142 books, of which only 35 (plus
fragments and reports) survive. How much more full would be our knowledge of the
last years of the republic with Livy as a guide.

But if I had to choose a single work of the ancients that has perished, I think
I would opt for one of the books that were written by Livy's student and friend,
the emperor Claudius. Claudius, whose first wife (and one of his better ones)
Plautia Urganilla was a native speaker of Etruscan, wrote two books about the
Etruscans: a general history, and a volume on the Etruscan language. It's this
second book that I would most want to rescue. Claudius was the last person known
to have been able to read Etruscan, a language which was becoming extinct in his
lifetime.

Etruscan was an isolate -- a language with no known relatives, like Basque. It
was written in an early (8th century) variety of Greek, so it can be recited,
but it cannot be understood. Etruscan contributed not only its alphabet but
a few words to Latin: "atrium," "histrio," "taberna," "stilus," and "cera,"
for example. Approximately 13,000 Etruscan inscriptions are in existence,
mostly on gravestones. There are also about 300 bronze mirrors with religious
or mythological scenes on one side, many with Etruscan inscriptions on the
obverse. They are found in the tombs of women who, it would seem, must have been
literate. There are no surviving Etruscan manuscripts but there is the Zagreb
mummy. Sometime around 125 in the last pre-Christian millennium, an Egyptian
technician re-used a linen Etruscan book to wrap a body. Twelve hundred legible
words survive. They seem to record prayers and invocations to the gods. Not much
else, except for a great linguistic mystery in the heart of civilized Europe.
Alas that Claudius's books did not make it through the dark age bottleneck!