Title: Still Another Brooklyn Novel:  Motherless Brooklyn (1999)
Date: January 17, 2022

Jonathan Lethem nominally sets Motherless Brooklyn in downtown Brooklyn, but
it's more accurate to say that it takes place in the world of Dashiell Hammett
and Raymond Chandler and Elmore Leonard. Or, to be even more precise, in the
Land of Noir. It's a textbook example of superior detective fiction, with all
the trappings: a clever gumshoe (who, of course, gets himself bopped on the
head), a bad girl, two (count 'em two) car chases; a mysterious international
crime cartel (on loan from Ian Fleming), a scary assassin, seedy all-night
joints, endless stakeouts, even a police detective who's always just a step
behind our guy. It's so self-consciously, unapologetically derivative -- less
plagiary than homage. One character even quotes Sam Spade: "When a man's partner
is killed, he's supposed to do something about it." The novel is suspenseful,
clever, and occasionally witty.  It kept me engaged and guessing, so I have no
complaints. Of course I couldn't follow the intricacies of the betrayals and
counter-betrayals, but then, I never can.

It's a Brooklyn novel in the sense that it recognizes the astonishing
provinciality of the borough. Lionel Essrog, our detective, thinks of New Jersey
and Connecticut as exotic territories. Most of the action is specifically
located in downtown Brooklyn, which happens to be a neighborhood that I know
rather well. The investigators have their office on Court Street, where I often
visited my father's law offices, first at 125 Court and later on the 13th floor
of a tall building at 66 Court (the floor was listed, believe it or not, as 12A,
so as not to alarm the triskaidekaphobic). Also mentioned is Joralemon Street,
where Dr Irving Pollack, my smooth-faced orthodontist, painfully tightened
the metal braces on my teeth every other week for the entire duration of my
childhood and youth.

Motherless Brooklyn seems to be designed for the big screen. In 2017 a version
appeared that was written and directed by the rather brilliant actor Edward
Norton, who also plays Lionel Essrog. On a whim, we rented and watched the film
last night. It's an engaging film, very handsomely rendered. I watched it, I'm
afraid, with a chip on my shoulder, because I came to it with the novel fresh
in my mind and resented the liberties the film takes with the novel. In fact,
after just a few introductory scenes, Norton left the novel behind. Instead,
he crossed it with the Towne-Polanski Chinatown. It's a mistake, but not a
bad one, because if your intention is to imitate a film, you might as well
imitate an excellent one. Into the film, Norton imports a series of elements
that are utterly foreign to the novel. There's a dictatorial character who is
modeled on Noah Cross, a child of mysterious origin similar to the daughter of
Evelyn Mulwray ("she's my sister and my daughter") and a contrived plot device
that brings us deep into impenetrable Harlem. I'm sorry to say that Motherless
Brooklyn, the film, doesn't escape the gravitational pull of Chinatown.