Title: Predators and Prey
Date: June 25, 2012

I was almost asleep but semi-conscious and I heard a noise outside. It could
have been the wind knocking over a chair, but it might also have been a raccoon,
a skunk, or a groundhog. Or even a coyote, a beast that we hear but almost
never encounter. Whatever it was, I was immediately electrified, the "flight or
fight" response fully engaged. Ready to go hand to hand with a groundhog or any
other rodent. But then I thought, hey, I'm an apex predator. Why I am being so
skittish, so fearful? I'm not a prey animal. I can hold my own with anything out
there.

The first hand axes date from about 2.5 million years ago. (A hand axe is
nothing more than a piece of flint or other stone, knapped into a point on one
side, adapted for cutting or throwing). The first spearpoint appears 250,000
years ago. Spears for throwing, or lances for poking are a major breakthrough
for hunting or self defense.

I wonder why it took 2.25 million years for one of my hominid ancestors to think
to mount an axe on a shaft of wood. How hard could it have been? Eventually
the bow and arrow appears in the archeological record, but not until 25,000
years ago. The pace was picking up. My point, however, is that for a couple
of millions of years, my forebears were not predators. They  were prey,
hiding from the European lion (50% larger than the modern African lion), from
the giant hyenas, from the cave bear, from big old snakes, and other extinct
mega- predators. Cowering on the savannah, clutching a hand axe, for millions
of years. It hardwires the brain.

No wonder that a noise in the night makes me fearful. Two million years as
prey doesn't disappear from the DNA just because we've recently eliminated or
neutralized all the major predators.

I think that human beings haven't realized that they are predators and are
almost entirely shaped by the prey experience. As a result, we're afraid of
animals; we're afraid of our shadows; we're afraid of noises in the night. We're
afraid of each other.I doubt that we'll ever grow up and learn to comport
ourselves confidently but not aggressively. As a species, we're just plain
scared. We should be lions, not chickens.