Title: Fiction by Jhumpa Lahiri;  Anthroponomastics
Date: May 30, 2007

Last week I read and was much impressed by Jhumpa Lahiri's collection of short
fiction called Interpreter of Maladies (1999), especially the first story "A
Temporary Matter," which shouldn't leave a dry eye in the house. I've now read
Lahiri's only published novel, The Namesake(2003). It's a fine book. I didn't
know, although I should have, that a film of The Namesake, directed by the great
Mira Nair, is now in release. I'll try to see it.

Lahiri writes about Bengali immigrants in America. Acculturation is not a
new subject in our fiction. Like other groups, the Bengalis bring their own
flavor to the American gallimaufry. In The Namesake, the first generation keeps
the customs and the food and largely self-segregates; members of the second
generation go to good colleges and become engineers and doctors, understand
but don't write Bengali, eat pizza and Chinese takeout, and aren't keen about
arranged marriages.

In Bengali society, individuals apparently have two names: an official public
name, and what Lahiri calls a pet name, but which anthropologists call a
hypocoristic. The central character in The Namesake was supposed to be called
Nikhil, but through a bureaucratic error, his pet name, Gogol, became his school
name. So he goes through the first years of his life as Gogol Gangulia. The name
inhibits and embarrasses him. Before he matriculates at Yale, he changes his
name back to Nikhil, yet he's always caught between the two identities signified
by these rival appellations.

Jhumpa Lahiri is a pseudonym for Nilanjana Sudeshna. She's married to Alberto
Vourvoulias-Bush. I can't imagine what's on her passport or what's she's named
her two children, but it's a sure thing that she's thought more than a little
about nomenclature  -- as must anyone who feels that his name doesn't properly
fit his character. I myself am ambivalent about my own name.  Vivian de St.
Vrain isn't exactly "me," if the truth by told. It's French, and I don't always
feel French. My teachers couldn't always pronounce my given name properly, and I
had to correct them, which was embarrassing for a shy youth. And Vivian -- it's
so ambisexual. I would have preferred to have been named something decisive and
less ethnic. I should have had Gogol's courage. Or Nilanjana Sudeshna's.