Title: "Loyal Bushies":  Two Archetypes
Date: May 07, 2007

Here are two types of "civil" "servants" prominent in the Bush era.

A.  The Moronotron. Just under 30 years old, he/she (let's say she) comes from
a large family of home-schooled children, five of whom are still active in the
LifeForce Harvest Church of Milan, Ohio, pastored by the Reverend Mike. Family
trauma (one of her brothers committed suicide; another had to be disowned when
he moved to San Francisco with his friend Gabe; that her mother recently entered
alcohol rehab has only strengthened her faith. She graduated from Brethren
College, where students and faculty bask in an "authentic relationship with the
Lord," with an honors degree in Christian Communication. After Brethren, she
attended law school at Regent University, where she chaired the debate team and
counseled pregnant teens. She was making fundraising calls for the Santorum
campaign in 2004 when she was offered the position of assistant undersecretary
for policy in HHS -- her roommate's cousin was a fraternity brother of a 'prayer
partner' of Lynne Cheney's aunt Sylvia's husband. As White House liaison, she
"relayed" information from the President's "closest advisers" to the Secretary.
Now undersecretary of HHS, she oversees 160,000 employees and a budget of 800
gajillion dollars. She is unmarried and doesn't date, enjoys Fruit Loops, and
someday, when her life is less busy, hopes to travel to third-world countries to
bring good news to the unenlightened.

B. The Henchdoofus. He is now close to 60, a graduate of the Chadron State
College in Chadron, Nebraska, with a degree in marketing. At Chadron, he
captained the cheerleading squad and made a complete recovery from the illnesses
(depression, fatigue, etc.) that made it impossible to for him serve in the
military during the Vietnam era. He joined Exxon Mobil right out of college.
He had worked his way up to a moderate-sized cubicle when he left to head up
Patriotic Americans For Clean Energy (wholly funded by Exxon). PACE lobbied
for a "balanced approach to offshore oil drilling." In 2000, President Bush
appointed him chair of the Advisory Council of the Food Safety and Inspection
Service. In 2001, he founded a K Street lobbying firm called ACS Associates
which had as its principal client the American Melamine Council. ACS (from
which his wife Christine continues to draw a $30,000 monthly stipend) is often
credited with the resurgence of profits of both the melamine and the pet-food
industries. He was recently appointed Undersecretary for Nutrition Policy in
the Department of Agriculture. He's a dedicated environmentalist and hunter,
and enjoys the wilderness in his SUV, his ATV, and especially in his Arctic Cat
Panther 360 snowmobile equipped with an ATN 24x75LU peak performance titanium
night vision telescope mounted on a Remington X-40 high-powered assault rifle.