Title: "Barefoot to Palestine"
Date: August 30, 2013

I'm enchanted by a sentence in Othello that is spoken by Desdemona's lady-in-
waiting, Emilia. She's helping Desdemona to undress and the two women are
engaged in informal chat. Desdemona, perhaps wondering why she had the
misfortune to fall in love with exotic Othello, allows her mind to wander. It
comes to rest on a countryman of hers, a good-looking man named Ludovico. And
then her interlocutor Emilia praises handsome Ludovico in words that should
compel every sentient being to gasp in astonishment and admiration.

About Ludovico, Emilia makes a remarkable claim: "I know a lady in Venice
would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip."

All that needs to be said is, wow! But let me try to explain why the sentence so
transfixes me.

It's hyperbole, but not the ordinary hyperbole of largest or smallest or coolest
or most awesome. It's a hyperbole beyond hyperbole. A lesser writer might have
said, "I know a lady who would have walked a long way to make love to him." Not
Shakespeare. For "a long way," Shakespeare give us "barefoot to Palestine";
for "make love" he offers "a touch of his nether lip." It's extravagant and
wheeling.

A hike, shod, to the holy land, would have been a long and exacting journey.
Barefoot, beyond belief. The evocative word "Palestine" infuses religion and
sanctity into a sentence about sex and desire -- and therefore generates a love-
longing that is as powerful, as silly, and as ill-planned as a crusade. And for
what aim? Not even, for this mythical lady hiker, a big, zonking, mouth-filling
kiss; simply for the merest contact of lips. No, not even lips, just one lip --
the lower one. It's an hyperbole of minimalism.

In the poetry that Shakespeare knew from his childhood, it was men who would
make the vows and undergo the trials to court their beautiful ladies. But this
lovely sentence reverses the convention. It is, so to speak, Sadie Hawkins day
in Venice.

Emilia elsewhere asserts that women have desires as strong as lovers of the
other sex; here she demonstrates that women's love-longing can be as ridiculous
(and as powerful) as men's.

And everyone who knows Othello will hear in the word "Palestine" an intimation
of the violent act that once, many years ago, shook Aleppo.