Title: Foolish Prudery;  Empson
Date: November 26, 2007

It's easy to forget that our immediate forebears were absurdly prudish. Consider
the case of William Empson, who ran afoul of the sex police in the late 1920s.

Empson may be the most influential literary critic of the previous century.
All "close reading" was pioneered by him. Seven Types of Ambiguity, written
when Empson was twenty-one years old and published in 1930, was the book
with which my teachers were still wrestling well into the 1950s. Prompted
by their puzzlement and by their enthusiasm, I dutifully read all about
"ambiguity" and I also tried my best with the equally influential Some Versions
of Pastoral (1935). In all frankness, both books were far too subtle for my
blunt, unphilosophical brain. In 1961, when I was a graduate student, the
pious and reactionary Douglas Bush, whose course in Milton was thrice-weekly
transporting me to the caves of Morpheus, dismissed Empson's ground-breaking
Milton's God (1961) as the work of the "village atheist."  (Empson thought
that Christianity was a cruel and savage religion because it was grounded
in scapegoating; he demonstrated that Paradise Lost became muddy and opaque
when Milton struggled with the ethical basis of core Christian doctrines. In
later years, the literary leviathanette Stanley Fish made his reputation by
domesticating, diluting, and popularizing Empson's challenging ideas.)

Although I had lived with Empson's work since mid-century, I had absolutely no
knowledge of the author's troubled private life until I read John Haffenden's
William Empson, Among the Mandarins (Oxford, 2005) which at 695 pages is the
first of a projected two-volume biography. (It's far too detailed; let me
confess to skipping and skimming.)

As a student at Magdalen College, Cambridge, Empson was mostly homosexual. 
Haffenden says that he was interested in "male bliss and buggery." The upper-
class students with whom Empson interacted were gay-tolerant and the authorities
practiced a de facto "don't ask-don't tell" policy.  In 1929, Empson was
elected to the prestigious Charles Kingsley Bye-Fellowship, which paid the
then-splendid sum of 150 pounds annually. By that time, Empson had turned
his attention to the other gender and was conducting an affair with a woman
named Elizabeth Wiskemann who was seven years his senior. Somehow or other, a
porter, an employee of the College, "found that Empson had some contraceptives
in his possession." It was a scandal and Empson was arraigned by the college
authorities for "sexual misconduct." He was stripped of his fellowship,
expelled, his name expunged from the college records, and he was even banished
from the city of Cambridge (by what authority Haffenden doesn't make clear).

For using contraceptives! For sexual relations with a woman! For preventing
pregnancy! Clearly, Empson should have stuck to boys or kept clear of condoms.

Let us remember the situation of William Empson whenever conservative
commentators trumpet "family values" and call for a return to the stricter
sexual codes of previous generations. Or when we might be tempted to admire the
wisdom of our ancestors.