Title: About "About Schmidt"
Date: October 16, 2011

I borrowed About Schmidt from our local library because I had seen and enjoyed
the Alexander Payne movie, even though it starred Jack Nicholson, who was once
again -- yet once more -- still another time -- reprising J. J. Gittes Redux.
There was however only the most marginal connection between novel and film.
In the film, Warren Schmidt is a insurance executive in Omaha whose nasty
wife has recently died and whose Denver daughter is about to be married to an
asbestos salesman. In the novel, Albert Schmidt.  an upper-class Harvard/New
York/Hamptons lawyer for a white shoe firm, has recently retired, and has lost
his beloved, talented and patient wife to a brain tumor. He fusses endlessly
about money, of which he has a more-than-ample supply. His major problem is
that he don't much like Jews, and that his daughter is about to marry one (a
young partner in his law firm). She (the daughter) teases her father with the
possibility that she's going to convert to Judaism. Schmidt has a nasty streak
but he's a good man underneath it all and one who can return blow-for-blow
and flirt for flirt. It appears that redemption from his narrowness will come
through an affair with a twenty-year-old Boriquena who doesn't much care about
money and who introduces him to a new world of modern sexuality. Just when
the novel seems unable to conclude, Schmidt receives a large enabling bequest
from his father's second wife and all his financial problems are solved.
Thesaurus ex machina, so to speak. Inasmuch as the novel seems to look askance
at Schmidt's money worries, it seems odd that it should end with a triumphant,
and I suppose comic, infusion of additional cash. I didn't find the conclusion
to be satisfying.

The relationship between Schmidt and his daughter is stressful and painful and
rings true -- it's the best thing in the book. It's a wonder that the movie
version neglected such rich material. My suspicion (I have no evidence to offer)
is that the perpetrators re-shaped the novel into a vehicle for Jack N. I hope
that Louis Begley, the author of this urbane tale, was amply rewarded for the
use of the novel's title, because the movie made almost nothing of the plot, or
the characters, or the dialogue, or the ambience.

It's a good book -- and  certainly intriguing enough to send me scurrying back
to the library for other novels by Louis Begley.