Title: The Famous First Sentences of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, This Time with Bodies.
Date: October 10, 2011

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a
good fortune must be in want of a wife, or at least a mistress, especially
if he does not wish to indulge with ladies of easy virtue, of which the
neighborhood enjoyed an ample stock.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first
entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the
surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property of some one
or other of their pining, inhibited, and frustrated daughters.

``My dear Mr. Bennet,'' said his lady to him one day, `have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?'' As usual, Mrs Bennet's stomach was
distempered with wind, which caused frequent eructations and annoying
flatulence.

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

``But it is,'' returned she; ``for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told
me all about it.''

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

``Do not you want to know who has taken it?'' cried his wife impatiently.

``You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.''  Mr. Bennet
was customarily cranky and irritable, perhaps because he had not enjoyed his
lady for the last fourteen years, or ever since the birth of his youngest
daughter, when Mrs. Bennet had declared that five pregnancies were sufficient.
He frequently retired to his room, where, pretending interest in his extensive
library, he surrendered to self-abuse.

This was invitation enough.

``Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a
young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on
Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it
that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before
Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next
week.''

``What is his name?''

``"Bingley.''

``Is he married or single?''

``Oh! single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or five
thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!''  He must be in the pink of
youthful vitality, and if we can only bridle his natural impulses until he has
been entranced by Jane or Lizzie, we might capture a prize.  Perhaps out of
excitement, Mrs. Bennet let fly an enormous, resonant fart.

``How so? how can it affect them?'' replied Mr. Bennet, pretending not to notice
that the air was rent with the sound and savor of the explosion.

``My dear," replied his wife, ``how can you be so tiresome! You must know that
I am thinking of his marrying one of them. He'll be so blinded by youthful lust
that he'll surely imagine himself to be in love.

More on Jane Austen and Sex.