Title: Reposted: Duke, Duke, Duke
Date: October 23, 2011

Ain't it shocking that Gene Chandler's excellent song is now almost half a century old?  Seems like just yesterday.

This be the verse in its full splendor.

Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

As I walk through this world Nothing can stop the Duke of Earl And you, you are my girl And no one can hurt you, oh no Yes, I'm gonna love you Come on let me hold you darlin' 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

And when I hold you You will be my Duchess, Duchess of Earl We'll walk through my dukedom And the paradise we will share.

Yes, oh, I I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

1)  "Duke of Earl" is classic, though late, doo-wop. Therefore it's lineally  descended from songs in which a supporting male quartet sang meaningless  syllables: doo wop, wop, wop. In this revisiting of the genre,  nonsense doo doo doo de wop has been superseded by words that carry  meaning of a sort: duke duke duke of earl. Return we now to the pages  of history: in their turn, doo wop quartets were themselves secular  offspring of gospel quartets, where a reverent foursome would sing do  lord do lord, do lordy lord (a good example: the unnamed backup quartet  supporting Georgia Peach in "Do Lord Send Me").

2)  It's a fascinating process: Gene Chandler's replacement of doo  doo with duke duke is in fact a return to the roots, except that the  previous and inherent religious content has undergone secularization. "Lord" has become "Duke," while the heaven of gospel has transformed into the  "dukedom" of doo-wop.

3.  It's easy to deride the naive faux-aristocratic title "Duke of Earl";  but would the song preserve its meaning if it were "Duke of  Buckingham?" "Earl" may sound silly, but because it's a generic title  rather than a specific one it carries allegorical significance. "Duke of  Earl" is no one and therefore everyone.

4.  It's entirely likely that the word "earl" was chosen because of  it echoes "lord": liquids "r" and 'l" and unemphatic vowel.

5.  The first line of the lyric --"As I walk through this world"--  introduces a secularized religious motif (an inheritance from the song's  gospel forbears). Some will notice the echo of the initial phrase of the  most famous of all religious allegories, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1672):  "As I walked through the wilderness of this world." Gene Chandler,  walking through this world, is reborn just as Christian was reborn in  the classic allegory. Not religiously, but in a worldly way. He is not  saved; he is duked.

6.  Why the aggressive "nothing can stop me  now?" What obstacles stopped the Duke of Earl in the past, before his  duking? The triumphalist language is highly developed but the obstacles  remain vague and unarticulated. Audiences find their own meaning in  the lacuna, but indignities historically suffered by the black  underclass lurk only slightly below the surface of the lyric.

7.  The transformation from a previous but unknown and unarticulated  existence to an aristocratic, unstoppable Duke of Earl takes place  offstage, nor is any explanation offered for the metamorphosis.  It's  entirely magical.

8.  Because it's magic, it's pure fantasy. Pastoral fantasy in fact,  which, curiously, is simultaneously primitive ("paradise") and  sophisticated ("dukedom").

9. But it's a shared paradise: the duke along with his duchess. The  retreat to domesticity is almost Victorian: "ah love, let us be true/  To one another...."  This particular Duke does not know that "Two  paradises were in one/ To live in paradise alone."

10.  The Duke retreats to domesticity and yet he seems to stake  out ("nothing can stop me now") new territory to conquer, in which  regard the spacious lyric seems to embody contradictory or even  incoherent vectors of thought. However, the enthusiasm of the singing  obliterates the ambiguity of the lyric; in sum, the song is remarkably  optimistic -- which is just one of many reasons for its continued popularity.