Title: What's the Deal with the Necklaces that Baseball Players are Wearing?
Date: October 11, 2011

What are those beads with which half of the players now accesorize?  Why,
they're magic titanium necklaces. "The necklaces... work by stabilizing the
electric flow that nerves use to communicate actions to the body. All of the
messages in your body travel through electricity, so if you’re tired or just
pitched nine innings, the electricity isn’t flowing as smoothly as it can,”
said Joe Furuhata, a Phiten (Phiten is the company that manufactures the beads)
spokesman. “Our products smooth out those signals.” Persuasive as all get
out, isn't he?  Nothing like smooth-flowing electric signals, though whether AC
or DC he doesn't specify. Here's some more science from the website: "Titanium
Necklace Benefits have been proven to be many. Some of these benefits include
alleviation from discomfort in your shoulders and neck, and it helps the whole
body to relax as well. Titanium necklaces are known to ease pains and aches of
the upper back, and also enhance the circulation of blood from the upper body to
the brain and other major organs. Included in the titanium necklace benefits are
that they have anti-radiation and anti-fatigue properties."  So it's not just
electricity: it's also pain relief and improved circulation, plus the beads ward
off radiation (a major problem in ballparks nowadays).

Gotta love the use of the passive voice: "Titanium necklace benefits have been
proven to be many."  Proven by whom?  Here I am searching for a citation, an
experiment, a demonstration, a study, even a minuscule perfunctory footnote.
But there's nothing. Not a whisper of evidence. Nor could there be: what sort
of double-blind experiment would it take to prove the efficacy of the beads. I
guess I'm a non-believer, once again. So is the chief of sports medicine at NYU,
who says, "it's all superstition."

OK, so baseball players are superstitious. No news there. But what are we
to think when Ron Washington, the manager of the Texas team, sports a magic
necklace?  Here he is:

Can you see the beads: trust me, they're not ordinary; they're genuine
"titanium-infused plastic."

Does "Wash" think that his beads improve the performance of managers, whose job
is of the brain rather than of the body?  "Wow, I never would have thought to
call for that double steal if I hadn't been wearing my magic beads!"

Altogether, the ubiquitous necklaces lead me into further despair about the
quality of American education.