Title: Seven Years Later and Still Going Strong
Date: May 08, 2006

Here's a letter that I wrote to the local newspaper. It appeared in 1999 when AGGP retired.

"I have read all sorts of commentary in this paper about the public school system -- letters from parents, students, board members and from both grudging and supporting taxpayers -- but I can't ever remember reading a letter from the spouse of a teacher. So here's the perspective of a person who has sat on the sidelines for almost forty years.

'My wife, AGGP, retired this June from a career in teaching secondary mathematics that began at Warren Junior High School in Newton, Massachusetts, in 1960 and continued in the local schools, initially at the junior high school level and since 1977 at BHS.

'In my considered opinion, public school teachers, especially secondary school teachers, rank among the genuine heroes of American society -- right up there with hospice nurses, smoke-jumpers, and astronauts.

'Consider the conditions of employment. Perhaps readers of this letter can bring themselves to think back to their own youth, or possibly they can remind themselves what it was like to share a home with one or two young people. Remember the mood-swings and the erratic behavior. Then try to extrapolate from this recollection and imagine two thousand energetic adolescents crowded into an ungracious old building where the air is always too hot, too cold, or too fetid. Imagine a world in which the girls are slightly more rounded and boys just a bit hairier on Tuesday than they were on Monday. Two thousand hormone-fueled young people who are so supercharged that they can't make it from history to English without playing keep-away with each other's shoes; whose normal mode of greeting is to shoulder their best friends into a bank of lockers. It is a world of games and exuberance but I'm sorry to say that it is also a world of troubles -- of cliques, of alcohol and drug abuse, of private pain and of public disorder. And yet five times a day, five days a week, an accomplished teacher manages to keep thirty or so of these young ones focused for fifty minutes on conic sections or sinusoidal graphs.

'A high school is also a place of increasing expectations and shrinking resources. Five teachers in an office suitable for one. Larger and larger classes. it was only a few years ago that BHS's mathematics department could employ a para-professional to xerox the exams and keep track of the textbooks and calculators and overhead projectors. Not too long ago there was released time for a department chairperson to make the schedules and screen prospective teachers and advise students. No longer: the public as said, "cut out the fat," and has decided that teachers can handle these chores between classes.

'What happens after school is out for the day? Piles of exams and notebooks and homework to be read and returned tomorrow. Lessons to be prepared. I have seen with my own eyes that it is ordinary for a teacher to put in two solid ten-hour days on the weekend. And the phone calls. I'd be willing to wager that there are several hundred people reading this letter who have called our home between 5 p.m and 9 p.m. because Amber or Zack has stopped attending classes and hasn't handed in homework for a week, or just "can't get" hyperboles, or will have to miss school next week because of a family ski trip.

'And what of that much-vaunted summer vacation? In my experience, the first half is spent in a state of profound collapse, and the second spent gearing up for the the one hundred and fifty new students who will roll in come August.

'But let me report on AGGP's response to working conditions that would crush mortals not as strong as your heroic secondary school teacher. "I love my functions class. My algebra students are trying so hard. My basic students are great. They did a splendid job on matrices. I have such wonderful kids this year."

'Is it a good job?  For those who are fortunate enough to have a genuine calling, as AGGP has so clearly had, and who possess tremendous physical stamina, and who can look with amusement rather than horror at an infected navel-ring, it's great; for others, better to choose an easier profession.

'And what are the rewards for four decades of teaching?  There is a warm retirement ceremony and a letter from someone in human resources, a plaque and a handshake and a very modest pension (health insurance not included).

'But then there are the rewards that truly matter. The first is the pleasure of knowing that in an "I, me, mine" culture, a teacher has honored the precept that asks us to promote the general welfare. But more particularly, there's what happens whenever we stand in line at the movies or take a walk on the mall. "Oh, Mrs. P. You don't remember me, but I was in your algebra class a few years ago. I've been meaning to write to you and thank you. I learned so much in your class. Now I'm a doctor/engineer/chemist/businessperson." And not regularly, but every once in a while: "Oh, Mrs. P. You'll never guess. I'm a teacher now. it's exhausting but I love it. You're my model. And someday I hope to be as good a teacher as you."'