Title: Cishet
Date: September 18, 2021

We watched a Netflix series called Feel Good. I suppose that the series title
must be taken ironically, because throughout the first two seasons, not
one character seemed to feel even slightly positive or healthy. Just about
everyone was miserable -- their unhappiness usually linked to romantic or more
specifically sexual dissatisfaction. The program introduced many more eccentric
varieties of coupling and frustration than I, a vanilla heterosexual, would have
imagined. The main character, Mae Martin, played by Mae Martin, is a boyish
lesbian; her on-again, off-again affair with a womanly young lady is the focus
of the story. Lots of obstacles both personal and social stand between the two
women and the achievement of genuine happiness. Let's hope that they can figure
it all out and find love at long last -- or at least by the end of Season 3.

There was one scene that I found to be particularly curious and troublesome. A
group of teachers assemble for a meeting, but before taking up business, every
one of the participants reveals or defines his or her own sexuality. One young
woman, surely the least glamorous of the set, refers to herself as "cishet." I
didn't catch the word as spoken but fortunately we had the subtitles engaged and
I was able to read the word, although in reading I pronounced it to myself as if
the sh were a digraph for the lingual palatal fricative as in shut or shun. But
I investigated the new word "cishet" -- and sure enough it exists and has become
a feature of our contemporary culture. It's "cis" as opposed to "trans" which
means not "across" but "this side" -- as the Romans referred to Gaul as either
cisalpine and transalpine. In this coinage, "cis" refer to a person who accepts
the gender designation assigned at birth by the appearance of one's genitals.
"Het" is simply a truncation of heterosexual." "Cishet" therefore means someone
who is unambiguously either male or female and is attracted to persons of the
opposite sex.

Wow, that's me. After all these years of just thinking I was an ordinary guy,
I now discover that I have a designation. I have a community, a tribe, perhaps
even an interest group. Hey, I belong,

But I think that it's mighty odd and even oppressive that members of a school
community, or any community, would feel that it is necessary or advisable to
announce their gender classification before getting down to the business of the
day. Shouldn't such information be allowed to remain private. If I want to be
cishet, it's nobody's business but my own. But perhaps such formal revelations
don't happen in real life -- only in satirical TV series. I sure hope so.

Not so for Mae Martin, the first paragraph of whose biography reads "Mae Martin
is a Canadian-born comedian, actor, and writer based in England. They wrote
and starred in the Netflix comedy series Feel Good." So it appears that "she"
is a "they" which in current modish jargon doesn't mean that she's plural but
signifies that she feels inadequately represented by the simple and specific
feminine pronoun. I can understand her motive, but frankly "they" confuses me
and sticks in my ear. I appreciate its value as a statement of resistance to
the "hetoro-normative" -- but by golly "they" sure throws a spanner into the
grammatico-normative works. It would be good if English had a set of singular
pronouns that are as gender indistinct as "they," but it doesn't, and to hijack
the plural "they" and turn it into a singular is an awkward and I hope ephemeral
innovation.

Sometimes I receive communications from people who are much more up to date than
dear old dad -- letters that are signed in the traditional way but to which is
subjoined, "My pronouns -- "he his," or "she her hers" (or "they them their").
This habit, I suppose, clears the air and perhaps forestalls some embarrassing
or awkward moments, but again, seems unnecessarily revelatory. It's limiting and
partial. It seems to me to declare that such guys and gals were acting in the
parochial interest of their own tribe or constituency -- much as if everyone
appended to his or her name his own religion or nationality. I'm not happy
with this innovation. Although it might seem progressive, it is in my opinion
ultimately dangerously reactionary.

Therefore I am not so current that I would include my pronouns on any letters
that I write. But I would like to append my adjectives,

Yours very sincerely,

Vivian de St. Vrain

(My adjectives:  "wise, upstanding, formerly debonair.")