Title: Anemoia
Date: October 10, 2022

The premise of Riley Black's The Last Days of the Dinosaurs (New York, 2022)
is a most splendid one. Imagine, she proposes, that it is 66 million years ago
and dinosaurs are the monarchs of the earth. What was it like, in that era, to
be alive in, say, the steamy forests where Wyoming now lies -- a world in which
club-tailed ankylosaurs were tracked by tyrannosaurs while primitive mammals
scuttled in the ferny underbrush. Rich and strange, certainly. And then, how
was it all transformed on "the worst day in the history of the planet" when the
Chicxulub asteroid plowed into the Yucatan? One fine day, the dinosaurs were
triumphant; and then in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the six-mile-wide
asteroid crash lands and everything goes all kablooey -- the sure and firm-set
earth shakes, the atmosphere turns furnace hot, and acid rain and smoke and fire
and tsunamis snuff out 80 per cent of our planet's animal species.

It's a fabulous idea for a masterpiece of science writing, and consequently
I'm grieved to report that The Last Days of the Dinosaurs is a disappointing
book. It is loose and melodramatic and outrageously padded -- a thirty page
essay turned into a swollen three hundred page opus. It's much too pop; it's
insufficiently serious and therefore leaves poor frustrated me craving data
and detail rather than reiteration. Who could believe that the high drama of
Chicxulub could become quite so tedious? I put the blame on Ms. Black's literary
agent, who, I have no shadow of doubt, advised her to "turn your idea into a
book, and keep it easy -- not too technical -- you'll sell a lot more copies."

What a shame, because Black is well-informed and writes with intermittent flair.
She loves her reptiles, and in particular displays genuine warmth, almost
reverence, for every young person's favorite dinosaur, the tyrannosaurus rex. An
infatuation that lingers from her childhood, I suspect. I myself, not similarly
transfixed, might have supposed that T. Rex had been expelled from the Terrible
Lizard Hall of Fame sometime in the 1990s, when it came to be gospel that
the 60-foot tall monster was not a top-of-the-food-chain predator but merely
a snuffling scavenger. Was it not revealed to us that the creature's meager
brain was dwarfed by its olfactory bulbs, so that it could effortlessly detect
decaying flesh over the unbounded western landscapes? And was it not also agreed
that its puny forelegs were useless for pursuit or attack? Black will have
nothing of such paleontological revisionism. Her T. Rex is a hunter, lurking in
ambush to pounce and to crunch with one powerful bite the enormous protuberant
osteoderms that protected the stegosaurus spine. To me, the idea that a beast
as gigantic as a tyrannosaurus could conceal itself behind bush or boulder and
sneakily lunge at its prey seems totally ludicrous.

Black, bless her kindly heart, firmly embraces the unrevised T. Rex. Her loyalty
is transcendent. In a burst of psychological overkill, she describes her crush
on the dinosaur as an example of anemoia. And what, readers rightly ask, is
anemoia?  It's an unfamiliar word that describes a baffling concept. Upon
investigation,"anemoia" turns out to be a recent coinage, a "fire-new" word
(as WS, in LLL, calls such innovations). It's "a nostalgia for a time one has
never known," such as Black seems to feel about the years and days that preceded
Chicxulub. And here I must once again reveal my want of imagination. Anemoia,
however hard I labor to grasp the idea, is too subtle for my downright brain.
Isn't it the case that "nostalgia" is by definition a cherishing of something
in one's own personal history, as such a one as I might remember with warmth a
concert or a wedding or that long ago glorious day in which I, batting leadoff,
started the game with a triple to right field.

I can't quite fathom a nostalgia for something I've not known in my own person.
The emotion that Black describes I would call simple curiosity. I'm as intrigued
as the next guy about the past and I can certainly summon a yearning to have
been present at some great historical event, but I wouldn't call it anemoia.
For example, I might wish that I had been at Fenway on September 30, 1960, the
day that Ted Williams blasted a home run on his very last time at bat -- but I
wasn't there and it would be a falsehood to claim otherwise. [Full disclosure: I
was in attendance, just behind third base, the previous day, September 29, and
therefore missed the moment by a scant twenty-four hours.] Unlike Black, I'm
not anemoiac about the dinosaur-dominated world of the K-P boundary, but I have
other anemoiac -- as I've now redefined the word -- yearnings.

My most pressing and immediate wish would be to have joined the crowd at a
performance at the Globe Theatre in London, perhaps of Hamlet in 1599 or
Macbeth in 1606. Why? Because even though Shakespeare's works have been studied
microscopically for more than 400 years, no one really knows how those plays
originally looked or sounded. My suspicion is that they were far more foreign,
more strange, less realistic and more primitive than scholars recognize.
After all, the most brilliant play ever written, King Lear, was performed in
daylight and the actors had to project their voices to a crowd of 2000 people,
many of them shuffling about, gossiping, and cracking hazelnuts. No sets, no
curtains, no lighting, and no scenery to speak of. I'd guess that the cast
employed a style of dramaturgy closer to its medieval inheritance of allegorical
representation than we like to admit. Furthermore, I am convinced that if I were
present there at the actual Globe, I would discover an endless series of unknown
unknowns. Unimaginable unknowns, that would knock our anemoiac socks off. The
past is another country; they do things a heck of a lot differently there.

But wait! My dormant anemoia, now aroused, yearns to experience in my own person
other events in the past. Where else to indulge my wants? Certainly in Athens,
at a performance of a play by Sophocles -- which I can guarantee to be a hundred
times stranger than anything London could possibly offer.

But why only the arts?  Now that I think of it, I would love to take a gander
at forested Manhattan Island when Henry Hudson's Half Moon made its first
landfall. I could have talked to the Lenapes; tried to warn them about the
dangers that were coming down the pike. And there's much more. Just prior to
struggling through The Last Days of the Dinosaurs, I read Marie Favereau's
The Horde (2021), a most fascinating history of the Mongol civilization that
conquered and controlled the area from Hungary in the west to Korea in the east
during the 13th century and the first half of the 14th. Favereau's depiction of
the Mongols was novel and disorienting, essentially because I'm accustomed to
think about great empires as centered on a dominant imperial city -- Athens,
Rome, London. I believe that I understand a little of what life might have
been like in Rome; after all, I've read some of the ancient historians and I
know a bit about cities. I've even toured Pompeii, for goodness sake! But the
Mongols did not live in cities; they were not particularly literate, they were
unabashedly polygamous, animist, and almost entirely nomadic. It's a challenge
to imagine a "city" of a hundred thousand people in constant migratory motion.
When Mongol men went to war, which they seemed to do often and always, they
brought along the women and children, the cattle-drawn carts and wagons and
the felt tents along with their horses, goats and sheep. To spend time with a
wandering horde, an entirely unfamiliar form of civilization, and to try to
understand their mental world, would certainly challenge and enlarge my (and
your) conception of what it means to be a human being.

Favereau doesn't dwell on such speculations (she is more concerned with military
history than social or psychological matters) but nevertheless the ways in which
the migrants related to each other and to their environment had to be entirely
foreign to us mostly urban, post Age of Reason moderns. What was it like to be a
Mongol? Perhaps I feel this question personally because a recent examination of
my DNA tells me that I'm 1% Asian by genetic inheritance. I assume, naturally,
that like approximately 16,000,000 other people, I'm directly descended from
Mongol leader Chinggis (formerly Genghiz) Khan through one of his seven wives
or his innumerable concubines. Is it anemoia, a recognition of my kinship to
Grandpa Genghiz, that has produced in me, this morning, such a wildness in the
blood? Or is it the caffeine?

In actual fact, although I'm most curious about Mongol life, I don't think
that I would have made a good nomad. In the first place, I suffer from serious
directional disabilities and would no doubt promptly misplace myself on the vast
and featureless Eurasian steppe; and secondly, I lack enthusiasm for subsisting
on kumis, the fermented mare's milk which was the staple of the Mongol diet.

Let me now admit that while I indulge some pseudo-anemoia for my distant Mongol
forebears, I feel much closer to my more recent Ukrainian shtetl ancestors. If
I could be plopped down in the western Ukraine, I might be able to absorb the
texture of life in Staroconstantinov in 1895, just before brave Isaiah and Eta
set out for America.  As things stand, I know almost nothing of any importance
about the lives of my eastern European ancestors. How did these resilient folks
survive centuries, millennia,  of dearth, disease and pogroms? What did they
eat? Where did they sleep? What, indeed, did they do for "fun," if they had
any conception of fun? What did they read? How did the sexes relate to each
other? How did they find privacy? And most significantly: how seriously did they
embrace that narrow, all-encompassing and demanding religion?

A nineteenth-century shtetl seems impossibly foreign and faraway, but in the
longer time frame, it's actually very recent. The most distant past that we can
readily imagine is when the archeological record begins to appear -- perhaps
five thousand year ago. But my and your fully human ancestors migrated from the
Olduvai Gorge some 60,000 years ago, which leaves approximately 55,000 years
without any data at all -- or at least nothing beyond the merest occasional
trace. For these many millennia our forbears lived in world where there were no
cities, no writing, no pottery, no weaving, no domesticated plants or animals,
no metals, no wheels and therefore no vehicles -- only stone hand axes and
later spears and much later still bows and arrows. Two thousand five hundred
precarious generations of foraging! I would like to see for myself how our
common ancestors managed to survive when the gigantic short-faced bear competed
for the cave and the terrifying European lion lurked in the shadows. I suspect
also that the most dangerous predator our g g g... grandfathers faced was the
tribe next door -- otherwise why would we have inherited such hostility to
people who look or act just slightly differently than ourselves. Wouldn't it be
profoundly anemoiac to join a family of our mutual forebears for a week or two
and participate with them as they went about their lives?

What a treasure-trove of unknown unknowns would we confront!