Title: "At Home"
Date: September 17, 2023

"And you're still at home," observed Mr. Henry, who had arrived to repair
our on-the-fritz propane-powered clothes dryer. (Mr. Henry has been curating
our appliances for a generation; he can diagnose a problem by a glance from
several yards away, or perhaps he does it by magic. He's a kind of stove and
refrigerator genius).

"At home?" Mr. Henry had inquired about my age and I had confessed my longevity.
"Confessed" is not exactly the right word. "Bragged," perhaps. I've reached the
age when I don't mind if people ask about my years. I'm proud, I think, to have
reached 84 and 5/12s still able to do a day's work -- when many of my friends
and former colleagues have plummeted off the cliff or have moved to a "senior
living" (formerly called "old age") residence.

But Mr. Henry's comment took me aback -- took me a few seconds to grasp. "Still
at home?" Where else would I be? Ah, in an institution.

I wonder about the difference between the 84-year-old person that Mr. Henry
perceived and the 84 that I experience, internally, every day. To myself, I'm
certainly not the geezer that I catch sight of in the mirror. Gray, paunchy, a
trifle stooped. A bit unsteady on his feet. Even on my best days, I'm not as
vigorous, even middle-age vigorous, as I once was. I tire easily and rest often.
Work a bit, nap a bit. I no longer perform feats of strength, not only because
my muscles have shrunk, but because I'm afraid of injuring my always-vulnerable
back.

I don't feel seventeen, but I feel myself to be myself. I'm competent. My brain,
thanks be to all the gods and goddesses in the various pantheons, is still
functioning well, though I'm troubled by "noun loss."  I know which plant
is a delphinium and which a hyssop, but there are days when those nouns just
disappear and can't be recalled. Same with the names of people. The recall
system is as fragile as the dryer, but the storage system is working just fine
(if I'm patient).

I find that sometimes people who look only at my outside underestimate my
abilities and give me credit and even praise for actions that I think of as
routine. I find this phenomenon to be mildly insulting. It's no fun to exceed
expectations when the expectations are so low.  At the same time, I know that
the task that I can easily dispatch today, might be one that I won't be able
to perform tomorrow. And yet I don't want to allow myself to be patronized or
applauded for putting my pants on correctly,

I no longer feel immortal. In fact, I feel mortality pressing in on me. I don't
fear death, but I'm not ready for it. I'm enjoying life far too much. How I
would feel if my various twinges and aches turned into chronic pains I cannot
say. But for today the watchword is, press on!