Title: The "bottlebrush buckeye"
Date: September 19, 2023

As a youth, I spent many a happy hour in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. One of
the plantings that I remember vividly was what I conceived of as a "wall" of
bottlebrush buckeyes. It's been many a year, but what stands in my memory is
roughly 40 or 50 linear feet of 20-foot-tall decorative shrubs in full flower.

So naturally, when I came to West Bradford, I tried to reproduce the effect. I
just happened to have a perfect spot for a wall of buckeyes -- a fertile slope
of the proper size and shape. In 1980 (plus or minus a year or so) I purchased
two such plants from White Flower Farm in Connecticut and set them 30 feet
apart, optimistically hoping that over the course of the years they would expand
to fill in the allotted space.

It did not happen. One of the plants lingered for a year or so before giving up
the ghost; the other stood still -- grew a bit, then died back over the winter.
Our Zone 3 Vermont weather proved to be too harsh for a plant that had thrived
in Zone 6 Brooklyn. I resigned my self to the fact that my experiment with the
bottlebrush buckeye was a failure.

But then perhaps 10 years ago, after decades of stagnancy, the plant began to
increase in size. Global warming?  Wetter summers? Maturity? I can't say. And
then this past summer, after forty-plus years of doing virtually nothing, the
bottlebrush buckeye produced some flowers. And there they are -- long awaited
and very welcome!

(The purplish plant in the background is Joe Pye weed, eutrochium purpureum,
which thrives and multiplies without the least bit of assistance from me. And
also a 20-year-old weeping willow and young Eastern cottonwood, which I set in
place about 5 years ago.)

This past summer, dazzled that the buckeye produced its extravagant flowers at
last, I gave it a few hours of care. Weeded it, pruned away the dead growth, 
and gave it a small optimisitc dose of 10-10-10 fertilizer. I'm very curious to
see what happens next summer. Could it be that my 40-year old experiment will
succeed at last?