Title: Our Classmate Janet Reno
Date: September 29, 2023

My first visit in four months to the new acquisitions shelf of the Boulder
Public Library turned out to be fruitful, for I discovered J. H. Stiehm's
2023 biography of Janet Reno: Janet Reno, A Life (Gainesville, Fl). Janet was
a classmate ('60) at Cornell and also proceeded with me to Harvard, where
she was one of 16 women in her law school class, and I was a undistinguished
graduate student in GSAS. I knew her slightly at Cornell; she "sat desk" at Sage
Hall, where I was a frequent caller. Our relationship never advanced beyond
superficial chat and I was surprised as all get out when she re-emerged in 1993,
having been appointed Attorney-General by President Clinton. She served in that
position for eight years and made quite a mark.

I've been on a project of reading the memoirs of members of my age-cohort,
especially of those with whom I've crossed paths, even if ever so slightly.  I
think that so far, Janet Reno is the only one of my acquaintances who's earned
not just an autobiography, but a biography of her own.

I was particularly interested in the paragraphs about Janet's Cornell and
Harvard years, but I'm sorry to report that those sections are notably thin
and superficial. Stiehm's account make Cornell seem archaic and primitive --
out of a 1930s movie. It is news to me that "freshman wore beanies, sophomores
had Cornell sweaters, juniors had blazers, and seniors had straw hats." Mere
mythology. It's true, though, that there was considerable drinking at fraternity
and apartment parties, but for what college was that not true?

Careless errors: Janet did not live at Dickinson Hall, she lived at Clara
Dickson Hall. She did not study political theory with non-existent Professor
Mario Anatti, but no doubt she did take classes with the distinguished scholar-
politician Mario Einaudi.

Stiehm passes over in silence the most egregious moment in Janet's career --
when she was suckered into allowing villainous Ken Starr to expand his probe
into Bill Clinton's sexual adventures. Either an apology or an explanation
should surely have been in order.