Title: "Colloquial Conversation" in Othello
Date: June 29, 2013

There is an ocean of difference between colloquial conversation in real life and
the dialogue that appears in Shakespeare's works, even when his plays are at
their least artificial and most mimetic.

In its most ordinary use, the word "conversation" means nothing more that the
talk in which real men and women engage in the greater part of their social
lives. These conversations might include formal or semi-formal events such
as oration, debate, interview, negotiation, interrogation, official inquiry,
ceremony , arbitration, sermon, lecture etc. -- all of them linguistic
interactions that are governed by specific although for the most part
unarticulated rules. "Colloquial" conversation, on the other hand, refers
specifically to the wave of informal, unplanned, unregulated and unrehearsed
exchanges that occur over dinner, on the street, by the water-cooler, at the
tavern. Such conversations, although not incapable of eloquence, are on the
whole disorderly, sprawling and haphazard. They are brimful of uncompleted
or suspended thoughts (or thoughts introduced by one interlocutor and then
either completed or re-directed by another), with syntactic collapse and
improvisation, with references to shared experience that may seem to be grand
leaps of logic to an eavesdropper but that are perfectly intelligible to the
participants, with mumbles and grunts, extended pauses (some meaningless, some
momentous), with apparently inexplicable ellipses, with overlaps in which a
number of participants speak simultaneously, with unmediated zigzags from the
profound to the trivial, with repetitions and backtracks, with mis-speakings,
mis-hearings, clarifications, false starts, fragments, non-verbal but sometimes
significant ecphoneses or "response cries" (ooh-ooh), and with a flotilla of
other very ordinary and very natural curiosities. Real colloquial conversation
is spontaneous; it is the activity of two or more intelligences working together
to shape meaning. Real talk is essentially untranscribable, and students of
conversation who have made an effort to set such interactions down on paper have
had perforce to resort to elaborate and imperfect diagrams and codes.

In strong contrast, dialogue in Shakespeare's plays very seldom attempts to
approximate colloquial conversation. And with good reason: Elizabethan dramas
seldom stoop to represent the casual situations in which conversation is likely
to occur. Instead, the circumstances upon which the plays dwell are typically
formal or ceremonial, and the dialogue in which they are enacted consists for
the most part of speeches that delineate an emotion or moral response to a
conflict, of debates over the proper course of action, of reports on past or
distant events, as well as judicial or ritualistic confrontation, soliloquy,
meditation, prayer, boast, threat and counter-threat and various other kinds of
regulated discourse in which the artless and random quality of ordinary talk
would be entirely inappropriate. The dialogue in comedies, though in a different
register, is equally artificial, consisting as it does, of wit-combats, jests,
and the conceits that clownage keeps in pay. Shakespeare's most colloquial
exchanges, unlike real-life conversation, are on the whole orderly, sequential,
composed in intelligible syntax and in complete thoughts. It goes without saying
that dramatic dialogue is, with the exception of the rare improvisational
moment, not spontaneous at all but the studied product of a single controlling
intelligence.

During the first years of his career as a playwright, Shakespeare experimented
with a variety of revolutionary ways to compose dialogue (not generally, but
on propitious occasions) that, although not in any real sense congruent to
actual spoken conversation, nevertheless managed to create the illusion of a
natural and colloquial sound. The employment of dialogue that might pass for
real utterance was not an inheritance from earlier dramatists but was a craft
that Shakespeare had to develop on his own. The fabrication of such dialogue is
an unobtrusive art that does not call attention to itself -- in point of fact,
colloquial conversation is most successful when it is least noticeable. While
the great leviathan examples of Shakespeare's rhetorical mastery have been
subjected to exhaustive analysis, colloquial conversation is so small and so
inconspicuous a fish that it has managed for hundreds of years to slip the nets
of critical analysis.

There is a finely-crafted instance of seemingly-natural colloquial conversation
in Othello.

As Emilia helps Desdemona prepare herself for bed, the two women gingerly feel
their way toward an issue of great sensitivity -- the domination of women by
men. It is a relaxed and intimate conference, all the more obviously so because
it follows in the wake of an anguished and highly-wrought -- and rhetorically
elevated -- scene in which Desdemona has been slandered as an adulterer and as a
daughter of the game.

What techniques does Shakespeare employ to make the exchange between Desdemona
and Emilia appear quite so marvelously natural?

Attempting to console her sorrowful mistress, Emilia offers the opinion that
it would have been better if Desdemona had never known Othello. Desdemona
contradicts her serving-woman:

Des.  So would not I:  my love dost so approve him,

That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns

(Prithee unpin me) have grace and favor.

"Prithee unpin me" comes as a genuine surprise because it is syntactically
discontinuous from the sentence in which it is embedded. It's a separate topic.
Dialogue in Elizabethan drama ordinarily deals with issues sequentially rather
than simultaneously, but dialogue begins to sound a bit like conversation when
the interlocutors engage more than one subject at a time. That the two themes
of the discourse are located on different rhetorical levels (the rather formal
series of nouns in parallel -- stubbornness, checks, frowns-- in contraste to
the offhand parenthetical instruction), suggests that something interesting and
different is about to occur.

The progress toward real or realistic-sounding conversation, initiated with
"unpin me here," continues when Emilia's response engages neither Othello's
mysterious anger or Desdemona's unpinning, but introduces a third subject: "I
have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed."  With this sentence Emilia does
more than simply resume a discussion of so ordinary a matter as bedclothes, she
also replicates a common feature of colloquial conversation -- its practice of
referring without overt signal to a past mutual experience -- i.e. "you bade
me."

Now Desdemona drifts off in a direction of her own.

All's one:  good faith, how foolish are our minds?

If I do die before, prithee shroud me

In one of these same sheets.

"All[s one" -- with its variant "all's one for that" is a common Elizabethan
demotic catch phrase: here it serves a meaningless filler. Desdemona's meander
from death to shrouds to sheets is designed to reflect her own private, internal
non-volitional synaptic leaps. Her apology - "how foolish are our minds" -
reflects both Desdemona's and Shakespeare's knowledge that the sentences violate
the habit of dramatic dialogue in that they are ordered not by logic but by
association.

Emilia's mild but polite rebuke ("Come, come, you talk") is followed by a
sentence in which Desdemona introduces the fourth separate and distinct subject
of this unfolding conversation.

My mother had a maid called Barbary.

She was in love, and he she loved proved mad,

And did forsake her.

Desdemona has fallen into a reverie in which she re-lives an experience of
the childhood that Shakespeare has newly and spontaneously invented for her.
In these two-and-a-half lines, Shakespeare audaciously allows Desdemona to
introduce three new but extremely pertinent characters: Desdemona's mother,
hitherto unknown to the audience, her mother's forsaken maid Barbary, and
the maid's lunatic and inconstant lover. The effect of Desdemona's brief but
poignant recollection is to reinforce the illusion that she is an autonomous
speaker, giving shape to her sentences as they precipitate out of her battered
and not-entirely-disciplined consciousness. An astute audience (or readership)
will certainly notice that Desdemona projects her own plight onto these
imaginary meta-beings, and although the psychological ramifications of their
creation are rich indeed, Shakespeare's use of these improvised beings to mimic
the habits of real talk is as fully wonderful.

Desdemona continues:

She (.e. Barbary) had song of willow.

An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune.

And she died singing it. That song tonight,

Will not go from my mind. I have much to do

But to go hang my head all at one side

And sing it like poor Barbary..  Prithee dispatch.

To enforce the quotidian quality of the dialogue, Shakespeare invokes a
phenomenon familiar to every reader or hearer: the tune that seems to repeat
of its own accord in one's mind. The result: Desdemona has been provided with
a memory, and her memory holds a song, and that song is now apparently going
to sing itself independent of the character's own will. But what occurs is not
only the illusion that Desdemona reveals an inner experience; it is also that
these reflections are cast in such courageously monosyllabic language. And just
to assure us that the characters not not float from their dock in the material
universe, Desdemona's instruction to Emilia --"Prithee dispatch" - sustains the
exact colloquial mode initiated by "Prithee unpin me" and anchors both women in
the real present.

Both song and reverie are now shunted aside as the conversation comes to a small
climax. The two ladies continue to imitate the randomness of real talk:

Emelia.  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?

Desdemona.  No, unpin me here.

This Ludovico is a proper man.

Emilia.  A very handsome man.

Desdemona:  He speaks well.

Emilia:  I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a
touch of his nether lip.

Desdemona and Emilia drift from topic to topic: nightgowns leads by some
unarticulated but easy-to-imagine route to Ludovico and his masculine allure,
thence to Ludovico's habits of speech and at last to the very vivid and
memorable 'lady in Venice" -- a colorful personage who springs from Emilia's
fabricated pre-history, and who flashes across the stage in a hyperbole of
brilliant but unstressed beauty (and whose inexplicable passion asserts that
women can prosecute love-longing fully as irrationally as men). And then, just
when it seems as if the maid Barbary has been left in the lurch and forgotten,
the conversation turns back upon itself and Desdemona breaks into the song of
the poor soul who sat sighing by a sycamore tree. To reinforce the apparent
spontaneity of the moment, Shakespeare makes Desdemona repeatedly interrupt (and
even amend) her own singing :  "Lay by these"... "Prithee high thee;  he'll
come anon"... "Nay that's not next.  Hark who is't that knockes."  This broken
series of syntactically independent units, periodically intruded into the song,
are invented for the sole purpose of giving emphasis to the naturalness and
immediacy of the moment.

Shakespeare has therefore created the appearance of spontaneous conversation
by forsaking the straight path of normative dramatic dialogue. Desdemona and
Emilia intertwine present and past, real and fanciful, public and private, high
language and low, song and speech, understatement and exaggeration, syntactic
coherence and syntactic collapse, all within a context of shared knowledge and
almost sisterly intimacy.

The colloquial moment is fleeting, for even before the scene comes to a close,
Shakespeare returns to a more traditional dramatic idiom. Nevertheless, the
episode has done important work: Emilia's great feminist manifesto ("Let
husbands know,/ Their wives have sense like them") which will follow immediately
after this exchange, has been so effectively grounded in a real, earthy, and
contemporary context that it must stir every sensitive intelligence with its
grand appeal to equity.

It has long been acknowledged that the exotic Moor speaks in a highly
particularized, elaborate, and picturesque idiolect of his own - the music that
sweeps in with the icy currents of the Pontic sea and allows the Moor's great
dignity to find its grand expression. Desdemona and Emilia sing a far calmer
but more original song, and their impromptu domestic duet is surely no less and
perhaps even a greater artistic achievement than Othello's stupendous arias.

More on Othello:  here, here, and here.