Title: Vagaries of Memory; Fear
Date: December 10, 2019

We watched the last ten minutes of an early 30s James Cagney crime film. I don't
know its title because we came in very late and didn't catch the name. The
concluding bit of the film was very good: a chase scene (rather tame by modern
standards) and then unrepentant Cagney in the hoosegow, facing a long stretch.
A gloomy prison cell. Cagney's girlfriend (a familiar face but not one I can
identify) comes for a visit. She promises, as is the custom in such films, to
wait patiently for him until he's released. An empty promise?  I don't know.
But Cagney perks up and delivers the film's last line: "If I had the wings of an
angel over these prison wall I would fly." Followed by a fade. The End.

I immediately said to my companion, "I know what he's quoting;  it's "The
Prisoner's Song" by Vernon Dalhart." I looked it up and I was correct: the lines
are right there in stanza 5.

Now if I had wings like an angelOver these prison walls I would flyAnd I'd fly
to the arms of my poor darlin'And there I'd be willin' to die.

"The Prisoner's Song" (1924) was a big hit;  in fact, according to Wik, the
first "country" song to sell a million copies. I imagine that Cagney's 1930s
audience would be expected to recognize the allusion. But ninety years have
passed and the lyric is pretty much forgotten today. Except, of course, by me.
An amazing recall. What a guy!

I have to tell you, I wallowed in self-congratulation. Preened. Demanded
extravagant praise. For twenty-four hours I was the cock of the memory dunghill.
But how quickly glory transits.

The next afternoon, I watched, with my 6-year-old grandson Luke, the re-play of
an NBA basketball game. Houston versus Toronto. I had seen the game a couple of
days before, so I knew it was a good one. But (and here comes the memory horror)
I couldn't remember who won. True that I remembered various plays and players,
but true also that I thought the game went into overtime and Toronto won. Not
so; James Harden, one of my least favorite players, "took over" the last couple
of minutes and Houston won decisively. I had simply forgotten. Blanked.

I was deflated, memory-wise. And scared. One day you can remember Vernon Dalhart
and the wings of the angel, and the next day you can't recall James Harden and
who won and who lost.

Here's the fear: it's obvious that the moments of memory-triumph are going to
be fewer and fewer and the moments of memory-failure are going to increase. And
continue to increase. Burgeon. Yikes. Double yikes.

This is Vernon Dalhart.

But who the heck is this?

By the way, has anyone  seen my keys?  I left them right there on the desk.
Didn't I?