Title: Dinner Conversation
Date: December 06, 2009

A:  Do you remember Walter Peter, used to teach history at the university?

B.  Yes, he had quite the reputation.

A.  Lazy as sin, among other things. I was his grader in the late 60s. He never
looked at a paper or at an exam. When a girl would complain about a grade, I'd
tell them to go see Professor Peter. Some of them would, some of them wouldn't
dare. There was this one young nubile maiden, very beautiful. She had a D on
the mid-term and didn't show up for the final, so of course I gave her an F.
She was one of those who were willing to see Professor Peter in his office. I
never heard back from her but eventually I took a look at the grade sheet. He
had changed her grade from F to B.  I asked him, how come?

B.  Did you get any kind of explanation?

A.  He said, I talked to her, and I felt sure she would have gotten an A on the
final, if she had taken it, so I changed her grade. He said it with a straight
face.

B.  I wonder if he thought you believed him.

A.  I don't think he even cared.

B.  Let me tell you my favorite plagiarism story. I was handed a paper which
began, "Moreover...."  Student just took a couple of paragraphs out of the
middle of a chapter. Didn't even bother to change the first word.

A.  There's also the story of the student who handed in a paper with the bill
from the ghost writer still in it.

B.  Here's one I heard from Don Baker.  He was teaching in  Mississippi,
early in his career. Freshman English. He receives identical papers from two
students in the same class. He gives an A to one and an F to the other. This
would be in the 1950s sometime. The F student comes into his office.  He says,
"Uh, uh, Mr. Baker.  I have a friend in the class. I sometimes study with him.
He, uh, uh, handed in a paper, kind of, uh, you know, similar to mine."  Baker
says, "and." The kid says, well, he got a much better grade than I did."  Baker
says, or at least he swears he says, "Oh, but I like him. And I don't like you."