Title: Contra Tattoos
Date: April 25, 2018

Here are some reasons, young 'uns, why you should steer clear of tattoos.

a) because tattoos are permanent and because taste, your taste, is impermanent
and will inevitably change. There's a poster on the wall of your bedroom that
you love. Five years later, you're indifferent to it, and ten years later,
you've trashed it. "How could I ever have thought that thing was beautiful?"
Same with your taste in all the visual arts. So with the tattoo. You may
think t's beautiful now, perhaps, but ten or twenty years on it has become a
permanent definition of your callow taste. Without remedy or the possibility of
amelioration. You're stuck with it.

b) because ink fades and bodies sag. That crisp tattoo is going to bend,
distort, twist and fade as your body ages. Face facts: that tattoo is going
to become uglier and uglier. Have you caught sight of someone of my age who's
tattooed?  If you have, you know what I'm talking about; if you haven't, don't
look. It ain't pretty.

c)  tattoos are expensive if they're done by someone with talent. The cheap
ones are horrid. What a waste of money! You could donate the same amount to a
useful cause and feel good about yourself.

d)  tattoos hurt in the application; sometimes they become infected.

e)  because tattoos limit your romantic options. For many a potential partner,
that pseudo clever tattoo will be a deal breaker. "You have a tattoo where?
There? Right there? Ugh?" And also, don't tattoo yourself with the name of your
present beloved. Consider the divorce rate.

f)   if the tattoo is in plain sight, it will lower your earning power. No
problem getting a job as a dishwasher, but perhaps that upscale employer is
going to think twice before hiring someone who made such a bad choice. Because
the employer doesn't want to offend potential customers.

g)  because the Bible tells you so. "Do not cut your bodies for the dead or
put tattoo marks on yourselves. I am the LORD” (Leviticus 9:28). Your body
is a temple; do not mutilate or desecrate it. And for god's sake don't tattoo
yourself with religious symbols. To do so is like throwing ashes in the face
of the Almighty. The injunction against tattoos is one of the few biblical
proscriptions that I can sincerely embrace.

h) because tattoos are an expression of vanity, like wearing show-off jewelry or
expensive designer clothes. Let us take pride in our achievements and not in our
shallow foppery.

j ) because you don't want to cause me, ME, to look askance or into the air and
wrinkle up my nose whenever I meet you.