Title: "Maestro to the Pit"
Date: March 07, 2017

Several times a year, we attend the opera -- that is, we wander over to the
Metropolitan Opera widescreen HD broadcasts at our local movie theater.
Last week, it was Dvorak's Rusalka --overproduced, over-costumed, a mighty
silly story, but nevertheless glorious. Sung in Czech. Of course, I didn't
understand a word, but then I never do expect to do so, even when the opera is
sung in a language with which I'm supposed to be on speaking terms. But it's not
the libretto which we savor, it's the music.

Nevertheless at each performance there's a solemn  moment when language moves
front and center. It comes after the preliminary fol-de-rol and acknowledgements
and interviews and trailers-for-next-month's performance are finally dispensed
with. Now, at long last, the camera locates the head-setted director, who sits
at huge intimidating console of buttons and knobs and switches and lights. And
now here they come, the words of magic and enchantment: "maestro to the pit."

In that pithy, incantatory sentence is encapsulated all the ritual power of
language. It's a hieratic moment. After such a magnificent statement,
everything else is anticlimax (linguistically speaking).

Freed by these words, the shamanic conductor heretofore invisible, steps up,
turns his back to the audience and faces the orchestra, brandishes his baton,
and initiates the business of the day.

"Maestro to the pit."  I love the idea that the generic term for conductor is
"maestro." I love the quasi-oxymoronic juxtaposition of "maestro" and "pit."
 In fact, I love the word "pit" in this context. Not a hole in the ground, nor
the pit of hell, nor a place in which to chuck pieces of dismembered bodies. No,
an orchestra pit, which is a horse of an entirely different color. Good thing
it's not the custom to say "conductor to the podium." How flat, how banal, how
unsacral. No dignity, no grandeur, no poetry.

No, it's "maestro to the pit." And let it always be so.

And by the way, I make a pretty good barbecue sauce, and I'm proud to say
that my spare ribs are semi-famous. Let the word go forth, that now and
forever, whenever I'm called to the grill, it's going to be "maestro to the
pit."