Title: Petruchio and Othello?
Date: May 26, 2020

It's an unlikely pairing -- what possible connection could there be between
Petruchio, a creature of farce, and Othello, distinguished general and tragic
victim of the green monster. Yet there is a surprising point of contact -- two
similar (but very different) reminiscences. It's not usual for Shakespeare's
characters to have a "backstory," but both P and O attempt one.

Petruchio brags that a shrew can't scare him, because he's been there before.
"Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?"

He riffs on the word "din." He's inured to noise, he claims -- and how he came
to be so adds a new and improbable dimension to his character.

Have I not in my time heard lions roar?Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with
windsRage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?Have I not heard great ordnance
in the field,And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?Have I not in a pitched
battle heardLoud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?

I, for one, don't believe a word that Petruchio utters and I doubt whether
Shakespeare expects us to do so. It's all bluster, the words of an accomplished
bullshitter. Petruchio is a youthful fortune-hunter, full of bravado and
effrontery to be sure, but except in this passage, he lacks an adventurous past
or a military history. When did he hear lions roar?  While on a Roads Scholar
tour of Scythia or central Africa? And where was the sea like an "angry boar?"
Where was the "great ordnance" and "loud alarum?" More likely at Saturday
afternoon serials than in the tented field.

Othello's story, on the other hand, though more extravagant and fantastic, is
grandly persuasive. Here's a piece of it:

I spake of most disastrous chances,Of moving accidents by flood and fieldOf
hair-breadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,Of being taken by the
insolent foeAnd sold to slavery, of my redemption thenceAnd portance in my
travels' history:Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,Rough quarries, rocks
and hills whose heads touch heavenIt was my hint to speak,—such was the
process;And of the Cannibals that each other eat,The Anthropophagi and men whose
headsDo grow beneath their shoulders.

Othello veers into the mythological yet his story comports with what we
otherwise know of him.

Petruchio's tale is an instance of "just-in-time" characterization. Shakespeare
needs to display Petruchio's bravery in the face of a scolding woman -- so he
produces a soldiership story. It doesn't accord with Petruchio's history, but
it doesn't need to, because it serves an immediate necessary dramatic function.
Othello's speech is part and parcel; Petruchio's is a loose end.

And the language! The first passage, in early The Taming of the Shrew, is
perfunctory; the second, in the mature tragedy, is simply magnificent. Anyone
looking for evidence of Shakespeare's progress of a poet could do worse than
compare these two passages.