Title: Pairings
Date: December 09, 2020

"Kith and kin" is an excellent example of a "pairing" -- sometimes called a
"coordinate pair." A pairing is a linguistic event in which two words join to
produce a single meaning.

"Kith" has no independent existence nowadays and only exists as an element of
the pair. "Kith and kin" means "family." Originally, back then, "kith" meant
"known" and therefore signified "friends." "Kith and kin" was "friends and
relatives." No longer; now it means "family and family." "Time and tide" is
another fine pairing; "tide" meant "time" centuries before it came to refer
to the moony fluctuation of the seas, although its older meaning survives in
"eventide," "Yuletide," and similar words. Now "time and tide" seems to evoke
the inevitability of both clock and waves -- both of them joined to wait for
no man. "Kit and kaboodle" is also a lovely pairing, because "kaboodle" lacks
independent existence. It may derive from "boodle' -- a thief's bundle -- with
the "ka" added just for the fun of it. "Dribs and drabs" is more obscure in
origin and may not be a true pairing. "Dribs" is probably a variant of "drip"
but "drab" was in times past not a small amount of something or other, but an
untidy or unchaste woman. It's possible that "dribs and drabs," now a rather
neat pairing, is better thought of as a reduplicative like mumbo-jumbo or
hoity- toity. "Nook and cranny" is a pairing in which both elements survive
independently; "nook" originally a corner of a room, and "cranny" a narrow
space in which a brown recluse might hide. When someone or something grows by
leaps and bounds, it's hard to tell which is the leap and which the bound. The
same with "hot and bothered" -- the two words simply reinforce each other.
Similarly, a person might want to "pick and choose" between alternatives, but
to do so requires only one action. "Flotsam and jetsam" is an amusing pairing
of uncertain origin. It is often thought that flotsam lies on the surface of
the water and jetsam is thrown into it, but such a definition might be merely
a folk etymology derived from the words "float" and "jettison." A "hoot and a
holler" both refer to shouting, but now they mean "shouting distance." "Stuff
and nonsense" is obvious, but what sort of "stuff" is nonsensical? Perhaps
it's the very vagueness of "stuff" that it allows it to pair up and reinforce
"nonsense." "Alack and alas" is a weary but euphonious pair. "Wrack and ruin"
becomes more transparent when it's remembered that wrack is a variant  form of
wreck -- as "beck and call" becomes clearer when it is recalled that "beck" is a
foreshortened version of "beckon." The cry in "hue and cry" is obvious; the hue
is thought to derive from the OF verb huer (shout).

Null and void, bag and baggage, prim and proper, vim and vigor, are self-
explanatory.

Bits and pieces are sometimes called odds and ends. That's the long and the
short of it. Jot and tittle have been thoroughly researched and explicated
here.

Is "footloose and fancy-free" a pairing. Yes, I think so. An energetic and
imaginative pairing.