Title: Another Paragraph Written for my Grandchildren
Date: January 11, 2018

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, Asher:

This is a picture of my father's grandmother (that is, my great-grandmother
and therefore your great-great-great grandmother) whom I can now identify as
Menucha Sheindl Perelman (born Rabinovich) who died in 1908 at the age of 75
or thereabouts. She was born in the shtetl of Radomyshyl and married Yaakov
Perelman of Old Constantine in western Ukraine. Menucha is reported to have had
18 children including many twins. Seven daughters and three sons survived to
adulthood. The four daughters whose names are known were Rochel Lerner, Reizel
Shposhnik, Miriam, and Chaya-Beila, who married Schmul Spector (I remember now
that my father had a cousin named Julian Spector). Her sons were Isaiah or Buzya
my grandfather, then Chaim, and Meshulam.

My father told once told me story that seems incredible. He said that he had a
grandmother in the Ukraine who came from a large family. He said that she had
ten children but that all of them died in a week during a cholera epidemic. Then
they had five more children. Or perhaps there were five children who died in the
epidemic and then they had ten more. Both stories are hard to believe.

What would it be like to lose five or ten children in a week? How could anyone
ever recover from the grief?  How could you live?  It's possible that this
story attaches to Menucha Sheindl Perelman, who lost at least eight children.
But it might also be a Hessel story (i.e. my father's mother's side of the
family, not his father's).

Provenance:  I have no idea how this picture came into my possession. It's a
drawing, not a photograph. A copy of a drawing, to be more precise, not the
original. My father told me that it was done by an itinerant Ukrainian artist
(apparently a pre-photography custom). I wish that I could say more about
Menucha's costume, especially the scarf. Is it traditional garb? Or about her
very dark hair, which might be a sheitel, the wig worn by the orthodox.

Is it possible -- is it truly the case that the woman pictured above bore
eighteen children?  And Inasmuch as your direct ancestor Isaiah was child
number sixteen, if she had said to her husband Yaakov, after birthing number
fifteen, "I'm done, Yaakov, no more children" -- which would have been a
perfectly understandable sentiment -- then it's obvious that none of us would
exist.

Other news of your old country ancestors:  here,  here, and here.