Title: Durocher 1947
Date: January 25, 2019

In 1975, Leo Durocher wrote an as-told-to autobiography called Nice Guys Finish
Last. I read every word of it, but I got to tell you, it's not a good book.
It's a piece of self-justifying pro-Durocher propaganda. It's argumentative,
hyperbolic, unreliable. Durocher was an irascible man: he got into fights
with sportswriters, players, umpires, owners, coaches, wives -- everyone he
encountered. In every single case, he was absolutely blameless and they were
absolutely wrong. The gambling that got him suspended for a year? -- why, it
never happened.

Durocher doesn't give it the emphasis it deserves, but he had, by accident, a
place in the story. Durocher was manager of the Dodgers when Branch Rickey hired
Jackie Robinson. It was a watershed moment, a supremely important step in the
civil rights movement, and the beginning of a major transformation of not just
baseball, or sports, but of the nation and the world.

Durocher played his part, and he's proud of it, but I can't help feeling that
he missed his moment. His vision was so narrow, so constricted, so unaware. I
suppose he should be commended for doing the right thing, but as far as I can
tell, he did it for trivial reasons and did not have a glimmer of understanding
of either oppression and injustice on the one hand, or equality and freedom on
the other.

When some Dodgers proposed to petition Rickey not to sign Robinson, Durocher
called a team meeting. Here's what he says that he said to them:

"I hear some of you fellows don't want to play with Robinson and that you have
 a petition drawn up that you are going to sign. Well boys, you know what you
can do with that petition. You can wipe your ass with it. Mr. Rickey is on his
way down here and all you have to do is tell him about it. I'm sure he'll be
happy to make other arrangements for you. I hear Dixie Walker is going to send
Mr. Rickey a letter asking to be traded. Just hand him the letter, Dixie, and
your'e gone. Gone. If this fellow is good enough to play on this ball club --
and from what I've seen and heard, he is -- he is going to play on this ball
club and he is going to play for me. I'm the manager of this ball club and I'm
interested in one thing. Winning. I'll play an elephant if he can do the job,
and to make room for him I'll send my own brother home. So make up your mind to
it. This fellow is a real great ballplayer. He's going to win pennants for us.
He's going to put money in your pockets and money in mine. And here's something
else to think about when you put your head back on the pillow. From everything
I hear, he's only the first. Only the first, boys. There's many more coming
right behind him and they have the talent and they're gonna come to play. These
fellows are hungry. They're good athletes and there's nowhere else they can
make this kind of money. They're going to come, boys, and they're going to come
scratching and diving. Unless you fellows look out and wake up, they're going to
run you right out of the ball park. So I don't want to see your petition and I
don't want to hear anything more about it. The meeting is over. Go back to bed."

To me, his speech, though apparently effective, is trivial -- an opportunity
wasted. He opposed the petition for three reasons: one, it defied authority
(his and Rickey's); two, Robinson is going to help us win and therefore make us
money, and three, there are "others" on the way, who also want to make money, so
get out of the way.

The idea that Jack Roosevelt Robinson and others of his hue should be allowed
to participate out of simple fairness and equity did not occur to him. Slavery,
racism, segregation, justice, equal opportunity -- not part of his thinking.
Durocher's awareness of his place in history -- zero. What a disappointment!