Title: Beast in the Backyard
Date: April 08, 2006

On the night of August 23, 1990, an eighty-pound, two-year-old female mountain
lion wandered into our backyard.

The story appears in a book on cougar-human interactions (David Baron, The Beast
in the Garden [New York: Norton, 2004], 182-187) -- a book which also contains a
picture of "our" lioness, lying drugged on the ground (167).

My strongest memory of that encounter doesn't appear in the book and deserves a
report.  The lioness was crouching on a low branch of a box elder, and a goodly
number of police loitered on the street and in the yards and alleys waiting
for the wildlife-control officer and his tranquillizing dart. Eventually the
marksman arrived and shot the lioness. The animal leaped down from the tree.
As soon as she hit the ground and started to run, we could hear the sound,
resonating throughout the neighborhood, of car doors being slammed shut as
the officers rushed into their vehicles -- to re-emerge only when the lioness
collapsed.

Last week, there was another mountain lion in a near neighbor's backyard. It was
daylight;  the owner of the house had her video camera available and produced
a very clear record of a magnificent animal -- much larger and more formidable
that the one we had seen. Two nights ago, the neighbors held a meeting and the
author of The Beast in the Garden, who lives in town, came to tell us about
cougars in our county and what to do if we encounter them. The good news is
that the odds of being attacked are small: only one local person (a high school
student jogging alone near Idaho Springs) has been killed -- or taken, the
word is -- during the last decade. The author's advice: bring a companion with
you when you go walking in the mountains-- it's unlikely that a catamount will
attack two people, and if he should attack, then there are two of you to fend
him off. (He didn't repeat a familiar bit of local humor: "Always bring  a
friend with you when you walk in mountain-lion country. Remember, you don't have
to outrun the lion; you just have to outrun your friend.")  He also reminded
the audience that it's wrong to run away (because you will look like prey) but
that you should make yourself look big, make noise, throw rocks, etc. Do not,
repeat do not, play dead -- or worse yet, get down on all fours and try to crawl
away. But on the whole it's not the mountain lion you see who's the danger; it's
the mountain lion whom you don't see, but sees you. The one you feel.

A jogger was in the mountains with his faithful pooch at his side.  He came to
the top of a rise and there, on the road, was a big panther.  The jogger's dog
immediately disappeared into the roadside vegetation. The man did everything
right -- shouted, threw things, stared the lion down. Eventually, and slowly,
the big beast moved away and the jogger continued on his run. When he came to
the bottom of the hill, Faithful Companion, who had taken the long way around, 
reappeared and resumed running  with his master.

Man's best friend, but within sensible limits.