Title: English Teachers Are Such Jerks
Date: December 02, 2009

English teachers are such colossal jerks, at least whenever they appear in
movies. A case in point is Smart People (2008), which is the second-best
academic movie ever made in Pittsburgh (Wonder Boys is superior). Smart People
offers us a Carnegie-Mellon Professor of English, played by a shambling Dennis
Quaid, who is a depressed, angry, uncommunicative, and miserable being, and
who insults and patronizes both his students and his family. He's the perfect
embodiment of traditional and persistent American anti-intellectual stereotypes.
Book-learning has turned him into a mere grammarian, a pedant, who must learn
about "real life" from his rolling-stone, improvident, frequently-stoned but
streetsmart brother. Smart People is constructed around stereotypes that were
exhausted when Shakespeare created Holofernes and Sir Hugh Evans more than four
hundred years ago.

I've known a lot of English teachers -- some good, some bad -- but I've yet to
encounter the shallow stereotype.

English teachers make their way into a disproportionately large number of
movies. There are two reasons for this phenomenon. The first is that the writer
of the film wants to illustrate some thematic point, so he brings his characters
into a classroom where a pompous old fart or fartess can provide some cheap
laughs while explicating a poem or novel that is tangentially related to a point
the film is trying to make. The second reason is pure revenge. In films in which
English teachers figure, there's often --almost always, in fact -- a young man
whose writing is unappreciated by the narrow-minded professor. In Smart People,
he's the son of our own nasty hero, and his sparkling poem is published in the
New Yorker while his indifferent father is still waiting to hear whether his
critical-theory manuscript has been rejected yet once again. This character --
the brilliant but unappreciated young poet or playwright or novelist -- stands
in for the writer or director of the film, who is saying, in filmspeak, "look
at me now, you colossal jerk. I'm making movies and you're still back in high
school or at State U., grading freshman term papers. So there!!! That'll teach
you to give me a C+."

By the way -- Smart People is an intelligent, well-written film. I heartily
recommend it.