Title: The Chosen Zebra
Date: December 09, 2009

Ordinarily, I'm skeptical when supernatural images magically appear on everyday
objects. To me, such manifestations are perfectly explicable run-of-the-mill
instances of pareidolia.  [Pareidolia:  the tendency, inherent in the human
brain, to discover patterns (e.g. faces) in random markings.]  No matter how
intently I peer and squint, I simply cannot find the blessed virgin and her
child in the Ritz cracker. Nor in the stump of that felled yew in Donegal nor
in the water stain on the Samoan wall nor on the broken storm window in Jesup,
Georgia and certainly not in the miraculous bird dropping on the rear view
mirror of a pickup in Bryant, Texas. Not even in the revered and legendary 1978
Mexican tortilla. I am also willing to confess that although I haven't seen it
with my own eyes, I remain unpersuaded by the internationally-celebrated image
of Jesus in the partially-eaten toasted cheese sandwich that is reported to
have sold on Ebay for $28,000 and is now framed and publicly exhibited in the
Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino of Hollywood, Florida, where it amuses the
agnostics and wows the credulous.

In my conception, if the Ancient of Days had wanted to impress an image of his
very own filius unigenitus or of JC's tender and mild mom on breadstick or
bagel, cornbread or challah, he would have the made the representation clear
and distinct -- certainly not subject to dispute or interpretation or doubt or
skepticism. That's the way the Big Guy in the sky should operate when he's at
the top of his omnipotent game.

Which brings me to the illustration above, where, when you point and click, you
will encounter in sharp detail a  complete and perfect menorah incontrovertibly
etched, this Hanukkah season, on the port side of a zebra. No ifs, ands, buts,
or pareidolia.

Why a zebra, a creature not mentioned in the Holy Book?  Well, once again, the
L-rd moves in mysterious ways. If He chooses a zebra, who are We to question his
mighty decision?

Moreover, there's absolutely no question but that His menorah on a zebra beats
His Jesus on a toasted cheese sandwich all to heck.

Just sayin'.

Unless perhaps the Lord of Hosts uses photoshop?