Title: Montaigne, Kinship with
Date: October 14, 2020

There is no author with whom I feel greater kinship than with Michel de
Montaigne and there's none with whom I've passed more hours and days, except for
Shakespeare. For many years, Montaigne's Essais has been my bedside companion,
first in the old Everyman Library edition as translated by John Florio, a book
which I early discovered among my father's small collection, and latterly in the
1958 version by Donald Frame. Of the two writers, Shakespeare is the greater,
but he is unknowable and certainly not a comrade. "Negative capability" --
and all that. Shakespeare, the human being, lies hidden behind a profusion of
characters and borrowed stories. Sometimes I think I can catch a glimpse of the
man himself in recurring images or in a repeated motif, but how can I be sure?
It's all guesswork and supposition. Shakespeare is an auctor absconditus. He can
be admired, even revered, but he's too mysterious ever to be a pal. Montaigne,
on the other hand, is insistently present. He talks directly to me, guy to
guy, teaches me, argues with me. Even though there's a universe of differences
between me and this astonishingly erudite sixteenth-century French Catholic
skeptic, I feel that we are good friends.

Why the kinship? Montaigne is so various, so mutable, so inconsistent, that he's
difficult to define, but nevertheless exhibits traits with which I l am in deep
sympathy. Of all the important thinkers, he's the least systematic -- which is a
benefit, at least for me. I can't make heads or tails of his near-contemporaries
Spinoza or Descartes because both are too orderly and logical for my unsubtle
head. But Montaigne works differently -- he advances an idea, modifies it,
retracts it, illustrates it with a dozen anecdotes, and then announces that
he can't come to a definitive conclusion -- which is the way my mind works,
although obviously at a much lower order. And then Montaigne's brain is a
hodgepodge, a gallimaufry of formidable learning strewn in heaps, like the last
scene of Citizen Kane. So is mine, although it's a cramped attic compared to
Montaigne's warehouse. And of course, Montaigne writes almost exclusively about
himself, as I do in these fragmentary blague entries.

Moreover, we both seem to be at least in part writing for the same purpose.
I compose these essaylets for what I conceive of, pretentiously, as dynastic
reasons. Because I I so much wish that I had some artifacts or writing of my
grandparents or great-grandparents, who left nothing behind, no scrap remaining,
I want my descendants to have something of mine. Montaigne agrees: "What a
satisfaction it would be to me to hear someone tell me of the habits, the face,
the expression, the favorite remarks, and the fortunes of my ancestors. How
attentive I would be. Truly it would spring from a bad nature to be scornful
of even the portraits of our friends and predecessors, the form of their
clothes and their armor." [Montaigne came from a family with a strong military
tradition, unlike mine, which is epitomized by grandfather's desertion from
the Russian army.] "I keep their handwriting, their seal, the breviary and a
peculiar sword that they used, and I have not banished from my study some long
sticks that my father ordinarily carried in his hand." I have no "sticks," but
as I sit here pecking at the word processor, I see out of the corner of my eye
my father's library ladder, used for retrieving just the right law book.

Montaigne is not done with the topic. He continues by exploring an idea about
which I also have ruminated. For whom do I devote these hours, if not for
myself?  He is eloquent upon the subject.

"If no one reads me, have I wasted my time, entertaining myself for so many idle
hours with such useful and agreeable thoughts. In modeling this figure upon
myself, I have had to fashion and compose myself so often to bring myself out,
that the model itself has to some extent grown firm and taken shape. Painting
myself for others, I have painted my inward self with colors clearer than my
original ones. I have no more made my book that my book has made me -- a book
consubstantial with its author, concerned with my own self, an integral part of
my life....  Have I wasted my time by taking stock of myself so continually, so
carefully. For those who go over themselves only in their minds and occasionally
in speech do not penetrate to essentials in their examination as does a man who
makes that his study, his work, and his trade, who binds himself to keep an
enduring account, with all his faults, with all his strengths."

I wish I could say that I'm as honest as Montaigne; I'm not. I recognize that
the "me" that appears here is to some degree different from the me that is
me. Although I do not lie about myself, I conceal some of my most flagrant
deficiencies. Nor do I blow my own small trumpet. As a result, the portrait that
has emerged is solider and also less troubled than the true-to-life person.
Don't say I didn't give you notice, unwary descendants.