Title: The "Yips"
Date: October 16, 2020

The yips have been big news this week because Jose Altuve, Houston's golden-
glove second baseman has made three throwing errors in two games. Glaring,
costly errors. He's bounced balls to first base and to second base -- throws of
twenty or forty feet which he has made successfully thousands of times in his
outstanding career.

The "yips" is sports jargon for the sudden, inexplicable inability to make
an ordinary or routine play. It's commonly used by golfers when they start
missing short putts --but baseball has its famous yippers -- Steve Saxe, Chuck
Knoblauch (both of them second baseman who have the shortest, easiest throws) 
and now, possibly Altuve. Sometimes a good pitcher will lose his control and
start to miss badly; the retired pitcher at the microphone will say, "he's
lost his release point," which is a yippish diagnosis without using the word.
Athletes think that the problem is psychological but it's possible that the
condition is merely neurological - a "focal dystonia" or muscle spasm in the
wrist. Basketball yips? Yes, sometimes a good foul shooter will miss four or
five in a row.

I suspect that the yips may not be a sports-only syndrome.

Once, a decade or two ago, I was driving across the country on a four-lane and
needed to brake. For some reason, my feet (I was driving a standard transmission
so both feet and the clutch pedal were involved) couldn't remember which was
the brake pedal. I flailed with both feet and was utterly panicked for about
five long seconds. Then I came to my senses, put the correct foot on the correct
pedal, and continued on in normal fashion. Life continued. But if I had crashed
the car and killed myself, which was certainly a possibility, investigators
would have thought that I had fallen asleep at the switch. They'd have been
wrong; it was just the yips -- a failure to perform a task that should have been
entirely routine.

I wonder how many road disasters are caused by undiagnosed yippishness.

Do actors get the yips? Do musicians? Dentists?  Airline pilots? Surgeons ("You
know, I've done that back surgery hundreds of times but three out of the last
four, I've sliced entirely through the guy's spinal cord").