Title: What We Read in the 1950s: The Magnificent Ambersons
Date: February 25, 2024

Although The Magnificent Ambersons was first published in 1918, it was still
admired and almost canonical in the 1950s when I was coming to awareness. It
was the sort of unchallenging social realism novel in the Sinclair Lewis or
John Marquand tradition that was then school-and-societyy approved. Did I read
it then? I can't say for certain. I can swear that I read Tarkington's Penrod
series which was specifically targeted to young people. I would have thought
that this week's reading of The Magnificent Ambersons was a return to familiar
territory, but it doesn't much matter because I didn't recognize a single word
of it. All was newer than new -- and disappointing to boot.

Tarkington's reputation, once sky-high (two Pulitzer prizes), has plummeted
since the 50s and I doubt that my grandchildren or their co-eval friends have
ever heard his name. Strange to say, the edition that was on the shelf at the
Boulder Public Library had all the marks of a high school text, with commentary,
footnotes, and sample questions designed to challenge those dedicated young
folks who were diligent enough to make it to the end. I suspect that students
and their teachers will find themselves repelled not only by the superbly
snobby, unattractive, and bratty central figure but also, and especially, by
the frequent and offensive use of the slur "darkies." Mighty off-putting, I'm
afraid.

The Tarkington mini-revival was precipitated by a viewing of Orson Welles' 1942
The Magnificent Ambersons - a film that deserves to be called "rivetting" -- but
rather for the cinematography than for the disturbing, perverse family drama
that it depicts. Welles thought it was his best work. Audiences will neither
be able to concur or disagree with his assessment because some forty minutes
of his completed film were cut and destroyed by a studio editor in order to
make the work more commercial and more palatable. Moreover, a happy ending was
sutured onto the film -- the original had been much "darker." Though how much
darker is hard to imagine, because even as it stands it's a gloomy story of
perverse values and gratuitous tragedy. In the edited and "improved" version,
George Minafer survives his automobile accident and reconciles with attractive
Lucy Morgan. In the novel and apparently in Welles' version, George dies of his
injuries. In both novel and film, George is a self-centered prig and frankly,
when the film came to conclusion, I myself would have been quite willing to
let him die. In no way had he earned the favors of such a self-respecting and
intelligent young lady as Lucy. Hadn't paid his dues, even though to make some
money he had taken up a dangerous work involving "nitro-glycerine." I do wonder
what might have been depicted in those purged Welles minutes because the film
follows the novel closely, almost slavishly.  What did Welles include that the
novel passes over, or more suggestively, what did Welles invent and add?

I think that one of the reasons that Booth Tarkington has sunk without much
trace is because of his exceedingly short-sighted and reactionary stance. The
Magnificent Ambersons is anti-modern, but not out of any deep ecological,
philosophical or psychological conviction. Tarkington idealizes the Indiana of
his childhood and doesn't much like change. People are moving into his town
(Indianopolis though he never uses the name) from Eastern Europe and they're
outworking and displacing the good old solid Americans -- those established
families with their shared values and small-town friendliness. These new
arrivals make money and build large ugly house and instead of horse-drawn
carriages they drive automobiles. The new auto industry is a particular bete
noir for Tarkington. The Ambersons lose their money investing in it and George
gets himself run over by a vehicle that was plunging down the street at 20 mile
an hour.  Autos bring speed and soot and social disruption.

At this moment, I do not feel a need to read any more novels by Booth
Tarkington.