Title: Interim Report on P. Roth
Date: December 07, 2007

I've now penetrated halfway into the Philip Roth corpus, reading not
chronologically but as the novels become available in our local public library.
At this moment I’ve interrupted my progress to enjoy DBC Pierre’s Booker
Prize novel Vernon God Little, a virgin copy of which I uncovered in a basement
storage box.

Here's my interim report on the works of Philip Milton Roth. No doubt but
that Roth has created a stunningly original and accomplished body of work:
it's witty, inventive, imaginative and unpredictable. So far The Human Stain,
which I read a couple of years ago and plan to re-read soon, is my choice for
masterpiece, but among the Rothgroup are a number of real dazzlers. Not a
single book has been uninteresting (well, of the very early works, Letting Go
was ordinary and Portnoy's Complaint, though notorious, was not serious). But
everything has been engaging, even if only for the coruscating surface. I'm
genuinely impressed. The Roth guy is good.

But, you ask, Is Roth a writer for all time, or is he a writer for this present
moment?  No one can make a fair estimate until the requisite hundred years have
elapsed. Nevertheless, my great pleasure and admiration for his achievement
notwithstanding, I very much doubt the permanent value of Roth's work. My
provisional opinion is that Roth confines himself to too small a slice of
human experience to sit at the table of the greats. The more I read, the
more conscious I become that his engagement with the world is incomplete and
deficient.

At bottom, Roth's subject is domesticity. His major characters, on the whole,
do not track whales or go to war or cure diseases or wrestle with new ideas or
sojourn in the wilderness; instead, they manage relationships with their parents
and with their colleagues and with their mistresses and ladyfriends. It's no
vice for a writer to choose the domestic arena: it's the domain of Jane Austen
and Henry James, among many others. Roth, however, presents us with a severely
circumscribed domesticity -- a partial and skewed view even of his own area of
interest.

Human social life begins with the family from which we derive, but it culminates
in the family that we create. It's a cycle; we’re born, we mature, we marry,
we bring forth children who themselves mature, and then we shuffle off the
stage. Roth understands and engages the first part of life -- the growing out
of childhood into adulthood. In traditional literature, it's the part of life
that, recorded in the novels of a writer less satiric and more comic than Roth,
might end with a wedding feast and the promise of future fertility. But Roth
does not write traditional comedy, and he's inordinately hostile to marriage and
especially to children. He's an acute observer of both the nuclear and extended
families of his west-of-Manhattan Newark-Jewish roots. But when it comes to the
progenitive phase of life, he has little to offer: incomprehension, or less than
incomprehension -- merely vacancy, a hole, a void. There's no sign that Roth
appreciates that to nurture a family of one's own is for most people a profound
part of the human voyage. His characters don't willingly marry, and if they do,
they don't stay married and they certainly don't reproduce. There are no babies,
no boys or girls, no teen-agers in the homes and streets and schools of New
Rothville.

When we (that is, the plurality of human beings) grapple with parenthood, we
inevitably come to some sort of detente with the generation that begot us.
Not only do we learn about life from our sons and daughters, but we find it
immensely satisfying to do so. But in the fifteen or so of Roth’s novels that
I've so far read, I've yet to find the father who loves his own children. It's
as though Roth were deaf and blind to the profounder half of human existence.
Children are not a fulfillment; they are only a burden and an annoyance -- clogs
to Zuckerman's or Kepesh's or Tarnopol's or Roth's freedom. (Readers of Claire
Bloom's memoir of her life with Philip -- Leaving a Doll's House --will clearly
remember Roth's implacable and inexplicable antagonism to Bloom's daughter.) For
many novelists, the non-existence of paternal affection would not be a handicap
to artistic achievement. But Roth writes entirely out of his own experience;
he’s anything but empathic. Roth cannot conceive of the full adulthood that
comes with mature parenthood. So he doesn't know what he can't know -- that his
various alter egos, even as they age, linger in perpetual frozen adolescence.

Unable to imagine the love of children, Roth also lacks the ability to
appreciate or describe a functioning marriage. For Roth and his multiple
avatars, marriages are similar to children in that they are restrictions on
individual freedom.  And therefore Roth's hostility to husbands is corrosive
and aggressive. Husbands are unmanly, emasculated. Real men have lots of women;
those who pretend to enjoy a permanent partnership with one person are either
slaves or eunuchs.

Roth writes obsessively about Jews and Jewishness and Jewish culture but there's
a core Jewish value that he never acknowledges. It's "being a mensch." A mensch
is a mature man who does right by his friends, his associates, and especially
by his family. He meets, and more than meets, his obligations, especially when
it's rough going. He can be relied upon. He enjoys his life, but he would never
put his own satisfactions ahead of his obligations to either his closest kin
or humankind in general. Of such a traditional virtue, Roth's characters know
nothing. In his novels, Roth's various alter egos not only shirk responsibility
and run from trouble, but they judge it virtuous to do so.  In the world
according to Roth, only a schmuck would be a mensch. But perhaps the satirist is
always doomed to be the malcontent outsider. A happy Rothmensch would be no Roth
at all.

Philip Roth is by all odds the greatest novelist of arrested development ever
produced by the state of New Jersey.