Title: Equines and Ovines
Date: July 21, 2007

There are now five horses and about twenty-five sheep pastured on our fields.
The horses are Morgans; they're handsome and dignified. They have mucho gravitas
and very distinct personalities.  I'm proud to say that we're friends; the
horses make a point to trot over and say hello when I'm working nearby. They
have big brains (or, at least, room for big brains) and they seem to want to
communicate. I sweeten our intimacy with windfall apples. My relationship with
the sheep is less satisfactory. Frankly, we're not on the same wavelength. Today
I was cutting some brush (mostly beaked hazelnut and red maple) on the other
side of the pond right against the sheep fence. Because I know that sheep take
a gourmet interest in leaves of any sort (although we keep them away from lilac
and wilted cherry), I carried a stack of branches out into the field. The sheep
were interested but wary. Finally, one of the lambs (Braveheart, let's call him)
sidled up to the pile and pulled on a leaf -- at which point the whole stack
moved an inch or two. The entire flock started and immediately skedaddled back
home.

The sheep are Scottish Blackfaces. My neighbor Ed, who owns them, claims that
Scottish Blackfaces are the smartest of all ovines. Talk about damning-with-
extra-faint-praise. Here's how utterly brilliant sheep can be. There are two
gates right next to each other to a second pasture. One of the gates is for
the horses and one is for the sheep. The sheep gate is nothing more than a few
boards tacked together to make a space 4 feet high and 4 feet wide -- just large
enough so that the sheep can slip through but the horses can't. The gate for the
horses must be 12 or 14 feet across. It's metal and it rests on a hefty pair of
hinges. Sometimes it's left open to allow the horses access to the field. But
even when it's wide open, the sheep don't use it. Instead, they line up single
file at their own little gate and wait their turn. Not a one of them, even
Braveheart, has the sense to look around and notice that the main thoroughfare
is available to anyone who wants to show a little initiative.

The horses are organized. Gillian, who's a twenty-something-year old mare, is
the boss. Gabe, an ex-boy, is at the bottom. In between, the two young chestnut
mares and a newly gelded bay struggle for status. In social terms, the sheep
are a horse of another color. If there's a system to the society of sheep, I've
not been able to discern it. It's all random Brownian movement. I asked Ed,
who knows his sheep and has kept them for many years, if he'd ever been able
to discover the structure of ovine social life. "Near as I can figure out,"
he answered, "one of them gets it in his head to go somewhere, and the rest
follow."

Horses are noble; sheep are amusing but duller than Charles B., who was twice
left back in first grade in P. S. 217, and duller also than my long-time
colleague Joel S.

Whose idea was it, do you think, to placate the gods by sacrificing sheep? 
Were our ancestors trying to pull the wool over their deities' eyes?  Were they
being deliberately disrespectful?  What sort of offering is a sheep?

"Here, sir god, I'll kill you a sheep. It's enough. What would you want with a
horse?"