Title: What We Read in the Fifties: East Side, West Side, by Marcia Davenport
Date: January 16, 2023

Two weeks ago, I wrote some admiring remarks  about a little-known post-WWII
film called East Side, West Side. I said then that I was sufficiently impressed
and intrigued by the film that I intended to read the novel upon which it is
based, but that since ES,WS has evaporated into the mists of time, I would have
to wait for Interlibrary Loan to dig up a copy for me. Well, the novel has
arrived, coming haste-post-haste from Laramie, Wyoming, the flyleaf inscribed,
"To Mrs Eccleston, from Anna." Gosh, I'd love to know who Mrs. E and Anna were,
and what they (and Laramie) made of this extremely Manhattan-y book.

East Side, West Side (published in 1947), I can now report, is a big hunking
doorstop of a novel. Not a very good one, I'm afraid. It is prosy, untidy,
and crammed with too many episodes and too many undifferentiated characters.
To transform its meanderings into an economical screenplay required great
intelligence and imagination. All praise to the screenwriter, Brooklyn's own
Isobel Lennart, who condensed characters, eliminated subplots, rationalized
excesses, and to some degree toned down the book's inherent snobbery.

ES,WS can be described as an old-fashioned "woman's novel," and not in a good
way. Its female characters are, almost uniformly passive victims. Plus there's
far too much chat about makeup, dinner parties, and "fittings." There's an old
--very old-- canard that an erotic novel for women consists of 400 pages of
courtship and foreplay  followed by a proposal of marriage. I'm afraid that
ES,WS fits this unfortunate formula. Jessie Bourne, wronged and soon-to-be-
divorced wife, is wooed by gentlemanly General Mark Dwyer but o so slowly. Sex
is teased and deferred for chapter after chapter. In Isobel Lennart's alert and
improved script, women are not afraid to take charge.

There's one episode in the novel that seriously rankled me. There's a murder.
The privileged East Side aristocrats do not turn the guilty party over to the
police; instead, they suppress evidence and suborn perjury in order to keep the
scandal out of the newspapers. They succeed, though their plot couldn't have
deceived the dullest precinct flatfoot. In the film, I'm glad to say, a killer
is brought to justice.

Toward the end of the novel, Marcia Davenport introduces a long embarrassing
digression in which the General, just returned from the European theater,
lectures on the post war situation in Eastern Europe. I'm sorry to say that he
praises Soviet aggression in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, etc. I suspect that
these tortured apologetics were written before Davenport lived in Prague and was
engaged to marry the Czech foreign minister Jan Masaryk, who in 1948 was thrown
out of a window by agents of the KGB.  I hope that Davenport would have changed
her position after the defenestration.