Title: "Re-Partnering"
Date: January 22, 2023

It's shocking, is it not, that 50% of American marriages end in divorce. "Fifty
per cent" is not just a statistic; it's a reality that stands for tons of
personal distress and suffering and remorse. Alas, the rate of divorce for
second marriages is even higher -- 60%; for third marriages, according to
many sources, as much as 75%. The fact that the percentage rises with age and
experience at first seems counter-intuitive. Shouldn't second and subsequent
marriages be happier, more peaceful?  Don't people learn and improve with
experience?  Should they not know themselves better and therefore choose a
mate more wisely?  Now that they are veterans, shouldn't they have grasped the
art of marriage ? Learned how to solve problems? Learned to make a stronger
and more sensible commitment to each other? After all, they've voluntarily and
optimistically decided to take another crack at marriage. Why not bend every
effort to succeed?

But the numbers don't lie. Many of the people who have been divorced one time,
say sociologists who study marriage and the family, bring negative attitudes
to the next. Instead of assuming that marriage is a lifelong commitment, they
regard it as a flexible arrangement that can be abandoned if things get tough.
They've already survived one or two divorces and are therefore less fazed by the
prospect of another. And inasmuch as the taboo against divorce has already been
shattered, such social inhibitions that remain are the more readily overcome.

There are even simpler explanation for the failure of subsequent marriages:
some people are marriageable by nature and some are marriageable-skittish. The
population of the marriageable-skittish increases as the natively marriageable
leave the pool. Who remains to be married among the population setting out on
second or third marriages? Only those people who are not intrinsically inclined
to prosper in long term relationships. As the pool shrinks to the less and less
marriageable, the percentage of failures inevitably rises.

Divorce and the rates of divorce have been well studied. But what about second
marriages of people who are not divorced but widowed? It's curious that there
seems to be no interest in how widows and widowers (w-ws) fare when they
contract subsequent marriages. Are second marriages of the w-ws more or less
likely to succeed? Apparently, it's not a pressing problem for sociologists. Or
perhaps it's too hard to procure the data. Just who are the remarried (or "re-
partnered") w-ws's? Many "remarried" widows and widowers don't bother to inform
either church or state of their new situation. They may have financial or tax
reasons to avoid scrutiny. They may be separately domiciled. They're not talking
but they're there. Hard to find and hard to study.

My suspicion, drawn from anecdotal evidence and just looking around at people
of my own age cohort, is that the divorce rate among remarried w-ws is very
very low. Why? Well, for one thing, because w-ws are people who are among the
marriageable by nature. They've stayed together, stayed married until death did
them part. Because they succeeded at maintaining a long marriage, they very
likely entered a later marriage expecting to do so again. In addition, w-ws
are likely to be older and weathered. Because they're not scarred by a painful
divorce, they are more likely to be sound of heart rather than wary and wounded.

Re-partnered w-ws have outlived many of the tensions of more youthful marriages.
They're probably not obsessed or consumed by their careers or by worldly
success. For better or worse, their successes and failures have been long
established, long completed. If they're old enough to be retired, they may have
the leisure to talk intimately with one another.

One of the principal causes of divorce, we're told, is tension around child-
rearing, an activity in which philosophical differences between the parents can
cause all kinds of difficulties and tensions and squabbles.  But most w-ws
aren't going to have more children, and the ones that they have are likely to be
grown and gone.

Nor will there going to problems with in-laws, because the in-laws are all dead.

And older w-ws, if they're fortunate, don't have the financial problems of
earlier decades: no sudden unemployment, no need to move to a larger, more
expensive house, no college tuitions. If they're not formally remarried, they
most likely keep their resources separate and therefore don't need to negotiate
about how money is to be spent.

Older folk don't have to deal with contraceptives. While sex is probably less
urgent and imperious than in earlier decades, it might be more consoling,
especially because older partners should have a better grasp of their own
needs and how they might be fulfilled. And they are probably more accepting of
themselves and of their bodies.

It goes almost without saying that w-ws have experienced the deaths of their
previous spouse and therefore share a most important mutual experience. A bond,
a link. An important mutual consolation, one among the many experiences that
older w-ws bring to the table.  They know from living many years on the planet
that various things that seemed important years ago turned out not to matter at
all.

And most important of all: older w-ws have learned over the course of many
decades not only how to love but how to cherish and to respect a wife or
husband.