Title: Edward Gibbon -- Replacement Child
Date: October 28, 2011

By strict definition, a replacement child is one who is conceived because
an older sibling has died. According to the theory, such a child is at
psychological risk, especially if the dead child has not been adequately
mourned.

Because he was an oldest son, Edward Gibbon, the greatest of all modern
historians and the most brilliant prose stylist in the English language, would
not seem to qualify as a replacement -- except that in his own curious manner
of thinking, Gibbon “replaced” children who were born subsequent to him.

Gibbon preened himself on his status in the family. “From my birth,” he
said in his famous Memoir, “I have enjoyed the rights of primogeniture.”
But primogeniture was not so much a chronological fact as it was a pinnacle to
be defended. As he conceived it, Gibbon triumphed over would-be competitors to
his supremacy. “I was succeeded by five brothers and one sister, all of whom
were snatched away in their infancy.” Toward his dead siblings, and toward the
parents who endured the heart-breaking death of six of their seven children,
Gibbon was unnaturally cold and mercenary. “I shall not pretend to lament”
the loss of those who would “oppress my inheritance.” Gibbon lacked empathy
in part because he felt, with some justice, that his younger siblings were
favored over him by his father. How could this be?

The Memoir supplies an explanation. In an age of high infant mortality, Gibbon
was a very sickly child. His life was at risk while other, later-born children
seemed to be born healthier. As Gibbon himself puts it, “so feeble was my
constitution, so precarious my life, that, in the baptism of each of my brothers
my father’s prudence successively repeated my Christian name of Edward, that,
in case of the departure of the eldest son, this patronymic appellation might
be still perpetuated in the family.” This is odd indeed. In five separate
instances, according to the future historian, a male child saw the light, and
each time the child was named Edward. In one case after another, the outcome was
the same. The infant who might have “oppressed his inheritance” succumbed
and the heroic oldest son beat back the challenge. The first Edward therefore
“replaced,” so to speak, a series of subsequent Edwards who might have
superseded him. It's not hard to imagine that a sickly child, pursued by a
series of infants each christened with his very own name, would feel threatened
and might rejoice rather than mourn at their funerals.

Although Gibbon attributes the pattern of naming to his father’s
“prudence,” it is obvious that the phrase "my father's prudence” is an
irony that masks a true fury. Was it prudence or was it his father's hope that
the sickly child would be succeeded by a healthy one?  Hostility also shines
through Gibbon's jealous account of his mother: "to preserve and to rear so
frail a being [as himself], the most tender assiduity was scarcely sufficient;
and my mother’s attention was somewhat diverted by her frequent pregnancies,
by an exclusive passion for her husband, and by the dissipation of the world,
in which his taste and authority obliged her to mingle.” The irony of this
beautiful Augustan sentence conceals infantine rage: to translate into more
forthright English, Gibbon objects that his mother conceived other children,
claims that she should have preferred him to her husband, and asserts that she
should have withdrawn from society to nurse him.

To what degree Gibbon’s suppressed and ironic but still obvious anger toward
his parents contributed to his peculiar temperament is difficult to say, but
it is a fact that the bulk of his career was spent not only in tracing the
decline and fall of Rome, the father of all European civilizations, but also in
displacing an established patriarchal religion from its position of supremacy.
The irony that he directed against his parents in his Memoir is the exact
weapon that he learned to deploy against Roman failures and against triumphant
Christianity.

In addition, there's an untidy psychological wrinkle. Gibbon’s claim that
the male children who succeeded him were all named Edward is a crucial part of
his indictment of his parents. But it's an assertion that is not true and is
not substantiated by parish records. There was no endless series of Edwards.
Apparently, one succeeding child was so named but the rest enjoyed various
different appellations. The most scrupulous of historians either invented or
misremembered the dreadful slight that so wounded him. What psychological
mechanism caused Gibbon to yearn to be even more of a replacement child than in
fact he was?