Title: Can We Hope for a Locative Renaissance?
Date: March 18, 2023

Here on Walnut Street, we're trying to make more and better use of locatives
-- words that have long been underemployed and undervalued. We think that the
language (and therefore the world) would be richer and more commodious if others
would join with us in this endeavor. But we're not evangelizing, heck no! We
honor and respect each and every person's private and personal linguistic
choices, locatively-speaking.

Nor do we refer to the common adverbial locatives, such as homeward, downtown,
underground, or nearby.  The locatives that we wish to revive and reinvigorate
are the neglected -- even forsaken -- classics of locativity.

Everyone uses the locative where -- the point upon which you metaphorically
stand --  but how many of us remember to employ the excellent and useful "to"
form, whither, or the "from" form, whence.  It's true that whither and whence
sound a trifle obsolescent, but with frequent use the flexible ear will soon
accommodate. One might be tempted to say "wither goest thou" or "whence com'st
thou", but with a little effort, "whither do you go" and "whence do you come"
will sound perfectly natural, I'm sure.

Similarly, we regularly use the word here, but by golly, we have slighted hither
(to here) and hence (from here).

Equally neglectful is the abandonment of thither and thence ("to there" and
"from there"). Extraordinary useful words, relegated thoughtlessly to the rear
of the locative line.

And then of course, there's yon, yond and yonder, all related varieties of
"there" but further off than "there." At a distance. Shakespeare, as one would
expect, is a most skillful deployer of yons. From Hamlet: "But look, the morn in
russet mantle clad/ Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill."  From Julius
Caesar. "Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;/ He thinks too much; such men
are dangerous."  From Romeo and Juliet. "What lady's that/ Which doth enrich
the hand of yonder knight?"

A yonnish locative that is not endangered and continues to thrive is the
word beyond. Shakespeare's most remarkable and I daresay most beautiful use
of "beyond" occurs in Cymbeline, when Innogen learns that her exiled lover
Posthumus Leonatus has returned to England. She is impatient to meet him at
Milford Haven; Innogen's speech that begins with the plaintive cry, "O, for a
horse with wings" includes the most transcendent barrier-busting locative in the
entire history of the English language. Her longing to see her lover is, she
claims, "beyond beyond." A superlative locative, beyond anyone's imagination but
Will's.