Title: The Replacement Child:  Juliet
Date: January 06, 2006

In the narrowest definition, a "replacement child" is a being who is
intentionally conceived because an older sibling has recently died. Such
substitutes must endure the lifetime burden of competing with a lost and often
idealized child. Because it is almost impossible for them to please their
parents, they easily become confused and frustrated, or worse.

Here's a dry summary from a learned journal: "When bereaved parents give birth
to a child or children subsequent to a perinatal death, their constructions
of the family necessarily change. The subsequent child is thought to be at
risk of psychopathology (the replacement child syndrome) if parents have
not sufficiently grieved their losses."  "At risk of psychopathology" is a
hesitant, euphemistic formulation.

The term "replacement child" has also been defined more broadly: it may, for
example, refer to any child in a family that has lost one or more of its
offspring (rather than solely to one conceived as a direct consequence of a
death). In an even larger sense of the term, there are all kinds of 'symbolic'
replacements: one psychologist has gone so far as to suggest that any Jewish
child born after the European holocaust should be so considered. This idea seems
extreme.

In pre-industrial societies, replacement children received no particular notice
because infant deaths were so very commonplace. While there must be many
replacement children in traditional literature, the earliest who comes to mind
is Juliet in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, which was written in 1595.

Juliet's biological mother is aloof and distant, but she has a second and more
loving parent -- her nurse -- who does much of the actual work of mothering.
The nurse has lost her own daughter, Susan, and has become wet-nurse to Juliet.
"Susan and she -- God rest all Christian souls --/Were of an age. Well, Susan is
with God;/ She was too good for me." Clearly, Shakespeare suggests, Susan has
been idealized in her natural mother's mind. The Nurse has a replacement child
in Juliet, a state of being that goes far to explain the profound bond between
surrogate mother and surrogate daughter.

It is uncharacteristic of Shakespeare to discuss the infancy of his heroines,
nor can I think of any other pre-modern work that devotes so much space to
wet- nursing or to the trauma of weaning. Although he depicts in detail the
relationship between Juliet and her nurse, Shakespeare does not seem to
anticipate or foreshadow the interest that later centuries would take in the
replacement child syndrome. Instead, he focuses on Juliet's sexual alacrity.

The nurse tells a pertinent story (and leaves us with the impression that she
has told it many times before): when Juliet had just learned to walk, she fell
and "broke her brow"-- cut her forehead, as we would say. "And then my husband
--God be with his soul,/ He was a merry man--took up the child,/ 'Yea,' quoth
he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?/ Thou wilt fall backward when thou has more
wit,/ Wilt thou not, Jule?'  And by my holidame,/ The pretty wretch left crying
and said 'ay.'"  "Falling backward" is bawdy talk for a woman's posture in
sexual intercourse. Retelling her husband's tale, the Nurse dramatizes her
expectation that when Juliet comes of age, or "has more wit," she will be eager
to fall backward. To this proposition Juliet -- "the pretty wretch"-- says
'Ay.'  Juliet's personal psychology, Shakespeare seems to hint, formed itself
to gratify the suggestions of her surrogate mother.

The vigorous sexuality that might be appropriate for the nurse's natural
daughter Susan, who would have been a servant girl, has been transferred to the
bourgeois Juliet, who, if she had followed the example of her birth mother,
would have been properly restrained, repressed, and diffident. In effect, the
nurse contrives to live her own desires through her replacement child; the
result is Juliet's sexual impetuosity and subsequent death.

William Shakespeare was born in 1564, but an older sister Joan was baptized in
1558 and another, Margaret, in 1562. Both died in infancy. The future playwright
was therefore doubly a replacement child.

There's an additional complexity in the family drama because the infants he
replaced were female. How this oddity affected his own psychological development
is open to speculation. Perhaps because he was the oldest son in a family that
had lost two daughters, he was especially cherished. Or perhaps a boy who
replaced girls developed the empathy to create complex female characters in an
English drama that, until Juliet, had limited itself strictly to one-dimensional
stereotypes.