Title: Les Tits
Date: June 08, 2009

We drove from DC to Bradford, Vermont. Not desrious of hazarding the I-95
corridor, we veered far to the west, almost to Scranton.  It was a mostly
pleasant ride. Travelers, remember the Taconic State Parkway --  it's
underused, neatly landscaped, truck-free.

Along the way, we encountered a road sign which said, Lititz, Pennsylvania.

Lititz. I know that name. How? Have I been there?  No. Did I have a
Lititzfriend from ?  I searched my mind.  Nope. Some famous person come from
LititzLititz?  No.

It bothered me. Something in my mind connected with Lititz but I couldn't
recall it.

Is it LIT-its?  Luh-TITS?

We at last we arrived here in Bradford, Lititz still puzzling me.  What kind
of word is Lititz? Time to fire up the wikipedia.  OK, here it is. "Lititz
was founded my members of the Moravian Church in 1756, and was named after
a castle in Bohemia named Litice....  For a century, only Moravians were
permitted to live in Lititz, and until the middle 1800s only members of the
congregation could own houses  The lease system was abolished in 1855." Nice
little exclusivist Pennsylvania Dutch town, but still the question lingers  --
how do I know it?

"Lititz is also home to Linden Hall School, the oldest all-girls boarding school
in the United States, founded by the Moravians in 1746."  That's an interesting
piece of news.

Do I know someone who attended Linden Hall?  No, I don't think so.

I went to sleep, puzzled. Why is Lititz, PA so familiar to me?

Next day, we started spring-cleaning the house and ran into distinct signs of
recent mouse habitations.  I got out some mousetraps, the kind with the spring
that I've been baiting with peanut butter at various catless times these last
50 years.  They're Victor mousetraps.  Aha. Printed on each one, in small
letters:  "Woodstream Corporation, Lititz, Pennsylvania."

Mystery solved.  Next time through, perhaps we'll stop at Lititz, check out the
church, the school, and the Moravian mouse-trap factory.