Title: Family Matters
Date: May 21, 2008

Yesterday, in a long-buried collection of file folders, I found some papers of
my father's that were written during those last painful years when he was a
widower. Some of the pages comprise a "commonplace" book, the theme of which is,
'why am I still alive when my wife is dead?'  In addition to the lamentations,
there are two anomalous paragraphs of reminiscence  -- constituting the sum of
my father's known autobiographical writings. For the benefit and edification of
my own children and grandchildren and family, I now put these writings on the
record.

My father writes:  "My maternal grandmother was a thin, almost gaunt  woman
about 5 ft 5 inches tall. Although I am sure she loved all her children &
grandchildren, I cannot remember her ever showing any overt sign of affection.
We children always knew when grandma was to visit us. My mother would go into
a frenzy of housecleaning. All the curtains would be washed and re-hung; the
kitchen floors scrubbed and the silverware washed and polished. Her [i.e. my
father's grandmother's] face was unwrinkled, the skin drawn tightly. Her most
dominant feature was her eyes, piercing, direct, demanding. There would be
Grandma, wearing a little hat, glancing around the room while she slowly took
off her gloves. If she was satisfied with what she saw, she would give a little
nod as if to say, 'well done.' We would all relax."

A historical footnote:  my grandparents came to this continent in about 1895
and the events that my father remembers are all turn-of-the-century and pre-WWI.

Until I uncovered this paragraph, I thought my grandparents came to North
America on their own.  I did not know that they were accompanied by this
formidable great-grandmother. Although she herself was long gone when I came on
the stage, I certainly encountered those piercing black eyes in other faces, my
father's in particular.  I wonder why my father (who was born in 1904) never
mentioned his grandmother to me -- she certainly made an impression that lasted
to the end of his life. Come to think of it, why the heck was my family so
entirely tight-lipped about their ancestry?

But wait.  There's more.

"My grandparents (that would be the ferocious grandmother and her equally
unknown-to-me husband), had 5 children, 4 daughters and one son. There were
born to their children in a space of 10 years, 18 grandchildren.  Each one of
these children were delivered at home. My grandmother attended every one of
these births.  About 2 weeks before the expected date of birth, my grandmother
would appear wearing her little hat and gloves & carrying a small satchel; she
immediately took charge of the household. The expectant mother would be freed of
all household obligations."

From this evidence it would appear that in addition to his three siblings (Max,
Sol, and Molly), my father had fourteen cousins on his mother's side of the
family.  Why didn't I know about them?  Why did I never meet a single one? Or
even hear their names?  Or the names of their progeny, if there were any?

Also in my father's hand, scribbled in a corner of the paper, is a
calculation:  Mom - 4, Manya - 6, Nadya - 3, Mary - 2, Maris (or Saris, or
Norris) -3.  And then the sum:  18.

So, children and children's children and collateral descendants, you now
understand a piece of the family history.

And readers:  if there's anyone out there in internetland who had a strong,
perhaps dictatorial great or great-great or great-great-great grandmother who
came to assist at births armed with a satchel, a little hat and memorable black
eyes (first name unknown but surnamed Hessel), and who knows that his or her
ancestry includes a woman whose maiden name was Mary Hessel or Manya Hessel or
Nadya Hessel, or if there's someone who's descended from Noris or Moris or Saris
Hessel, hey, cuz, take a moment and add a comment to this entry and I'll get
right back to you.