Title: Where My Grandchildren Play Soccer
Date: October 25, 2022

Stunning, is it not? Just at the west side of our fair city, set against
the first manifestations of the Front Range. Six well-tended fields, scores
of players and many, many parents and grandparents (among them me, on sunny
Saturday mornings). I can't imagine a more idyllic and peaceful scene.

Do Luke and Caleb and Asher appreciate the glory of their situation? Why should
they, after all? It's what they've always known; they take it for granted that
soccer should be played in such lovely and prosperous surroundings. Later on,
they'll come to know more about the circumstances of less fortunate people.

It's hard for me not to compare Foothills Community Park with the P S 217
schoolyard of my own childhood. Ours was a representative "playground," no
better or worse than would be found in any other middle-class or working class
neighborhood. No grass, just solid concrete from one chain-link fence to the
other. It was where we ran races, played "two-hand touch," flipped baseball
cards, played punchball, stickball, basketball, softball, boxball, box baseball,
handball, and any other game that could be improvised with a pink spaldeen.
There were, as I remember, four basketball backboards and rims, arranged as two
full courts. But one of the backboards was missing, the pole having disappeared
many years ago and never replaced. Another of the poles had been set in the
ground at an angle of perhaps 80 degrees and never corrected. It was useless.
And then the two other baskets, on the Newkirk Avenue side, were set in ground
that was not level, so that the basket was 9' 6" or so if you shot from the left
side and 10" 6" on the right. Maybe this was a benefit; it helped us master
trigonometry.

The P S 217 schoolyard was crowded. Various sports overlapped and shared the
fields. If you were playing basketball, you had to watch out for line drives off
the bat of one of the softball players. This taught us to be alert.

I did not feel at all deprived or "underprivileged" -- it was life as I knew it
-- but I'm mighty glad that my grandchildren enjoy the luxury of grass and space
and peace. In the words of the great Sophie Tucker, "I've been rich and I've
been poor, and, believe me, rich is better."