Title: My Career as a Dowser
Date: June 06, 2024

When we built the summer house/cabin/hovel in 1977, we needed to dig a well,
and someone, probably the plumber, hired a dowser. I didn’t approve –-I
would have hired a credentialed hydraulic engineer. For me, dowsers belong
in the same ol' crazy crate as astrologers, phrenologists, flat-earthers,
Shakespeare-author conspiracists, along with the lunatics who report on visits
to the earth by ancient astronauts. Nevertheless, a dowser arrived, an elderly
gentleman. Curiously, he dowsed with an old pair of rusted pliers rather than
the traditional forked willow stick. He was an enthusiast for his trade and,
ignoring my skepticism, showed my how to cut a willow and exactly how to hold
it. After he left, I tried it out. A most odd experience, one of the oddest in
my life, then took place. As I walked about, brandishing the rod, from time to
time the tip of the willow would turn suddenly down. Not in a subtle way, but
forcefully and dramatically – strongly enough to redden and even slightly cut
the palms of my hands.

Even more strange -- if I handed the willow to another person and he or she
walked about, nothing happened. Nothing, that is, until I held that person's
wrist. Then the dowsing rod went all crazy and twisted downward out of the
holder's hands.

It was a wondrous incredible experience and is vivid in my memory now these
fifty years. But it was a one time only event.

Every once in a while, over the decades, just for fun, I would cut a piece of
willow and walk about, but I’ve never been able to reproduce the phenomenon.
The dowsing rod doesn’t dowse, doesn’t do anything at all;  just behaves
like an ordinary piece of wood.

I don't believe in dowsing. I don't believe that you can find underground water,
or even underground electric wires as some think, by walking about with a piece
of willow in your hands.  On the other hand, I know that something peculiar
and very real happened to me that one time. Was there water underground. I
don't know, but I know that I wouldn't dig a hole on the basis of that fleeting
evidence. I am a man of reason, or at least I like to think so.

Incidentally, the place that the 1977 dowser picked out for us to dig was a
great success. We've enjoyed a bounteous  supply of water for all these many
years.

But now that I know more about wells than I did half a century ago, I can read
the landscape well enough to recognize that the dowser picked an obvious place
to dig a well -- with or without the help of his magical pliers.