Title: My Life in Cooking
Date: April 23, 2024

And now for another installment in my long-running "autobiography by topics."

Today's topic is my life as a cook. I say cook, rather than chef, because
my kitchen work has always been functional rather that artistic -- the very
opposite of sophisticated or elegant. I am most definitely not a chef -- just
a guy who can put a meal on the table. Confession: I prefer to my own food to
what is presented to me at all but the most elite restaurants. I'm basically a
hamburger-and-ketchup plebeian; fancy foods with exotic ingredients do nothing
for my pedestrian palate. Why leeks, chives, ramps or shallots when your
everyday yellow onion will do the job. Especially if it's one of those amazingly
sweet Vidalia onions.

My lack of gourmet-ism originated with my family of origin, back there in 1940s
Flatbush where cooking was not imaginative. Its basics were Velveeta cheese and
those slimy canned Harvard beets. No frills but a sufficiency where "enough
[was] as good as a feast." My mother, who presided over the kitchen, did it
all, every bit of it (my father might just have starved if he had to extend
himself to boil water). Mom was a functional cook and her limited repertoire
of meals repeated weekly. I never knew her to try something new nor did I once
see her consult a cookbook. Spices were limited to salt and pepper. Chicken
was boiled, lamb chops were broiled, flounder was poached. There was too much
malodorous liver and too much tongue and too many salmon croquettes. Almost
all meals were accompanied with mashed potatoes. My favorite food, in those
days, was noodles with a meat-and-tomato sauce (which would nowadays have been
upgraded to "Bolognese"). (The word "noodles" was later promoted to "spaghetti"
and has now been ennobled to "pasta.") On an occasional flush Sunday there was
roast beef. The family celebrated Thanksgiving with a grand turkey and countered
Yom Kippur with a defiant roast pork.

What a tedious chore it was for my mom to set out twenty-one meals a week for
the five of us, but she did so without complaint.

The only memorable meals of my childhood were supplied by my grandmother Sonia.
Unsurpassed blintzes, potato latkes, jams and jellies. My favorite meal in those
days: black radish, onion and pumpernickel complemented with gribbinis. I have
written about my love affair with the black radish here.

The first steps into cookery of my own arose out of my native frugality. When
I was in college, most of my friends ate in the dorm cafeteria or in nearby
restaurants but I soon discovered that with a little initiative I I could eat
better and cheaper. It was a bit of a learning process, because, growing up, I
regarded cooking as a kind of alchemy to which only married women were privy.
In 1957, I abandoned the dormitory for a remarkably grotty off-campus apartment
and discovered that I too could turn on a gas burner and transmogrify raw
ingredients into food. For the next three years I lived on a hunk of meat and a
boiled potato and warmed frozen peas -- at a quarter the cost of an equivalent
restaurant meal! Not elegant food -- but what a revelation!  It was not only an
improvement in standard of living, but a demonstration to myself that I need not
imitate my father's example of dependent helplessness.

My galley skills, such as they were, were also good for my social life. Dates
with my girlfriend (later my wife of more than half a century) often began with
me preparing a Saturday night dinner for her. Fortunately for the two of us, she
was not put off by my want of culinary imagination.

Let me record a sad reminiscence about the way in which we were all hog-tied by
Eisenhower-era conservatism: I did all the cooking until June of 1960, when AGP
and I married. At that point, it seemed mandatory and inevitable  that kitchen
responsibilities should be transferred from me to her. It was, we believed, an
inviolable rule of the universe that wives cooked and husbands ate. That was
the way things were in that reactionary pre-feminist period -- even though my
bride had until that point never prepared a single meal in her entire life. How
conventional, how thoughtless we both were. However, true to the stereotype, AGP
rapidly became a much better cook than I could have imagined. But what socially-
constrained idiocy! How blinkered were the two of us! It's embarrassing to
confess it all even sixty-plus years after the fact.

Once the three children joined us, cooking became less fun and more of an
obligation -- but now a chore at last shared by the two of us. Inasmuch as
we were both employed, food preparation became a weekend activity. Together
we'd cook up a cauldron of beef stew or a spaghetti sauce or something else
that could get us through the week. Lunches were improvised, but I was always
the breakfast cook. I wish I could properly estimate the number of eggs that
I scrambled or pancakes that I flipped. They would stuff a moderately-sized
warehouse, I'm sure. For AGP, meals became a burden. If I remember correctly,
it was not so much the labor of preparation as it was the organization that
distressed her. Just gathering the ingredients and keeping the refrigerator
stocked became dull boring work. Her point, and I know she was correct in this,
was that even if I did I half the cooking, she had 100% of the responsibility.
Things became even more complicated when the kids went through their vegetarian
phases and when their complicated after school activities made orderly
scheduling next to impossible.

I remember that one summer, sometime in the 70s. I announced that I would do
all the gathering and cooking for two months. AGP's only task was to lie in the
hammock all day and to eat whatever I produced. AGP enjoyed the vacation, but
she pointed out that it our society, men could get the credit for labor that was
taken for granted for women. She was once again correct in her assessment, but
nevertheless I felt that I had done a good deed. I think she enjoyed the kitchen
respite.

Eventually the kids left home and life became simpler. We were now "recovering
parents."  Food preparation became simpler and fun again. Joint fun.

Unfortunately, it was only a few years later that AGP began her long decline. Of
course I took over more and more of the kitchen responsibilities. I think for
the last ten years that AGP was with me, I was the head and only cook. How else
would we have survived?  As a result, I became more interested in the work.
As I have said, I never became a chef, but I do take some pride in my general
competence around the kitchen -- especially in my barbecued spare ribs, my beef
stew, my stuffed cabbage (grandma Sonia's recipe) and my transcendent lasagnas.

Nowadays, in my miraculous second relationship, cooking, like everything else,
is shared equally.

Gosh it's been a long haul.