Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  A Death in the Family
Date: April 10, 2007

I remember exactly when I first heard of James Agee's A Death in the Family. It
was in Ithaca in 1958. The late Edward Ruhe, who was then a young instructor in
English, stopped me on the street and asked if I had read it. He said I must,
and, obedient lad that I was, I immediately purchased a copy. I can't remember
much from my fifty-years-ago reading, except that I was put off by the novel's
long italicized flashbacks and by what I regarded as its excessively intimate
tone, which I then judged to be sentimental and false. But I've now re-read the
novel. It's authentic, it's emotional, and it's so very American. I'm very glad
to have had a chance to revise my earlier opinion. Perhaps I was too young. It's
curious that I didn't connect Agee to the autobiographical poets that I was then
reading, for the ground that Agee covers was then being explored by Lowell and
Snodgrass and Roethke and of course by Sylvia Plath.

It's a novel not only about death (it's told through the observing eyes of
Rufus Follet, the six-year-old whose father dies in an automobile accident) but
about the details of American life. There's very little in the way of plot, but
Knoxville in 1915 is wonderfully evoked, mostly through concrete images. It's
very much a novel of things. Perhaps I'm especially conscious of this technique
because I've been re-reading Flaubert. But in Flaubert's novels, almost every
object is laden with satirical significance (which is also the case -- to choose
an American parallel -- in the novels of Mark Twain). Agee, however, loves the
objects that he describes. Although there's puzzlement and mystery, there's not
an ounce of satire or cynicism anywhere in A Death in the Family. Rufus Follet
and Huck Finn -- it's not as unlikely a pairing as it might at first seem.

The facilitator of Agee's achievement is James Joyce. A Death in the Family
could not have been written without the precedent of A Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man. But it's an American not an Irish portrait -- not as complex
or as original, but fully as real as Joyce's. If an extraterrestrial visiting
our lovely green planet wanted to understand the difference between Europe and
America, he couldn't do better than read Portrait and A Death in the Family side
by side.