Title: E & L Chafetz Family Circle c. 1946-1952
Date: June 29, 2020

When I was a boy in the 1940s and '50s, I was -- yearly or semi-yearly -- hauled off to gatherings of the E & L Chafetz Family Circle. "Chafetz" was the maiden name of my maternal grandmother, Sonia Green. "E" and "L" were Sonia's parents, but the names that the initials abbreviated are gone for good. At the Family Circle, twenty or thirty or sometimes even forty Chafetz siblings, cousins, and spouses would share snacks, schnapps, and gossip. No question but that, selfish and un-empathetic lad that I was, I very much resented being scrubbed and fancied up to attend these meetings -- especially on a summer Sunday afternoon when the Brooklyn Dodgers might be playing a double-header. Why would a young scamp want to miss out on Red Barber and Connie Desmond in order to hang from a subway strap for an hour and a half while the stifling IRT rattled to some obscure corner of the Bronx -- just to while away the afternoon with a bunch of old folks?

The Chafetz relatives were all immigrants from Belarus and thereabouts, born, like my grandparents, in the 1870s or 1880s. They were small people -- tiny really -- the men topping out at or 5'3" or  5'4", the women at 5'0" or somewhat less -- their stature a consequence of their impoverished "old country" childhoods. They spoke Yiddish or Russian to each other and very rudimentary English to me. They smelled peculiarly -- of chicken soup overlaid with moth balls, their "good clothes" having been retrieved from the storage closet for this annual adventure. They assembled, if I remember correctly, at the second-floor apartment over someone's store. (It seemed as though they were all keepers of small shops -- newspaper kiosks or vegetable markets or candy stores or perhaps a delicatessen or an "appetizer." One enterprising Chafetz cousin was a glazier.) They seemed to be mostly childless -- or, at least I can't remember encountering any other youths at these events.

Who were these people? Why were they so asymmetrical? Bent and twisted, most of them, their faces marred by blackheads and lumps and swellings. Their mouths were dental nightmares. Must I admit that my ten-year-old self was repelled and disgusted, unconscious that their distorted bodies were a testament to their arduous troubled lives?

Who was Uncle Joe Pessin? How was he related to me? What was his livelihood? I remember only a small dark bald man with a grating voice. Did he have a family?  And who were indistinguishable Lifscha and Leah? Were they twins or sisters or sisters-in-law? Why did Uncle Usher smell so pungently? Was he in the pickle or sauerkraut business? I know only that he had a great expanse of face and outsized shoulders and that he longed to visit his brothers and sisters in Winnipeg.

At these gatherings, I was put on display. My mother (my father refused to attend) would take me around the room and introduce me to the various cousins and uncles and aunts. It was a torment, frankly. "This is your uncle Nahum." Uncle Nahum would shake my hand. I had nothing to say to him, but Uncle Nahum asked the question that was every uncle's question. "How are you doing? You doing well in school?"  "Yes, I'm doing well in school." And so this uncle would smile beneficently upon me. And then on to the next one.

Because of what I perceived as their limited communication skills (though English might have been Uncle Nahum's fourth or fifth language), I definitely felt superior and condescending -- an acute embarrassment to me now. In my heart, I silently patronized these strange people.

What I didn't know, and is so obvious now, was that I was much more important to them than they were to me. That I was "doing well in school" were words that they dearly wanted to hear. It was for my generation and for me that they had braved the Cossacks, sold the farm, deserted from the Russian army, left backward Belarus or Ukraine behind, endured the miseries of steerage, slept four to a bed for years and half-acclimated themselves to a new world utterly foreign to them. For me. They had sacrificed themselves to invest in me. So that I could "do well in school," go to college, live a better life. I was their emissary to America, to the future.

What could a ten-year-old have possibly known?  It's too late to regret that I didn't learn their language and learn their stories. That world of theirs, that universe represented by E and L Chafetz --- it's all gone now, vanished, present no where else but in my failing memory.