Title: Bringing Us up to Date on Otzi the Ice Man
Date: October 24, 2017

Otzi the freeze-dried 5300 year old Tyrolean man/mummy continues to be studied
and his corpse regularly yields new information.

Otzi was about 45 years old, stood 5'3" and weighed only about 110 pounds. He
had been wounded with an arrow in the shoulder which pierced an artery. He may
have bled to death or, alternatively, died from a blow to the head. He had brown
eyes, a dark beard, and long dark brown hair. He was wearing a bearskin hat, a
goat loincloth, a goat cloak, and goat leggings with deerskin laces. His shoes
were complex -- bearskin soles and deerskin uppers and were lined with hay --
presumably for both comfort and insulation. He had a calfskin belt in which he
carried flint and bone tools, including a flint dagger, a large bow and a quiver
of chamois hide reinforced with hazelwood. The quiver contained unfinished
arrows made of shoots from the guelder rose tree. He had a container constructed
of birch bark. He carried equipment for lighting a fire -- a flammable fungus,
a piece of pyrite, and a flint. Otzi also carried a woven net for trapping
prey and a mat made of grass fibers which probably served as a raincoat. And
frameworks of hazel twigs that most likely were snowshoes. His outfit consisted
of materials drawn from 18 different kinds of wood. His last meal, consumed
two hours before his death, was of various unidentified plant material, and a
helping of ibex meat. Otzi was lactose intolerant. His skin was marked in about
50 places with "tattoos" where charcoal had been rubbed into incisions. Some
ribs (he lacked a twelfth rib) and his nose bone had been previously broken but
had healed. He carried a stone ax with a copper edge --a rare and expensive
possession. To judge from the traces of arsenic in his body he might have been
a copper smith. An analysis of his mitochondria revealed that he belonged to
haplogroup K which was a typical marker of members of the farming culture that
was then expanding into Europe. His closest relatives today are found on Corsica
and Sardinia. He also belonged to a Y-chromosome haploid group G which which is
also associated with migrating farmers. He had a rare mutation known as G-L91
which has been discovered in 19 contemporary residents of the Tyrol. He was not
healthy. His knee joints were in bad shape and caused him considerable pain,
his teeth were worn down and inflamed, his lungs show traces of soot particles
probably from living in badly ventilated spaces. He suffered from Lyme disease,
rheumatism, intestinal parasites, hardened arteries, gallstones, and an ugly
growth on his little toe perhaps caused by frostbite. It would appear that he
had had a hard life.