Title: Seventeen Hours of Downton Abbey
Date: March 18, 2012

I've now sometimes zoomed but sometimes plodded through seventeen hours of
Downton Abbey. The series is lovely to look at but also at various times
lugubrious, false, and shamelessly gimmicky -- but apparently I'm easily
seduced. Let me confess: I fell for it, mostly, but always against my better
judgment. Let's face it, the primitive parts of my brain simply overwhelmed
my higher critical faculties. I laughed and cried, even when I knew that I was
being cheated and manipulated.

My favorite parts: Mr. Pamuk and his Nelson Rockefeller departure ("he came,
and went)," which took me totally by surprise, as did Anna's and Lady Grantham's
resourceful disposal of the corpse. Lady Sybil as a nurse, in part because
she was doing useful work for the first time in her pampered life, and in
part because she looked so fetching in the uniform. My favorite performers --
Maggie Smith, reprising her role in Gosford Park (a much superior great house
fiction), and Mr Carson's eyebrows, perpetually raised in shock at modern
shenanigans.

The series is pure, undiluted soap. It is also, as they used to say
in Variety, a "costumer." Query -- would I have spent seventeen hours
watching a television program set in a mansion in Dubuque, Iowa, in 2012 in
which a soldier returns paralyzed from the wars and miraculously regains his
mobility, where terrible culinary disasters occur because the cook almost goes
blind, where granny shows her goodwill by losing a flower show, in which the
family is traumatized when a daughter runs off with the chauffeur, or where a
presumably innocent servant is sentenced to death for the murder of his wayward
wife. I don't think so. I would have said, "cornball soap opera" and clicked
back to the NBA. Or to the advertisements for zirconite jewelry. And yet I went
on. And on. And continued on even after Downton Abbey not only jumped the shark
but vaulted the great white whale, Moby Dick himself, when it introduced into
the plot a bout of supposed amnesia. Amnesia! Is there anything soapier?

Or perhaps my reluctant fascination proves that the traditional formulas
retain their power. Here's a formula of comedy: "artificial difficulties
overcome." In Downton Abbey, Lady Mary and Matthew are destined for one
another, and every viewer knows it, even as steaming piles of artificial
difficulties are strewn and heaped in their path. Shakespeare could slice
through the impediments in two hours traffic on the stage, but here it's
seventeen anguished hours until heir and heiress finally figure it out. And
here's another formula of comedy: always bring it to conclusion with a feast
and a dance. They did, and, sucker that I am, I was elated. Even though I saw
the scam coming a mile down the o-so- picturesque road