Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Norman Podhoretz
Date: January 03, 2024

To most readers of this blague, Norman Podhoretz is a nonentity, but for a
while there, he was a big deal in certain intellectual circles. His youthful
autobiography, Making It (1967), elicited howls of indignation. Nowadays, it's
impossible not to read Making It retrospectively, because it's undeniable
that the author, who began life as liberal or progressive, has metamorphosed,
over the years, into a monster. He is now a full bore Trumpian fascist. In
the Podhoretz universe, abortion is infanticide and homosexuality constitutes
a danger to the polity. Although the child of shtetl Jews, Podhoretz is now
stridently anti-immigrant. In 2010, he ridiculously proclaimed that "I would
rather have Sarah Palin sitting in the Oval Office than Barack Obama." He has
called the Trump presidency "a kind of miracle" and announced  that Trump is "a
vessel chosen by God to save us from the evil on the Left." Such a sentiment is
not just echo-chamber conservative twaddle: it's nutso insanity pure and simple.

How much of Podhoretz's wandering in the wilderness can be traced to his
Brownsville Brooklyn childhood and youth is hard to say?  Making It is a
most peculiar autobiography. It's beautifully written -- in the sense that
the arguments are finely deployed and the sentences are lucid, sometimes even
lyrical. But it's also clear that Podhoretz, from the start, was the kind of
obnoxious guy who delighted in provocation. It's not uncommon for Brooklynites
of his generation to wish to leave Brooklyn behind. Podhoretz is shameless about
his ambition: he had "a vulgar desire to rise above the class into which he was
born."

Most megalomaniacal autobiographers want to be liked. Not Podhoretz. He strives
to be disliked, even hated, and in this he succeeds. He had a fear of becoming
an "inauthentic WASP" but that's exactly what he became. The further to the
right he went, the further away from his mother's embarrassing Yiddish accent. A
sad life.

The character in literature who Podhoretz most resembles is Johnny Rocco in Key
Largo, who wants "more."

Podhoretz's "more" is similarly empty and was similarly dangerous.