Title: More on King Solomon's Mines
Date: January 09, 2007

I received the following note from Marion Morrison, who is an associate
professor of English at the University of Iowa. It was written in response to my
entry a few days ago concerning H. Rider Haggard's King Solomon's Mines. I'm
extremely grateful to Professor Morrison for taking the time to comment on my
observations.

"Dear Dr. Metablog:

I detect the subtextual presence of mutually imbricated and conterminous
forces in your multichronotopic problematizing of King Solomon's Minds. The
indigenous woman, Foulani, living in a no (wo)man's land where the colonialist
gaze dissects racialized gendering, foregrounds the elusive intersectionalities
present in the semiological narratology of deconstructive post-structuralism.
It is only by scrutinizing the poetics of diasporic displacement that we can
contest the epiphenomenological echo of (hetero)masculinist discourse from a
gendered perspective, which, if I understand your insufficiently theorized
analysis, you have vainly tried to do. Such (re)mapping of knowledge, even when
employing a single-axis feminist theory, unpacks syncretism and hybridity and
at the same time denaturalizes doxa rooted in phallocentric epistemologies.
But, you ask, what about the reproduction of alterity through a highly policed
matrix of conceptual checkpoints?  The answer is simple: any binarist
recontextualizing across multiple terrains adds a metadiscursive dimension
to the polysemic site and leads to aporias of nationalist cartographies of
knowledge, as is crystal clear in the case of Rider Haggard. Without otherizing
the conceptual spaces opened up by postcolonial hybridity, hermeneutical
nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality -- and you know what that
might lead to. A meta-analysis of King Solomon's Wives -- a textual situation
in which there are multiple hegominid discourses as well as the potential for
co-implicatedness -- could rupture various subaltern geographic positionalities
(but only in a translinguistic sense).

As I'm sure you understand, these comments are written under the sign of the
plural."

January 10.  Today I received another communication from Professor Morrison. 
It's a bit angry, so I won't quote it all, but here are the relevant sentences.

"Dear Dr. Metablog, or Vivian, or whatever you call yourself:

When you typed my comments into your blog, you clumsily erred. I certainly did
not write "hermeneutical nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality"; it's
obvious that I wrote "hermeneutical nihilism would not dismantle palimpsestic
textuality."  Leaving out the "not" makes a mockery of my argument and renders
it virtually unintelligible. You owe me and your readers an apology."

Yours,

Marion Morrison, Ph. D."

Gosh, Professor Morrison. My bad. I don't know what I could have been thinking.