Title: My Favorite Inventions - II
Date: January 01, 2007

A while ago, I reported on my very favorite innovations of the last half-
century  -- including such wonders as the retractable vacuum cleaner cord,
fitted sheets, duct tape, and the mute button.  I now realize that I was remiss
in not celebrating the most revolutionary invention of recent decades -- the
disposable diaper.

I was knuckle-deep in the diaper business from 1965 to about 1973. Cloth was
then the material of choice. In our family there were three infants and each
one had, roughly speaking, 900 days of diaperhood. Suppose that there were nine
changes of diaper a day (a conservative estimate) -- that's a total of 24,300
diaper-changes.  Let's say that I personally presided over one-third of those
off-with-the-foul-on-with-the-clean exchanges. We're talking more than 8000
excretory experiences. So, dear reader, I know whereof I speak.

Post-cloth diaper parents live in a world of decadent ease. Here's what they're
missing. A) cloth diapers had to be changed more frequently than the new ones --
they didn't wick away the liquid as the disposables do. Rashes and irritations
were all too common. b) gagworthy solid material had to be carefully flushed
away. c)  soiled diapers sat in a waste receptacle, where they generated an
ammonia-based chemical one whiff of which could revive a morgueful of corpses.
d) cloth diapers had to be washed, dried, and folded for next use. e) diapering
with cloth and safety pins was a fine art. Badly-applied diapers hung to the
ground to shame the diaperer; open pins and pin-sticks were a constant worry.

Nowadays, it's pop 'em off, throw it in the trash, pop on a new one. Piece of
cake. Perhaps disposable diapers are not ecologically sound  -- I don't know.
But frankly, I can't think of a better use for the vast Canadian forests.

But I shouldn't complain too much. We owned an automatic washer and dryer. My
mom had the same number of diapers, but she scrubbed them on a washboard in
the "laundry sink," put them through the wringer (first a hand-crank, later an
electric), and hung them outside to dry. She was a true heroine of diaper labor.
And I can't even bring myself to imagine the diaperworld of older generations.

Today's parents, wallowing in sybaritic luxury, cannot appreciate what it means
to be "put through the wringer." And just as well.