Title: Status Report
Date: March 16, 2018

A few days ago Vivian de St. Vrain aka Dr. Metablog began his last year as a
septuagenarian. His next birthday, 80. Astonishing. Unbelievable. And kind of
miraculous.

When I was boy, I thought that people of such an advanced age were very likely
extra-terrestrials or possibly members of another species. I remember my ancient
ancestors and relations as very small people, odd-smelling (chicken soup and
mothballs), whose faces were covered with knobs, whelks and unsightly dark
spots. As a group, they appeared to my youthful eyes as swollen, distorted,
asymmetrical.

But now, at this present age, I don't feel even the slightest bit extra-
galactic. I feel like me. Except, of course, when I catch sight of my reflection
in a shop window as I stroll the mall. Who is that white-haired guy?

Here's my status report at age 79. I'm healthy. All my organs might work a
little slower, a little grumpier about doing their jobs, but none of them has
crapped out completely. My joints are relatively supple, especially my knees.
I have great knees. I experience muscle pains and muscle spasms occasionally,
and my back is bad, but it's better than it was a decade or two ago, thanks to
the surgery. I tire more easily and recover from fatigue more slowly. My memory
is not as sharp as heretofore, but it's still pretty good, better than most.
I'm learning a new language and I admit that I have to look up new words two or
three times before they stick. Sometimes four or five times, truth be told. My
capacity for abstract thinking, never strong, has definitely diminished, but my
sense of humor is intact.

I'm not taking any medicines, except for an occasional sleeping pill. The
bifocals and the lens implants are working just fine. So are the hearing aids.
And the tooth implant is still firmly in place. The rest of me, I'm proud to
say, is all original equipment.

On the whole, I'd say that I've come through some dark times and that I'm
enjoying a personal renaissance. How long will it last? Impossible to predict.
A day, a year, ten years?  But hey, I have love in my life. Children who are
thriving. Lovely grandchildren.

I must acknowledge that at my age I could be growing something deadly and that
the least little twinge could be an early sign of a fatal disease. And although
nothing of that kind has happened yet, it's inevitable that something will
happen. Life is term-limited and I've lost too many friends and relations to
deny the obvious. I'm acutely aware that each day is precious.