Title: Modern Biography
Date: December 06, 2010

It's been a Charles Dickens revival here.  The Dickens formula -- "make them
laugh, make them cry, make them wait" -- works as well for me now as it did
fifty years ago.

I was curious to fill in the gaps in my knowledge, so I trotted over to
the library and found a newish biography of Dickens.  It looked eminently
respectable:  St. Martin's Press and its author a "Professor of English
Studies" at the University of Stirling.

But youch, what a travesty the new "biography" turned out to be.

Here follow some sentences (none of which I've altered in the least) from
a book which has the temerity to call itself Charles Dickens, A Literary
Life.  Prepare yourself for pretention, bathos, meandering metaphors and
syntactic peculiarities marinated in post-modern obfuscation.  Savor these
monstrosities.

"'Dickens,' a convenient and perhaps unavoidable label, masks a range of
Dickenses, which, taken together, constitute a highly complex whole."

"In short, this book will attempt to separate out at least some of the
contextual forces that flowed through Dickens's pen along with the ink at the
moment when he sat down to the ostensibly solitary and private process of making
that series of black marks on white paper that we call novels."

"Suffering is a crucial part of the artistic process and the artist is seen as
quite different from the ordinary run of people through his possession of a
creative power akin to that of God in His creation of the world."

"This aspect of his career can be explored in a number of ways, in his deep
respect for his own activity as a novelist as well as in an intense concern
to extract his full pound of flesh financially from publishers and also, in a
sense, from the public."

"A dramatic opening and an exciting climax are desirable features of any
narrative, but the desire to impose them on historical narratives may distort
the flow that is an inherent aspect of historical process."

"But the facts and arguments of this chapter show that the point at which
Pickwick Papers came into being was one of turbulence in publishing which
carried with it, as periods of turbulence always do, possibilities of movement
in a variety of directions."

"The serial violates the decorum appropriate to high art and the imagery of the
passage embodies a distate of profusion which could be likened to a class-based
disdain for the crowded urban environment and dislike of such new-fangled
phenomena as the railway."

"Public school meant the classics and, in England, university spelled Oxford or
Cambridge, 'advantages' which Dickens conspicuously lacked."

I could wisecrack about each of the above sentences, but I'm in a more-in-
sorrow-than-in-anger frame of mind.   Why oh why do academics feel they have
to write this way?  Such woeful prose and trumpeting obviousness compromise
the reputations of sober scholars and teachers.

Does the author of this book realize that he's bamboozling himself?    Does
he know how ridiculous he is?