Title: My Swiss Cheese Brain
Date: December 03, 2010

As a youth, I could memorize poetry with great ease.  Nowadays, with a toe
into the water of my eighth decade, what was once a snap has become a
frustration.  But inasmuch as the authorities continually remind us geezers
that we need to keep the intelligence well-lubricated, I persist.  Yet it now
takes two or three hard weeks to memorize a speech in one of Shakespeare's
plays that, fifty years ago, I might have learned in less than an hour.

I've been trying to commit to the old brain Othello's magnificent speech about
wooing Desdemona -- the one with "antres vast and deserts idle" -- about which
I reported last week.   Instead of memorizing fluently and quickly, my swiss
cheese brain continually generates gaps, fissures and holes.  For example,
take this passage.

This to hear would Desdemona seriously incline

But still the house affairs would draw her thence

Which ever as she could with haste dispatch

She'd come again, and with a greedy ear

Devour up my discourse.

There's no reason why this sentence shouldn't be easy enough.  I read and
study it, but when I shut the book and try to recite, it comes up this way:

She'd come again and with a  greedy [empty space]

Devour up my discourse.

The word "ear" has evaporated, or rather fallen into the black hole of memory,
or gotten stuck in the synaptic link between two nerve cells.

I peer into the book once again and take a second crack.

She'd come again and with a greedy ear

Devour up my [empty space].

Ear appears, discourse disappears.  And so on through the thirty-two line
passages.  Nouns sink beneath the waves and then bob to the surface.  And
these lacunae occur again and again. And again.

It is fascinating to me that I retain the rhythm of the pentameter line and
that I always know that I am missing a two-syllable noun.  Nevertheless, the
precise word will not emerge -- at least at the moment that I need it.  But
it's there, coated with polysaccharides, lurking in an obscure empty space
behind a neuron.  It's astonishing that the words that disappear are almost
always nouns.  I have very little trouble with other parts of speech.  But
then noun- loss is a recognized characteristic of your "mature" brain.

Because it has taken so long to memorize, I have become extremely well-
acquainted with the speech.  Slow motion has its advantages.  Othello
tells us that Desdemona would come "with greedy ear [to] devour up [his]
discourse."  It wasn't until I had gone over that sentence a hundred
times that I realized that Shakespeare used "devour" to connect with the
"cannibals that do each other eat" in the earlier part of the speech.  It's
a purposeful comparison: while wandering and errant Othello encountered
anthropophagi, domestic Desdemona, confined to house affairs, was only able to
eat words.

Clever fellow, that Will S.