Title: Secession Nostalgia
Date: December 22, 2010

The Sons of Confederate Veterans celebrated themselves with a $100-per-person
Secession Ball on Dec. 20 in Gaillard Municipal Auditorium in Charleston. 
The event centered on a play highlighting key moments from the signing of
South Carolina’s Ordinance of Secession 150 years ago.  Jeff Antley, who
organized the event, said that the Secession Ball honors South Carolinians who
stood up for their rights.  “The secession movement in South Carolina was a
demonstration of freedom,” said Antley. “What I’m doing is honoring the
men from this state who stood up for their self-government and their rights
under law."

Is the act of secesion a "demonstration of freedom?"  What sort of freedom? 
Let us now read from South Carolina's Articles of Secession, which asserts that
the federal government has impinged upon states' rights.

"The right of property in slaves was recognized [under the Constitution] by
giving to free persons distinct political rights, by giving them the right to
represent, and burthening them with direct taxes for three-fifths of their
slaves; by authorizing the importation of slaves for twenty years; and by
stipulating for the rendition of fugitives from labor. We affirm that these ends
for which this Government was instituted have been defeated, and the Government
itself has been made destructive of them by the action of the non-slaveholding
States. Those States have assumed the right of deciding upon the propriety of
our domestic institutions; and have denied the rights of property established in
fifteen of the States and recognized by the Constitution; they have denounced
as sinful the institution of slavery; they have permitted open establishment
among them of societies, whose avowed object is to disturb the peace and to
eloign the property of the citizens of other States. They have encouraged and
assisted thousands of our slaves to leave their homes; and those who remain,
have been incited by emissaries, books and pictures to servile insurrection. For
twenty- five years this agitation has been steadily increasing, until it has now
secured to its aid the power of the common Government. Observing the forms of
the Constitution, a sectional party has found within that Article establishing
the Executive Department, the means of subverting the Constitution itself. A
geographical line has been drawn across the Union, and all the States north of
that line have united in the election of a man to the high office of President
of the United States, whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery. He is
to be entrusted with the administration of the common Government, because he has
declared that that "Government cannot endure permanently half slave, half free,"
and that the public mind must rest in the belief that slavery is in the course
of ultimate extinction. This sectional combination for the submersion of the
Constitution, has been aided in some of the States by elevating to citizenship,
persons who, by the supreme law of the land, are incapable of becoming citizens;
and their votes have been used to inaugurate a new policy, hostile to the South,
and destructive of its beliefs and safety."

Yes, it's true.  Citizens of some states have not captured fugitive slaves or
returned them to their owners, have denounced slavery as sinful, have elected
a president who is hostile to the "peculiar institution," and have (horror of
horrors! even granted citizenship to former slaves.

The South Carolina document is extraordinarily clear.  Can anyone fairly doubt
that there would have been no secession and therefore no need for a Secession
Ball except in defense of slavery?  The "demonstration of freedom" is nothing
more than a celebration of the  freedom of one person to own another.

Nowadays, when slavery is no longer defensible, "conservative" South Carolinians
are reduced to protecting their guaranteed right to make life difficult
for gays and immigrants.  And keep women in their places.  A far cry from
their glorious past.

But they continue to nurture that nostalgia for the great old antebellum
days.