Title: Book Report: The End of Innocence
Date: March 31, 2019

I don't read much fiction, but when I do, it's usually one of the 19th-century
classics. However, the "international bestseller" The End of Innocence (2016)
by Benedict Wells came highly recommended, so I gave it a shot. It's pretty
good, not bad, not great, and certainly a novel for today and not for all time
-- not even for the next decade. It's thin, simple.

Egomaniac that I am, I was less interested in the novel itself than I was in
my own reaction to it, which was, in a couple of words, both resistant and
resentful.

Why the hostility,  I ask myself?

In the first place, it's a novel without any sense of style. Perhaps it's the
translator's fault, but gosh, it's written in the prose of a bad TV journalist.
And second, it's ruthlessly manipulative. The the back-cover blurb, boasts "tear
jerker." And so it is, shamelessly. Jules, the first-person narrator, loses his
parents in an auto accident, is sent to a boarding school that is depicted as a
quasi-penitentiary, is abandoned by his two siblings, suffers from paralyzing
guilt, and when he finally marries, has to watch his wife die from cancer (a
sequence which is narrated in extended, unnecessary detail).

I suppose these disasters might have been handled with enough circumspection and
integrity to teach us something about the human condition. But no, only to wring
a couple of tears from our reluctant eyes. And then the too easily won upbeat
ending -- goodness gracious!

Some parts, but not enough of them, rang true. The family dynamics among the
siblings was complicated enough to generate some heft.

Here's a single instance, one of many, to which I objected: a late middle-age
writer suffers from Alzheimer's. Our hero, Jules, puts a gun in the man's hands,
then walks away and hears the report of the weapon. He never confesses that he
assisted in the death, and suffers no psychological ramifications from doing so.
Peculiar, especially since the dead man was his rival for the love of his soon-
to-be wife. I think most people would agree that assisting in a suicide is a
fraught act and that a novelist neglects his duty and cheats his readers when he
fails to acknowledge and explore its effects. A major, compromising misstep by
Mr.Wells.

So there it is, in little: disappointed, exploited and cheated. Not a good
feeling to take away from a novel.

But I wonder at myself. The most manipulative novelist of all times is Charles
Dickens, whose writing  I revere. Dickens is on a level several orders of
magnitude more tearjerkery than Wells could possibly imagine, grasp, or emulate.
How can it be that I embrace Dickens and reject Wells?