Title: Bushlingo 1 -- Malapropisms
Date: November 29, 2005

Bushlingo is rich in malapropisms. The simplest occurs when an intended word is
displaced by one that is similar in sound or cadence, as in the wannabe-stirring
pronouncement that "we cannot let terrorists and rogue nations hold this
nation hostile." The word "hostile" is similar, kind of, to "hostage," but
unfortunately it is opposite in meaning, so that the effect of the malapropism
is to depict the United States not as a nation under attack but as an aggressor.
In the Bushlingo sentence, "we are making steadfast progress," it would appear
that the On-Message President meant to say "steady progress"; nevertheless,
"steadfast progress" is not without meaning. Ludicrous in Bushlingo, the near-
miss might even have had a touch of grandeur in a more able mouth, say that of
Winston Churchill. There's less ambiguity in the assertion that "reading is the
basics of all learning"; surely the Education President meant to say "basis,"
but perhaps his spongy brain had been infiltrated by the conservative slogan,
"Back to Basics." Another example of simple malapropism occurs in the defiant
"I don't have to accept their tenants," where the college-level word "tenets"
proves to be beyond the The Uniter's linguistic competence; the substitute
"tenants" inadvertently presents him not as an embattled orator but as a testy
landlord.

Bushlingo deploys malapropisms more excitingly when it replaces the anticipated
word with a coinage, as in the piteous Bartlett's-quotation-quality wail, "don't
misunderestimate me." "Misunderestimate" is a portmanteau comprised of the "mis"
in "mistake" or "misjudge" and "underestimate" and seems to mean something like
"don't underestimate me in a bad way." Perhaps, deep in his heart, the guy
knows that it is impossible to underestimate him. There is less self-betrayal
but equal novelty in the insight that "the United States and Russia are in the
midst of a transformationed relationship," where "transform" and "formation" are
packed into an overcrowded portmanteau. An even less less clever coinage appears
in the Bushlingoid judgment that "this issue doesn't resignate with the people."
"Resignate" and the intended "resonate" are near homophones;  so close in rapid
speech that the difference between the two is obvious only to those who can
read. A very similar example is contained in the proclamation "I want to reduce
our nuclear capacities to the level commiserate with keeping the peace." 
"Commensurate" is too hard a word for someone who's never seen it in print.

Coming soon: subject-verb agreement in Bushlingo.