Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
Date: December 23, 2005

Sloan Wilson's 1955 best-seller is saturated with alcohol. Nary a character can
carry on a conversation without first mixing a highball, a scotch, a manhattan,
or a batch of martinis. "Let's have a drink" is the lubricant without which the
novel couldn't proceed. In The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, the characters
not only drink like fishes but they also smoke like chimneys. There's not a
social interaction that isn't punctuated with lighting up, puffing, flicking,
extinguishing. But the use of alcohol and tobacco do not pose moral challenges;
they're just there, like food and water, and do not become issues for either the
characters or the author. Were the 50s so rich in nicotine?  I think they must
have been: our house, like everyone else's, was a thick blue haze. Between my
mother's cigarettes and my father's pipes and cigars, I must have inhaled many
lifetimes worth of second-hand smoke during my childhood. On the other hand, we
departed from the norm in that we were not spiritous. While there was always a
bottle of something or other on hand to offer to the very occasional guest, I
never once noticed either of my parents drink liquor, or beer or wine for that
matter, unprompted. Omnipresent alcohol, or rather the manners that surround its
consumption, dates The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit. Right there, in the middle
of the Beat Generation, is an old-fashioned Bourbon Generation novel.

The "gray flannel" of the title refers to the ubiquitous 50s costume of the
upwardly mobile. I re-read the novel, which I remembered more from the Gregory
Peck-Jennifer Jones epic than from the book, with the expectation that it would
be another Marquand-like story of conformity and thwarted rebellion among the
aspiring execs. In truth there is some of that, for Tom Rath, the central
figure, is for a while caught up in corporate climbing. But the button-down
world is not as vividly realized as is the prevailing suburban angst. Basically,
the novel is a story of a marriage that's lost its juice. Rath, a good man but
one who's become extremely cautious and tightly-wound, had been a paratrooper
who dropped behind enemy lines in Europe and in the Pacific. He's killed
seventeen men, most with his bare hands -- one an eighteen-year-old, and one
(accidentally) his best friend -- but he's never been able to tell his wife
Betsy about the war and about the way the war altered his values. In the last
chapter he finally breaks through the barrier, but only because he has to admit
to Betsy that, while waiting to be shipped from the European to the Pacific
theater, he lived with and fathered a child with a Roman "soldier's girl." Rath
asks a very good question -- why is it that he's not ashamed to have killed,
but he is ashamed to have loved. Rath's revelations are the heart of the novel,
but they're given curiously short shrift (as though Sloan Wilson unconsciously
allies himself Tom Rath's impulse to suppress the truth).

I think the book was so popular because it must have helped to purge some of
the psychological traumas of the war. It's a moderately good story written in
moderately bad prose.

It was sad to read Sloan Wilson's obituary (he died in 2002) and discover that
he was an alcoholic for much of his life.