Title: "He Got the Witch Grass out of his Garden"
Date: July 09, 2008

Last summer, planning to extend a flower garden, I covered a weed-choked area
of about 4 feet by 10 feet with a foot high pile of dense lawn clippings.  The
plan was to kill the sod by excluding the light of the sun. It's an effective,
proven method  -- most people use black plastic for the same purpose. What sort
of weed was I combating?  The population endemic to this part of Vermont:  a
mixed stand of goldenrod, milkweed, plantain, dandelion, blackberry, bindweed,
dogbane, Indian paint-brush, buttercup, bracken fern. Yesterday I inspected
the results. The sod is dead, but it's been replaced by a nearly pure stand of
witch grass, which not not only survived but prospered. Every other plant was
door nail dead. I spent the day pulling up and digging out forty square feet of
tenacious witch grass.

Witch grass is the most noxious of the weeds with which I daily contend. It's
invasive, almost indestructible, powerful. If you dig it out and leave behind
the merest shred of root (underground stem, actually), the plant immediately
regenerates. It finds its way through wooden barriers and under metal barriers.
It grows rapidly in almost all soils.

Witch grass has forced me to stop growing bearded iris. It so surrounds and
overwhelms the irises that they can't be weeded without dislodging the shallow
corms. I've occasionally dug up an iris where the witch grass didn't even bother
to go around the corm -- just dug a hole and bored right through it. On the
other hand, Siberian irises compete well with witch grass.  Siberians make
such a dense deep cluster of roots that they squeeze the witch grass to death.
Strangles it. Does my heart good.

There's some pleasure in weeding witch grass, especially when you can get a
good grab and drag out a long root. In good soil, after a rain, I've pulled
out pieces three or four feet long.  But you have to dispose of it properly.
It takes the sun a week to kill the root, and should you accidentally cover it
with other weeds, it will come to life even even though it's not even under the
ground.

I used to say that I wanted my gravestone to read: "He got the witch grass out
of his garden." But now I know that it was mere vanity to think that I could win
the battle of the witch grass.  Here's a prediction: there will come a day when
witch grass will grow over and under and around my marble marker.

Witch grass (agropyron repens) is not even native to the New World. It's come to
us from Europe. Along with the dandelion, the starling and Dutch elm disease.