Title: Garden News
Date: July 04, 2008

Last fall, I purchased two bottlebrush buckeyes by mail order and set them
temporarily in the kitchen garden.  Yesterday, I finally picked out the right
spot.  I cleared some weeds, carted over a generous supply of the well-dried, 
and transplanted the buckeyes into their permanent location on a slope that's
been difficult to maintain, just at the edge of the sheep pasture.  It's an
experiment;  I've never seen a bottlebrush buckeye this far north.  But hey,
they made it through their first winter with flying colors and the climate is
warming up.

The bottlebrush buckeye is one of those magnificent flowering shrubs that I
first encountered years ago in the Brooklyn Botanical Garden.    It's a plant
that will take three years to flower and a decade to mature, so it's touch-and-
go whether I'll see it in its glory -- assuming that it survives when we have
one of those snowless frigid winters that turn nominal Zone 4 into actual Zone
2.

In addition, I planted a four foot tall bur oak (also new to the norhern
neighborhood). I like to plant an oak tree even though it will be a decade
and a half before it makes an impact on the landscape.  Oaks are for the
grandchildren and the great-grandchildren,  should there be any.  And for the
planet.  Although this part of Vermont is rich in oaks, our particular property
was oakless when we arrived.  We now have many northern reds, a swamp white and
a bur.  I'm on the lookout for other varieties that can tolerate the winters.

Not everything's going up.  Coming down, yesterday, a huge mature balsam fir,
which was in the wrong place and needed to go.  We finally bit the bullet
yesterday.  It took my neighbor Ed's big chainsaw and his Massey-Ferguson
tractor, along with chains and cables to fell it.  It will take a whole day to
cut it up and prepare for the big bonfire.  On the way down, the fir took some
limbs of a beech and made quite a mess of the front lawn.  We've replaced the
divots and re-seeded and mulched the hard-hit areas.  The beech will recover
eventually, but it will take a couple of years. It can now see the light.