Title: News from the "Hair Industry"
Date: May 02, 2011

While indulging a long, pleasant walk this morning, I happened upon a shop I had never before noticed.  It's called Juno's Studio of Contemporary Hair Artistry.  I ws curious as to whether a "hair artistry studio" was what we called in the old days a "barber shop" or a "beauty shop." I tried to peek inside the shop but the situation was a tad too "architectooralooral" (in Mr. Joe Gargery's phrase) for me to feel  comfortable doing so. Nevertheless, I was sufficiently intrigued about "contemporary hair artistry" to visit Juno's website. I am now prepared to "share" with my readership what I have learned. The following paragraph comes to you absolutely verbatim.

"Jules Juno’s passion for the hair industry pulses through her life and work at every turn and every look, as her creative spirit is continuously fueled by the rhythms, themes and movements of the subtle and deep rich nuances of the world around her - from the street to the flora, feathers and fur of nature, to the lines of fashion and art in all its forms. Aligned closely with the powerful totem of Raven and ready to celebrate newness in light of every full moon, she dwells in the magic of change and transformation. Often called the “Hair Shaman” and “Keeper of the Hair” by her devoted clients, Jules believes in the sacredness of being trusted to work her creative magic on the high chakra space of one’s head."

I can tell you one person whose brilliant (though graying) mane Juno's not going work her creative magic upon (even though the hair industry pulses through every deep rich nuance of its rhythms, themes and movements). Mine, that's who's. Keep your ever-loving hands off my high chakra space, Hair Shaman!!

Upon further investigation, Juno (her real name?) turns out to be a disciple of Minnesotan Horst Rechelbacher -- under whose tutelage she taught "for a triune of years before adventuring her creative genius as a platform artist."  In our town, she plans to "keep the fires of inspiration burning and push the edges of hair design."

And while here, she will also "push the edges" of New Age Bullshit.

By the way, what the heck is a "platform artist?"  And what distinguishes a "triune of years" from "three years?"