Title: Nugget-Watching
Date: January 02, 2012

This year's Nuggets are now at 3-2 and each game has been worth watching.
Because there are no superstars, there's a different plot every game. The ball
moves and doesn't stop as when, in the old day, it came into the hands of
Carmelo, or, even worse, The Answer. Everyone plays defense; everyone runs,
almost everyone gets into the game. Arron Affalo is the key, I think, because
he sets the example of constant effort. As soon as he gets into better shape,
and his three starts to fall, he'll be even better. Lawson is fearless and
swift as an arrow and he's become adept at pocket-picking. Andre Miller is a
player to identify with: he can't run, can't jump, has no range, has no weight-
room/steroid muscles and his mid-range is more of a leaner than a jumper, but
he's smart, resourceful, tricky, and throws a better alley-oop than anyone in
the league. He's the kind of steadyEddie you want to be in there for the last
five minutes. Al Harrington, who was injured and out of shape last year, has
come back strong and is now a classic sixth-man-scorer-off-the-bench-instant-
offense-go-to-guy. The Birdman is as erratic as all get out but he remembers
to swat a couple away every game. Unfortunately, he's mutilated his body to
the point that any person of aesthetic sensibility must fast-forward through
his foul shots. The furriners give the team great balance (and because they're
untattooed, provide a welcome relief for the eyes.) Gallinari, the Italian,
shows great promise, especially when he goes to the rim with two-handed
authority. When Nene, from Brazil, plays up to his ability, he's sensational,
and the more time he gets at PF the happier he'll be, which is why it's crucial
that Timofey Mozgov, the massive Russian center. learns to move his feet and
avoid the fouls. Mozgov will improve as the season progresses. Rudy Fernandez,
the lone Spaniard, plays good man D., but won't make a real contribution until
the outside shots start to fall. And then there's the half-Greek 7-footer, Kosta
Koufos, who plays with great enthusiasm.

Not to mention Kenneth Faried, college rebounding sensation, who's chomping at
the bit, waiting for one of the regulars to go down.

Other reasons to watch the Nugs: no J. R. Smith (a most talented nutcase),
no Kenyon Martin (effective on D but always borderline thuggish, and with
the ugliest no-spin set shot ever); no Carmelo playing matador. Addition by
subtraction.

It's a short long season, ths year. Stay healthy, guys.