Title: Bronte Notes
Date: March 29, 2010

I have just read, for the first time ever, Agnes Grey (1847) by Anne Bronte,
and what an infinitely sad book it is! Poor Agnes, an impoverished clergyman's
daughter, goes as a governess and is daily humiliated by monstrously spoiled
children and their grotesquely insensitive parents. Her sufferings are
poignantly particularized. The novel is structured as if it were a comedy
(after extended tribulations, Agnes marries a decent young curate) but it is
nevertheless barren, desiccated, and joyless. Even the long-awaited marriage
proposal receives the shortest of shrifts:

"And so now I have overruled your objections. Have you any others. "No --
none."  "You love me then," he said, fervently pressing my hand.  "Yes."

And that's all the romance that this poor downtrodden, passive, beaten-into-the-
dust emotionally-stunted "heroine" is granted.

Nevertheless, my own personal sadness while reading this novel arose not
from Agnes Grey's suffering, but from Anne Bronte's -- there being not a
skin-of-the- teeth space between the bedraggled writer and the bedraggled
protagonist. Agnes's experiences as a governess exactly mirror Anne's --
except there was no saving curate to snatch the wedding chestnuts out of
the fire. Poor Anne returned home defeated, virginal, and alone, to die
at age 28, of tuberculosis. Nor is it simply the doormat heroine or the
downtrodden novelist that is so distressing -- it's the general oppression of
women in the first part of the nineteenth century that must draw a tear from the
stolidest of eyes. Here's a society that offered no decent options for women,
and even Anne Bronte, as talented as she was, hadn't the least ability to
think her way through attitudes toward women that proved to be paralyzing and
ultimately fatal.

I turned to Agnes Grey because I had recently read Anne's older sister
Charlotte's Villette, a novel that perplexed me more than any book I've read in
years. I couldn't make sense of it. I've read my share of nineteenth-century
novels, and I would like to think that I have a general sense of how they're
made, and, after I get a few chapters in, how they must conclude. In Villete,
all the early markers point to the eventuality that young Lucy Snowe, after the
customary and appropriate difficulties and misunderstandings will have been
resolved, will marry the handsome young Dr. John. But somewhere in Book II,
the game changed and the poor reader (me) became confused. Dr. John is allowed
to make some bad choices -- sufficiently wrong that he becomes superfluous and
gradually fades into the background. He metamorphoses from a major character
in the first half of the book to a minor character in Book III. His place as
Lucy Snowe's suitor is taken by a teacher, M. Paul Emanuel, who is nasty and
unattractive when introduced but who becomes more and more acceptable as the
novel proceeds. I couldn't comprehend the seismic shift until I read the truly
excellent biography of CB by Lyndall Gordon (Charlotte Bronte, A Passionate
Life (1994). It turns out the plot of the novel parallels CB's experience
in Brussels. Initially attracted to a young man who lost interest in her,
she fell deeply in love with a teacher at her school. Alas, M. Heger was not
available, either matrimonially or emotionally.

But at least Charlotte, unlike Anne, was willing to take a risk -- which is why,
in Charlotte's greatest novel, witty, forthright, independent Jane Eyre, for
all her weirdness, remains such a striking and refreshing alternative to the
ordinary oppressed nineteenth-century heroine.