Title: Where's the Gasplant?
Date: June 22, 2016

I'm most fond of the gasplant, also called fraxinella or dittany or, when
formality is called for, dictamnus albus. It's a beautiful plant. In flower
it's an ornament to the perennial garden, and even when it's done blooming, it's
neat and orderly and retains a lovely shade of green throughout the summer.
Smells good too. It's a long-lived perennial, very hardy. It takes a number of
years to establish itself, but then lives almost indefinitely. If you have one,
you treasure it. I have two, both of which I took from the garden of my late
sister Phyllis when she died in 1998. Or should I say I had two, because over
the winter one of them went missing.

In the location where there should have been and always has been a fully-mature
gasplant, there was nothing -- not a leaf, not a twig, not a root. If the plant
had died, it would have left some evidence behind. It's a woody plant which dies
back to the ground each year, so every spring there is a bundle of dry hollow
stalks or kexes. But this year nothing. Not a shred.

What happened to Mr. Dittany. Here's a possibility. I transplanted him, put him
somewhere else, and then forgot that I had done so. An unlikely possibility.
I searched my brain but can't' recall moving it. I searched the grounds -- no
luck. If it wasn't me, was it someone else?  Did some malefactor steal the
gasplant?  I have never heard of a gang of perennial thieves. Is it possible
to believe that a nefarious individual entered the garden while I was away and
heisted an out-of-season gasplant, roots and all?  Not an hypothesis I can much
credit. Did the plant have enemies? If it's being held for ransom, I have yet to
receive the note. "We have your fraxinella. Either fork over $14.99 or we'll mow
it."

Another possibility: there never was a dittany. It was always a hallucination
of my decaying brain. Nope, no go. It's been in the same place for years. Many
people have seen it. I show it off -- it's so dramatic, so striking.

Or perhaps, it's a plot against me. Am I being gaslighted?  With a gasplant?