Title: Chalaza
Date: March 21, 2017

If you asked me to guess what the word "chalaza" means, I'd say, from its sound,
that it would have to be an odd cactus-y looking plant that grows only in the
Atacama desert and flowers once a decade, or an extinct language formerly
spoken in the southern Caucasus mountains, or perhaps some sort of Levantine
breadstick. It's a strange exotic word. But if then I told you that you've seen
thousands, perhaps many thousands of chalazas (or chalazae) with your own eyes,
and eaten as many, you'd be perplexed, even startled. Because you have eaten
them.

Anyone who's cracked an egg has noticed two ropey white bands that extend from
the yolk and are rooted in the transparent albumen.

Here's some more information about chalazae which I quote from Tim Birkhead's
The Most Perfect Thing (2016), a detailed and most enthusiastic book all about
eggs.  "The role of the chalazae is to suspend the yolk within the albumen....
One end of each chalaza is attached to the ovum itself... and the other is
firmly lodged in the layer of dense viscous albumen, which itself is attached to
the shell membranes at the pointed and blunt ends of the egg. The chalazae allow
the yolk to rotate when the egg is turned so that the embryo always remains on
top of the yolk and within the inner liquid albumen layers. This self-righting
ability is [necessary] because the embryo develops on the least dense side of
the yolk. Keeping the embryo uppermost ensures that it is always closest to the
parent's brood patch for maximum warmth, but also closest to the inner surface
of the shell for maximum access to oxygen."

No chalazae, no chicks.

I'm astonished that although I have scrambled thousands of eggs, and certainly
noticed the "ropey strands," I never gave them the slightest thought. How
incurious of me!

Birkhead's book is a revelation. He is the egg man of our times. Occasionally
he gets so carried away with his joy in the egg that he veers into unconscious
comedy. I adore the phrase, "a renaissance in the study of eggshell
pigmentation."  Or, "guillemots are not quite unique in incubating
shit-covered eggs."  Or, "tinamous lay the most extraordinary and beautiful
eggs."  Or, "there is something sensual about eggs."

About the word chalaza: it's from the Greek meaning "small knot." Nor is it new:
it entered the language (in Latinized form) in 1704.

Some practical information: the more prominent the chalazae, the fresher the
egg.