Title: The Mall of Me
Date: March 16, 2017

I can, however, imagine a shopping mall designed for my particular and personal
satisfaction. It would be called "The Mall of Me."

Anchoring one end of the Mall of Me is a large book store, carrying both new
and used, but stocked with volumes of history, fine arts, crafts, popular
science, biography, travel, fiction, gardening and what used to be called
"natural history", with lots of room to browse and sit and read. Proviso: the
"bookstore of me" carries zero books on Spirituality, Self-Improvement, Soul
Regression, Tarot, Alternative Therapies, or Healing Arts. No books written by
TV pastors or repentant politicians recently released from prison or by instant
millionaires. No celebrity autobiographies. At the other end of the Mall of Me,
there's a shop selling music cds which  specializes in the great age of middle
European music from 1685 (birth of Bach) to 1911 (death of Mahler), but also
features a treasury of classic blues, bluegrass, American roots, popular song,
rock and roll, and gospel of the golden age. No New Age, No Rap, no Electronic.
Between my two "anchors," there will be a good garden store featuring expensive,
elegant, heavy-in-the-hand garden tools. No power mowers or power tools, but
when appropriate to the season, racks of seeds, preferably of heirloom and
antique vegetables. Next to it, a movie memorabilia and poster store, with large
collections from the earliest days of cinema right through 1950, especially
Shakespeare movies. And then I'd like a high-end antique store displaying walls
and shelves of classical and Asian works of art. Unfortunately, because of
budgetary constraints, I won't be doing any purchasing in this particular shop,
but I'll be pleased to browse in it, at least weekly, perhaps oftener. Also, a
cafe where a guy could purchase a hot chocolate and an almond croissant. I would
also like a store that specializes in 19th and early 20th century Caucasian rugs
and wall-hangings though here, once again -- it would be more for appreciating
than for actual buying. Subject to the same constraints, a baseball memorabilia
shop -- National League only. A high end crafts store. And as for restaurants:
a Jewish deli, modeled after the now defunct Second Avenue Delicatessen. An
imaginative Asian fusion restaurant. A bagel bakery. No fish, and certainly no
sushi. Perhaps a hole-in-the-wall one-person walk-in shop where a guy or gal
could help me with computer and cell phone anomalies and failures -- someone
who speaks in traditional English, not in acronyms. And then there will be
buskers: at one end of the mall, a string quartet; at the other end, a bluegrass
band. No fire-eaters, contortionists, or drummers banging on pots and pans. All
performers personally vetted by me. No panhandlers or noble solicitors with
their dread clipboards.

And of course, some intelligently-designed play areas for infants, new walkers
and small children. And some comfortable chairs for their parents (and me) to
sit and watch the kiddies frolic.

Yes, I think that will do it.  It's the Mall of Me.

Now that I think of it, everyone should have their own mall. Instead of vast
mall installations, let's have targeted malls. Individually designed and
executed.

Merchandising genius!!