Title: Deaths, 2024
Date: December 26, 2024

The year got off to an early start when Brad Gombas died on December 16. Brad
was the brother of my late brother-in-law Allen Gombas. I knew him in the
1970s, when he was a young man; he lived most of his life in New Mexico where
he established a career as a builder and craftsman. I wasn't in touch except
through the extended family communication chain. On December 26, my friend
since  1965 Ray Pike died at age 90. Ray was an accomplished journalist. Nancy
Pike and AGP were the young mothers in a playgroup that included the infants
NGP and Nina Pike -- in an earlier life it now seems. We saw Ray and Nancy at
least once a year for many decades. Then on the last day of the year Sue Palmer
died (peacefully, I'm told), after many many years of illness and pain. She was
a superbly talented artist and a friend, though not a close one, since 1969. In
February, we lost Nancy Levitt. Not a close friend (wife of a colleague) but a
long time acquaintance  -- a regular at the Takacs, seated just in front of
us these past 30 years. Sheldon "Spike" Cohen, later Alan Mills, a friend from
the PS 217 schoolyard, died in March. Esophogeal cancer that had metastasized.
A long drawn out death, with many months of hospice care. In May. Bill Wood
died. He was a world-famous scientist and a friend. It must be 20 years now
since his wife, Renate Wood, a poet, left us. Bill had been in a relationship
with another old acquaintance, Marilyn Krysl, for these many years. Marilyn
died a couple of months after Bill; she had been in "memory care" for several
months. During the summer, we lost two former English colleagues. The first to
go was congenial Chuck Squier, at the age of 91, who had moved to Boise, Idaho
to be near his children; he was a friend and also a long time neighbor on the
Hill; the second: nice guy Doug Burger. In August I discovered that Anatol Anton
had died earlier in the year. I knew Anatol when he was a member of the CU
Department of Philosophy in the 70s or 80s, but hadn't been in touch since he
left Boulder to return to San Francisco. Anatol was a cheerful bear of a man,
far to  the political left, who grew up in Greenwich Village with a semi-famous
painter for a father. Fred Litto, classmate from P S 217 and Erasmus, died in
Brazil, where he had lived for 50 years; we always planned to get together, but
it never happened. Another PS 217 friend, Tony Sogluizzo, died in the spring
but I didn't find out about it until much later. He was a genuinely decent and
gentle man who had a good career as a librarian. Late in December, we attended
the dignified funeral of Bill Belew, husband of Lynn's friend Sharon Belew. 
And so the year came to an end.