Title: Driftin'
Date: April 01, 2025

Every once in a while, I experience something that I call a "cultural
convergence" -- perhaps an event reported in a daily newspaper that closely
resembles something on the very page of the novel that I happen to be reading. A
cross-genre overlap, let us say.

Here's in example of such a coincidence that amused me much.

Yesterday evening I watched the classic western The Magnificent Seven (1960)
and this morning I read, once again, Shakespeare's Twelfth Night. It's hard to
believe but yes, there is a very brief moment where two such very distinct works
brush against one another.

Unlike TN, The Magnificent Seven is a violent spectacle that steers clear of
humor, or subtle characterization or extensive dialogue. After the climactic
concluding battle to preserve the Mexican village has been both lost and won,
the two surviving gunmen share a moment before trotting off on their separate
ways. Chris Adams (Yul Brynner) inquires of Vin Tanner (Steve McQueen) if he
has a plan for what comes next. Laconic Vin, cowpoke and gunslinger, responds,
"driftin'.

In Twelfth Night, there's a similar question and a similar answer, but in a far
different idiom. Antonio asks Sebastian, who has survived a shipwreck, about
his plans. Sebastian's view of his future is essentially the same as Vin's, but
there is none of that "ah shucks" minimalism in his reply. Instead, Sebastian
responds, "My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy."

[While Vin's one-word answer is clear as clear can be, Sebastian's "mere
extravagancy" requires a bit of a gloss. Nowadays, "extravagancy" (usually
"extravagance") signifies a "lack of restrain in purchasing luxury goods." Not
so in 1600, when "extravagant" remained much closer to its root etymological
inheritance. The word descends from L. vagare, "to wander." Extra-vagance
therefore means something like "wander beyond." Here's a more familiar example
of the word at work: when Roderigo characterizes Othello as an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger," he does not criticize Othello for spending too many ducats
on his fancy get-up. He means that he's a rootless and wandering non-native.
(Wheeling? my dictionary glosses wheeling as "roving, wandering, drifting"). And
also: "mere" did not then connote triviality; its meaning is closer to "pure."
"Determinate" meant and still means "decided.")

Therefore Sebastian's sentence --"My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy" --
is directly equivalent to  Vin's "driftin''". Cultural convergence at its best.

It's just two ways of talkin'.

I sometimes wonder about Shakespeare's intent here. Why did he bother
to put such a difficult sentence in Sebastian's mouth? For purposes of
characterization, certainly. But at the expense of clarity. Wouldn't it have
been more economical, more transparent, for Sebastian to say something plain,
such as "I don't have a plan, I'll just wander." It's certain that some
percentage of Shakespeare's audience, perhaps most, will not grasp the meaning 
of the sentence as written and will be left puzzled. Yet as he so often does,
Shakespeare preferred eloquence to transparency.

In my opinion, Shakespeare delighted in his own fluency.  And sometimes I think
that Shakespeare wasn't just writing to be heard by his Globe or Blackfriars
audience. He was writing to be read and studied --  although I doubt he could
have imagined a future in which his sentences would be glossed with crowded
inches of small-type footnotes.

It it possible that Shakespeare also had an inkling that, as Beethoven once put
it, he was writing for "a latter age?"