Title: New Old Books from the 1940s
Date: April 22, 2025

I read George Hutchinson's Facing the Abyss, a report on the culture of the
1940. Hutchinson assesses books that were influential during that troubled
decade.

When I came of age in the 1950s, I encountered a good share of these books. I
was a curious, library-addicted lad and 1940s culture lingered in the 1950s air.
Yet Hutchinson brings to attention whole shelves of important writing of which I
was shamefully ignorant. Through the resources of Interlibrary Loan and second-
hand internet bookstores, I've now become acquainted with a bunch of new old
books. Here's some of them (with more to follow).

Hutchinson claims that Jo Sinclair's Wasteland (1946) is an important
contribution to the Jewish-American novel. Perhaps it is, by priority, but I
found it disappointing and superficial. The main man, Jacob Braunowitz changes
his name to John Brown and hides his Jewishness, but it doesn't work -- he lives
in a "wasteland" neither integrated into America nor bolstered by his inherited
religion. Along comes a Freudian psychoanalyst and in a few magical sessions
Brown is liberated to embrace his Judaism. For me, the novel was simplistic and
implausible. Harry Brown's A Walk in the Sun (1944) is the most persuasive and
realistic war novel I've ever read -- it accomplishes more in 150 pages that
Norman Mailer achieved in 600. Aldo Leopold's Sand County Almanac (1949 is a
pioneering classic of environmentalism -- though nowadays less widely known than
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring but much more learned and innovative. It's a very
good book but frankly I found the "lyrical" prose a bit too gooey for my taste.
Isaac Rosenfeld's Passage from Home is a distinguished novel of adolescent
alienation. It's kinky (about a boy's semi-sexual relationship to his deceased
mother's sister). It's a far better novel, I think, than Salinger's similar
and imitative Catcher in the Rye. What a pity that Rosenfeld died of a heart
attack at age 38!  A great loss to literature. I also read Anatole Broyard's
Kafka Was the Rage, a memoir of Greenwich Village in the 1940s although not
published until 1985. It's a noteworthy collection of short essay, able to be
much more candid about sex and sexuality than if it had appeared during the time
it chronicles. Broyard claims that 1946 was the best year ever: the war was over
and he had freedom and the G I Bill.

A pretty good for me too -- in 1946 just seven years old, sitting on the sunny
stoop eating raisins.