Title: A Scots Quair
Date: January 12, 2021

I've given over the last week or ten days to Lewis Grassic Gibbon's A Scots
Quair and I'm very pleased to have done so. And I'm embarrassed that I've only
now read this strange brooding wondrous series of novels. How could I not have
known? For those equally as ignorant as I, the Quair is a trilogy -- Sunset Song
(1932), Cloud Howe (1933) and Grey Granite (1934). Together they tell the story
of Christine Guthrie from childhood -- about the turn of the century -- through
the years of the Great Depression. I can't remember reading a piece of fiction
that has so thoroughly engaged me, or encountering  a fictional character so
fully realized as Chris Guthrie Tavendale Colquhoun Ogilvie.

Here's a picture of Gibbon (birth name: James Leslie Mitchell) who died at age
34 from a botched surgery.

The novels do for the northeast corner of Scotland what Thomas Hardy did for
the southwest of England. Gibbon's corner of Scotland is traditional agrarian
society beset by doctrinaire religion, industrialization, war, and the Great
Depression. The novels range from extremely brutal to marvelously lyrical. They
are not without defect: sometimes too long, often too preachy. Occasionally, I
felt that I was being treated to a Scottish version of "orientalism": Scotism,
perhaps. The books want condensation, editing; sometimes I felt that I was
reading a first draft -- but Gibbon wrote fifteen books in seven years, so signs
of haste are inevitable. Gibbon might be called a local colorist or a social
realist, but he's much more. His feel for the landscape and for history is
unparalleled.

In subject matter and tone, A Scots Quair reminds me most of Halldor Laxness's
great Icelandic novel, Independent People. It's also like one of Hardy's Wessex
novels, but funnier, more playful, and yes, more sensual. There are stream-of-
consciousness speeches that recall Faulkner and passages that might have been
written by James Joyce (not the Joyce of Ulysses but the Joyce of Portrait).  A
much neglected masterpiece.