Title: Book Report:  Fiction by Michael Chabon
Date: October 24, 2006

I liked the film Wonder Boys (2000) so very much that I set out to read all
of Michael Chabon's writing. Here's my interim report. I couldn't finish The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh (William Morrow, 1988). The book is reported to have
sold well and it has been widely praised, but, I'm sorry, I thought it was
precious juvenilia and should never have been published. I do, however, love
the title. A Model World (1991) and Werewolves in Their Youth (Random House,
1999) are collections of short stories. I found them both mighty insubstantial,
and I confess to wearying of the little boy whose father left the family (a
far-too- frequently-repeated motif). Wonder Boys (1995) is a fine, complicated,
clever, satisfying novel.  Grady Tripp, Terry Crabtree, and James Leer are all
memorable creations. The Passover service (omitted in the film) is top-flight
-- comic and moving at the same time. The story is fast, funny, and original --
even richer than the fine, little-known movie.

I respected more than I loved the pullet-surprise winning Amazing Adventures of
Kavalier and Clay (Random House, 2000). It's engaging but overcrowded. While
reading it, I was too conscious of the artifice and too aware of the novel's
debts: Nabokov, a pinch of Pynchon, Doctorow, etc. Chabon's a great storyteller
with a bright future. So far, he's doesn't have the heft of Bellow or the
fluency of Roth, but he's up there in the big leagues. I'm hoping Summerland and
The Final Solution are as good as the novels I've read so far. It's going to be
fun to follow Chabon's career. He's a talented guy.

October 25. Today I read the novella The Final Solution (Harper Collins, 2004).
It's a snazzy mystery. Chabon returns to his infatuation with mythic figures;
he also re-creates the hero-sidekick relationship that is an obsession of AAKC
-- this time its S. Holmes and Linus Steinman.  A very entertaining story,
although sometimes I worried that I was reading a filmscript-in potentia. 
Perhaps I'm too suspicious: not many directors are jumping to cast a parrot in
the lead role.

October 30.  I read forty or so pages of Summerland (Miramax, 2002). Two words:
"teen" and "fantasy." Not at all my cup of tea.  I hope that Chabon doesn't
continue to indulge himself with such trivialities. He's too good for this
stuff.

Michael: get back to work!  Get serious!