Title: Hosseini's The Kite Runner
Date: October 13, 2006

Every American should read Khaled Hosseini's The Kite Runner (Riverhead, 2003)
-- but for its political relevance, not its literary achievement. The novel is
set in Afghanistan, which is one of the few countries where recent American
foreign policy hasn't been entirely incompetent and disgraceful, so to read it
feels reassuring and even patriotic. Inasmuch as we're engaged in a never ending
war in Afghanistan, every one of our fellow citizens should have an idea why
we're there and what we're doing. It's not at all obvious -- Afghanistan doesn't
have a single drop of oil.  Americans should know how bad the Taliban was and
might become again, and also why we should remain vigilant against any rabid
fundamentalist theology--even ones that are near and more domestic than Islam.

In The Kite Runner, the conflict between Afghanistan's dominant Pashtuns and the
exploited Hazaras reminds us that there are countries that are far more absurdly
tribal than our own.

Even though I learned a great deal from this novel, I feel that as a work of
art, The Kite Runner is profoundly disappointing. It came highly recommended to
me and I set out to fall in love, couldn't.  It's an overpraised work. It's
advertised as written in "hard, spare prose" (I'm quoting from the back-cover
blurb), but in fact it's written in prose without any style at all -- and worse
still, every paragraph or so there's a sentence that must make a discriminating
reader cringe. The novel is very weak in characterization: aside from the
autobiographical narrator, there's only one figure of any dimension --Baba--
and all the rest are flat as pancakes. The novelist is particularly bad with
women, who are never more than wallpaper. The child Sohrab, in whom so much is
invested, speaks an idiom that no living child has ever spoken. Has the author
ever had a conversation with a real boy  The plot is filled with obvious
contrivances, artificial cliff-hangers, and (goodness gracious!) a climactic
fist-fight. And while I appreciate the author's love of his native country, it
doesn't seem at all honest to attribute Afghani problems to "Arabs, Chechens,
and Pakistanis." In this novel, the Taliban is represented by a character who
is half-German, a sociopathic admirer of Hitler, and (we eventually discover)
a pervert who preys on little boys. He's a grotesque villain who seems to have
wandered into an ostensibly serious novel from a James Bond melodrama. Why can't
the author face the fact that the the Taliban are home-grown Afghani fascists?
He would have given us a stronger novel if he had done so.