Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 6
Date: April 03, 2025

After struggling through a run of mysterious and puzzling works, I'm cheered to
discover a book written by Cornell English faculty member that I could read with
pleasure from beginning to end. And understand. And which alerted me to books
and poems with which I was not familiar. No theory, no pretentious jargon; just
honest scholarship and intelligent stylish analysis,

It's Facing the Abyss, American Literature and Culture in the 1940s, by George
Hutchinson, who is Cornell's Farr Professor of American Culture.

Unlike Professor Hutchinson, who is a considerably younger man, I myself was
alive (although barely sentient) during the 1940s. I was too young for serious
reading, so 1940s culture didn't come to my aluminum desk until the 1950s when
I belatedly came to awareness. As a result, I read many of the books that
Hutchinson discusses a decade past their relevance. Hutchinson also mentions
many influential books that I didn't read at all and therefore came as a
surprise -- and which underlined my ignorance. For example, during the 1950s,
my high school and college years, I read many books of 1940s Jewish American
writers to whom Hutchinson devotes a long chapter: Mailer, Bellow, Malamud,
Rukeyser, Arthur Miller, etc. But my acquaintance was incomplete. I confess that
I had never heard the names of Jo Sinclair or Isaac Rosenthal, both of whom
Hutchinson scrutinizes at full. One name missing from Hutchinson's survey is J D
Salinger, who started to publish in the 40s but only became famous with Cather
in the Rye in 1951. Just as well -- I never caught Salinger fever although many
of my friends were quite infected.

Hutchinson has presented me with a reading list of books that I should have
known but didn't and that will keep me engaged for months. I'm grateful.

Hutchinson's chapter on WWII is most revelatory. Without being unduly partisan,
it exposes and corrects the "greatest generation" mythology that I had half come
to accept.

After reading Facing the Abyss, I continued my investigation of Cornell English
faculty publications by taking a couple of wild swings at Elizabeth S. Anker's
mystifying On Paradox, the Claims of Theory (Duke UP, 2022). (Anker holds a
joint appointment in Cornell's law school and its Department of Literature in
English.) I can say just two things for certain about this difficult book: a) I
didn't understand two consecutive sentences, and b) it's not about literature,
not even tangentially. In fact, I'm not sure what it's about -- as far as I can
tell, it's not about the law. I have rarely attempted anything in English prose
that I found quite so impenetrable. I never even grasped what Anker means by
paradox.

I'm sure it's mea maxima culpa, but so be it.

[April 4] PGB writes: "Every time you post something, it becomes ever clearer
that you're not the right person for this investigation. Give it up and stick to
something within your abilities, like basketball. You write well on basketball.
Do yourself a favor: stay away from the deeper issues that Anker discusses."

[April 4]  Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Perhaps you're right, PGB (whoever you
are). The shoemaker should stick to his last. This Anker book is not intended
for me, but I I wonder for whom it is intended. It's got to be an extremely
small specialized audience. Six or eight people, worldwide. I doubt anyone on
Cornell's English faculty then or now could make heads or tails of it."

[April 6]  Artie Greengroin writes: "Thanks for hanging in there.  I hope you
find other Cornell English Professors who know how to write English. I'm not
optimistic, though. BTW, I think PGB is harshing on you, but I agree that your
basketball essays are pretty good."

[April 8] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Thanks for the recommendation, Artie
and PGB. If anyone is interested, my basketball essays are here.

[April 9]  Charles Evans (Mercer College) writes: "I agree. Vivian, your notes
on basketball are quite good. But you're just not smart enough to understand
philosophy."

[April 10] Joe J. Keen (Northwest Nazarene University, Nampa, Idaho) writes: "I
agree with Charles Evans. The basketball entries are amusing. But, Vivian,
you're no philosopher."

[April 16] Vivian de St. Vrain writes: The "Artie Greengroin" who posted on
April 6 does not exist. Artie Greengroin is not a real person; he's a character
invented by the WWII novelist Harry Brown. Come on, Artie you can use your real
name. Don't be afraid. Don't hide behind a pseudonym. We're all friends here."

[April 30]. Chester Bacon writes: "Thanks for bringing the Hutchinson book to my
attention.  I've read and been enlightened by it. But following your
recommendation I'll stay away from the Anker book. And I do like your basketball
essays."