Title: A Heart-of-Flatbush Novel: Big Man (1966), by Jay Neugeboren
Date: March 30, 2022

Of the many Brooklyn novels that I've read this last while, Big Man, by Jay
Neugeboren, comes closest to home. Neugeboren was newborn in 1938, just a
year before me, and he attended fabled Erasmus Hall High School, most likely
graduating with the class of 1955 (I was '56). It's a mark of my ignorance of
modern American letters that I had no idea that my near-classmate was the author
of 24 books, most of them novels. Big Man was Neugeboren's first novel.

Close to home? Here are couple of sentences that will shiver the nostalgia
timbers of wistful ex-Erasmians.

I walk down Church Avenue, past the Kenmore Theater. Across the street the
old church, used to cut classes and sit in the graveyard....  In front of
Garfields's Cafeteria all the guys hanging out with their broads and their
puffed hair.... Guys with Erasmus jackets on. I keep walking. Past the firehouse
and the Holy Cross schoolyard.

Wow, it's a guided tour of the old neighborhood as it was in the 1950s. Who from
Erasmus hasn't sprawled on the steps of the Dutch Reformed Church?

The novel revolves around the 1951 basketball scandals, which were world-shaking
news at the time. A number of New York City college players (CCNY, St. Johns,
Fordham, LIU) fell into the clutches of shady gamblers and were paid to shave
points.  A few were indicted and convicted. I wrote a few melancholy and
disillusioned paragraphs about the scandals some years ago -- here.

In Big Man, Neugeboren tells the story through the eyes and mouth of a
character named Mack Davis, who had been an upcoming star but is now, because
he missed a couple of baskets, stuck in a dead-end job at an automated carwash.
It's an ambitious conceit and a promising plot. Big Man, I regret to say, is
not a very artistic piece of work, but what the heck! Neugeboren was only 25 or
26 when he wrote it and had had only a few years to recover from uninspiring
Erasmus Hall English classes.

I confess that I was uncomfortable that Neugeboren wrote the novel in a black
voice. I don't object in theory, because there's no earthly reason why a
white novelist can't impersonate a black person, any more than male novelist
can't speak as a female (or vice versa), or a young writer speak in the voice
of an old. So wny was I troubled? I think it was because the voice that the
novelist invented didn't seem genuine. It seemed "literary" -- as though the
Davis character had been heisted out of a  blaxploitation film. Occasional
inadvertent lapses in the dialect were particularly painful to my ever-sensitive
ears.

Big Man reminds me how central basketball was to my adolescent life. I think
if I had spent as much time and effort on my schoolwork as I did practicing my
foul shots I might have been somebody. But I think I learned as much about life
from basketball and its scandals as I did from any other 1950s phenomenon (such
as the antics of "Tailgunner Joe" McCarthy). I'm grateful to Jay Neugeboren for
preserving an important piece of my history and especially for bringing the old
neighborhood right to the forefront.