Title: "The Lost Chord"
Date: May 05, 2017

Insomnia once again -- a nightly affliction, a family trait. Perhaps we lack a
gene that lets others sleep from dusk to dawn. Have I noted here that I want my
tombstone inscribed with the motto, just beneath my name and dates, "No More
Insomnia, Forever."

During the wakeful nights, I've taken to listening to old-time radio. My
favorite: WHRO out of Norfolk, Virginia. Last night, I heard some tenor from
the 1920s (perhaps John McCormack) in a scratchy recording (tuba for bass) wail
or warble "The Lost Chord"-- quite the 3 am treat it was. A flood of memories
arose, because "The Lost Chord" was one of the songs that we learned during
the PS 217 assembly back there in Flatbush in the 1950s. I recalled with some
amusement that our determined "music specialist," Miss Georgia Keiselbach, a big
lumbering woman with a trained contralto voice, tried gamely to inculcate an
anguished mid-Victorian quasi religious parlor song into the minds of a roomful
of fidgety 10-year-olds. Quite an experience. I was entranced by Sir Arthur
Sullivan's melody, but I have to admit that the lyric was incomprehensible to me
then and is still quite a challenge to this day.

So I investigated. Onto the internet, which, fortunately, works very well at 4
am.

The words to "The Lost Chord" are by Adelaide Anne Procter, after Tennyson
apparently the most popular poet of her day, although I must confess that
I had never heard of her even though I'm supposed to know something about
nineteenth- century English literature.

Here's Ms. Procter's fervid poem:

Seated one day at the organ,I was weary and ill at ease,And my fingers wandered
idlyOver the noisy keys.I know not what I was playing,Or what I was dreaming
then;But I struck one chord of music Like the sound of a great Amen.It flooded
the crimson twilight,Like the close of an angel's psalm,And it lay on my fevered
spiritWith a touch of infinite calm.It quieted pain and sorrow,Like love
overcoming strife;It seemed the harmonious echoFrom our discordant life.It
linked all perplexed meaningsInto one perfect peace,And trembled away into
silenceAs if it were loth to cease.I have sought, but I seek it vainly,That one
lost chord divine,Which came from the soul of the organ,And entered into mine.It
may be that death's bright angelWill speak in that chord again,It may be that
only in Heav'nI shall hear that grand Amen.

I'll paraphrase (even though I know that paraphrase is not a nice thing to do
to a poem): in a reverie at the organ the poet experiences something grand
that is aesthetic, transcendent, ineffable, and fleeting. The "lost chord
divine" -- note the Miltonic deployment of adjectives -- stands for the hope
or wish or belief that there is such a place as heaven and that it's a place
where weariness, fever, pain, sorrow, perplexity, strife, and discord are
superseded by the "infinite calm" and "perfect peace" of the "grand Amen."  A
not unusual or extraordinary nineteenth-century sentiment where the hunt for the
disappearing god was frequently mediated by art -- in this particular case by
the art of music.

As long as I'm reducing the poem to its paraphraseable meaning, I might also add
that Procter, like many poets before and after her, has conflated religious and
sexual longing. I derive this meaning, inaccessible to the roomful of quavering
sopranos of which I was one, and very likely unsuspected by Miss Keiselbach
herself, from the vocabulary of passion in which the poem is couched: "crimson,"
"touch," "lay" "love," "trembled."  And from the sentence, "It came from the
soul of the organ,/  And entered into mine," where it might be argued, slightly
frivolously, that any line of poetry that contains "came" "organ" and "entered"
has got to be about a symbolic sexual encounter. Especially when the ambiguous
word "mine" can denote either "my soul" or "my organ." So in this extravagant
reading, in which it is once again clearly demonstrated that you can take the
boy out of Brooklyn but you can't take the Brooklyn out of the boy, "The Lost
Chord" is not only about the search for "perfect peace" but also for the perfect
orgasm which will provide infinite calm to the poetess when she "dies" -- a word
which is itself a Victorian euphemism for sexual climax. The lost chord is the
big O (and I don't mean Oscar R.)

Just for fun of it let me also adduce a couple of sentences from the wikipedia
article on Adelaide Anne Procter: "Modern critics argue that Procter's work is
significant for what it reveals about how Victorian women otherwise repressed
feelings." "One critic suggests that Procter may have been a lesbian and in
love with Matilda Hays; other critics have called Procter's relationship with
Hays 'emotionally intense.'" "Procter became engaged in 1858. The identity of
Procter's fiancé remains unknown, and the proposed marriage never took place."
"In 1851, Procter converted to Roman Catholicism." "Procter never married. She
became unhealthy, possibly due to her charity work, and died of tuberculosis at
the age of 38." I'll let my loyal readers connect the dots.