Title: Othello/ Otello
Date: October 30, 2012

I prefer my opera to be aural rather than visual. Opera is a form that
is made for listening, not watching -- at least in my view. The music,
Mozart or Verdi, is frequently transcendent and most satisfying. But on those
occasions when I venture to the opera house and I have to deal with the
cultic, cachectic audience and the grand-opera worshippers as well as the
ridiculous plots, the unhandsome singers, the interminable intermissions, the
staginess and artifice and the general all-around silliness -- as well as pay
through the nose for the privilege of doing so, well then, I'm not always a
happy fellow.

I know the sound of Verdi's Otello moderately well, having played the Placido
Domingo version often enough for the laser to have bored holes into the cd.
Moreover, as it happens, I'm moderately familiar with Shakespeare's play). But I
had never seen a performance of Otello until this past Saturday when we betook
ourselves and our bagels and our Granny Smiths to the Century Theatre to watch
the Metropolitan Opera's Live in HD performance. It was, frankly, glorious --
Renee Fleming in the electronic flesh, moving us to tears with the willow song
(along with Verdi's bonus, dubious Ave Maria).

She was superb; so were the orchestra, the costumes, the sets, even the
overacting, villainous Iago, who would have twirled his mustachios, if he had
had them, and the non-acting, expressionless Othello.

Our "guide," a robust, comfortable mezzo whose name I should know but didn't
catch, made the claim that Verdi's Otello improved upon Shakespeare's Othello.
A highly dubious claim, I think, but then, I don't know how to measure the
value of the grand "Othello music," that Shakespeareans so much admire, against
the cellos and the bassoons. Whether for better or worse, however, there's a
heck of a lot in Shakespeare's play that didn't make it across the centuries
and genres and into Verdi's opera. More than can be said in a paragraph or
a blaguepost.

For starters, Shakespeare created a multi-layered society, not just elaborate
sets. His city of Venice has a sense of itself as a successful, orderly,
civilized, and advanced community. Into this world strides Othello, not
only an outlander but an African and a erotic exotic. Although Venice needs
his soldiership, he's still a black man in a racist world who marries a
willful patrician lady who prefers him to  the "wealthy curled darlings of
the nation." It's an unlikely, perilous match: he's "declined into the vale
of years" while she's very very young. He's a soldier who's been around the
world; she's the secluded mistress of the house affairs. He's commanding;
she's naive.

Verdi must have loved Othello, although not necessarily for the right reasons.
How could a play that ends on a bed, with a climactic murder-suicide, not have
excited the instincts of the composer of Aida. Nothing more appropriate for
grand opera than Othello and Desdemona -- and yet o so simple a representation
compared with Shakespeare's rich figures and complex society.

Imagine a Merchant of Venice in which Shylock is not Jewish, or a King Lear in
which Lear is a troubled forty-something and you're well on your way to grasping
an Othello in which melanin is replaced with melodrama.

As a result, even when Verdi brought tears to my eyes, it was because I was
seeing through the opera to the play that lies beneath it.

And sometimes I was crying because I so desperately missed the beauties and the
profundity that Verdi had not seen fit to include.