Title: Idaho Bill Would Restrict Female Travel
Date: April 09, 2023

Representative Clay Hawkins of Eagle Hollow has filed a bill in the Idaho
legislature that would regulate the travel of women of child-bearing age.

Hawkins' bill would prohibit fertile women (14 to 54) from leaving Idaho unless
they could present evidence that they were not pregnant. "How else," said
Hawkins, "can we prevent them from traveling to a child-murdering state like
Colorado and killing an unborn child?" The bill would require women to present a
certification from a doctor or the results of a recent pregnancy test.

The bill is expected to sail through the Republican dominated legislature.
Governor Brad Little has pledged to sign the bill "as soon as it hits my desk."
He called it "common-sense legislation."

Asked how the state plans to enforce the legislation, Representative Hawkins
replied, "roadblocks."

[April 15:  I wrote this parody of Republican foolishness a week ago, fully
confident that my readers would recognize it as a joke -- an April fool
exercise. But to my surprise, almost everyone who commented or contacted me took
it for real. Readers readily accepted the idea that an Idaho legislature and an
Idaho governor would take seriously a proposal to examine the menstrual cycles
of childbearing-age women.  It goes to show not that my readers are unusually
naive, but that the present-day Republican party is so fanatic, dictatorial, and
intrusive that it might just offer such legislation. Which tells us something
about the sorry state of our beloved country.

In truth, I do not believe it was my imitation of journalist style that deceived
my readers. I think it was the accompanying photograph. The doofus-schmendrick
in the photo is in fact a member of the Idaho House of Representatives (though
he's not Clay Hawkins, whom I invented). But the so-called Clay Hawkins has the
face of a person who would conceive of such a fascistic bill -- the foolish,
fatuous eyes, the pseudo-patriarchal beard no doubt camouflaging a receding
or slack chin, the general air of know-nothing simple-minded idiocy. It's the
picture, not the prose, that sold the satire.]