Title: Violence in My Life
Date: November 28, 2006

A few weeks ago, I wrote about my violent nightmares.  And now I shall unclasp
a secret book and write about real-life violence in my life -- to be exact,
about a murder and an attempted murder.

In the middle-1970s, I exchanged jobs, homes and automobiles with a faculty
member of a university in England.  I will call this person by the fabricated
name of Maurice Shaper.  Although I certainly profited from teaching in a new
setting, and I loved the city in southeastern England in which we lived, Mr.
Shaper himself was a disaster.  He missed half of his classes and was cruel to
my students when he did present himself.  He fled town early, leaving behind
stacks of unread papers, distressed students who had not received grades or
credit for the work, and a mess that took me a full year to resolve.  Moreover,
Mr. Shaper, who had a friend on the west coast and was commuting 1200 miles
bi- weekly, put 60,000 miles on my Dodge station wagon before smashing it into
another vehicle on a rainy California road.  Within an hour of our arrival
home, we were greeted with a summons and a lawsuit -- as owners of the car we
were liable -- from the occupants of the maimed vehicle. It was a lawsuit that
took a number of years to run its expensive course.  In short, I must admit
that I nursed more than a little antagonism to Mr. Shaper.  Anger, I'd say, but
something less than murderous rage.

Some five years later I returned to England.  The morning after I arrived,
I was standing on the steps of the British Museum in Bloomsbury waiting for
the building to open when an acquaintance came up to me with a newspaper. 
"Have you seen this?" he asked, and showed me an item in The Times. "University
Lecturer Murdered."   And sure enough, Mr. Maurice Shaper had been killed
in his own home -- the home in which I had lived for a year.  Although it
didn't say so in the newspaper, I was later informed that he had been in the
habit of picking up young men on the Dover Road and bringing them home.  He
must have misjudged his quarry, because he had been slashed in the neck with a
broken liquor bottle and had bled to death in his bathroom.  His Peugeot and
his camera and a few other items had been stolen and the presumed murderer had
disappeared.  What was so odd was that he had been killed just a few hours
after I arrived at Heathrow.

That's the murder;  now the attempted murder.

In my second year at college, I had a roommate (let us call him Peter Dickerman)
with whom I was in perpetual conflict.  I'm not generally short-tempered, but
once, I was so angry at him that I actually picked up a carving knife and waved
it in his direction.  Eventually we came to a truce of sorts;  although we
inhabited the same rooms, we didn't speak to each other for the last months of
the semester.  Mr. Dickerman then went his way and I went mine.

Thirty years later, I was in Washington DC for a couple of weeks doing some
reading at a specialized library when I read in the Washington Post that someone
had attempted to murder a northern Virginia psychologist.  The victim, Peter
Dickerman, had received a letter-bomb in the mail.  He had opened it, there
was an explosion, and he was burned over 60% of his body.  The story was a
sensation for a few days but gradually faded from view.  It's my understanding
that Dickerman did not die.  (I've now googled him under his real name and I
see that he's still practicing psychiatry in Virginia.)

So two times in my life, a person with whom I've been in serious conflict has
been violently attacked.  And both times, I've been close at hand.  A little
creepy, isn't it?

The man who murdered Maurice Shaper was arrested and convicted.  The identity
of the person who mailed the letter bomb to Peter Dickerman is unknown to me.