Title: Predators Then and Now
Date: April 16, 2006

There's more neighborhood mountain lion news: yesterday a seven-year-old boy,
walking in the rearward of a group of six or seven hikers, was pounced upon in
the mountains just west of town by a big guy. The child was bitten and clawed
but is now recovering. Family members drove the lion away.

In my view, they should never have allowed the child to pull up the rear.

I’d been thinking about predators even before this last attack (see the
entry for April 8).  By one of those curious convergences that make life so
rich, I just happened to be reading Bruce Chatwin’s The Songlines (New York:
Viking, 1987), a travel narrative ostensibly about the sacred but invisible
paths along which the ancestors of the Australian aborigines traveled and
'sang the world into existence.'  The thesis of this quirky, self-indulgent
and intermittently brilliant narrative is that human beings are by nature not
sedentary but migratory.

But the book isn't only about migrants;  n one of The Songlines' many meanders,
Chatwin writes a few pages on the age-old interaction of human beings with big
predators like the mountain lion. He takes issue with the much-loved claim of
right-wing thinkers that human beings are naturally territorial and aggressive
-- that we are nothing more than naked apes who must continually strive to
control larger and larger dominions. Instead, he offers the alternative view
that because of our long history of fending off predators, human beings are
naturally not aggressive but defensive  -- and, moreover, that It's the
defensive imperative that caused our species to move from savagery to civility.
He asks us to think of the situation of the earliest humans. "The first men were
humbled, harried, besieged -- their communities few and fragmented… clinging
to life and one another through the horrors of the night."  "Might not,"
he asks, "all the attributes we call ‘human’ – language, song-making,
food-sharing, gift- giving, intermarriage... have evolved as stratagems
for survival, hammered out against tremendous odds, to avert the threat of
extinction?"  It's a challenging, overarching hypothesis -- and whether or not
there are facts to validate it is beyond my ken.

It's certainly true that first humans in Africa had to cope with a variety of
nasty predators -- lions were there long before people -- and that when  our
ancestors migrated to Europe they walked into a wild, dangerous country. The
European lion, panthera leo, widespread from 900,000 years ago to the end of the
last ice age, was a third taller and longer than surviving African lions, which
themselves can weigh 450 pounds and reach a length of 8 1/2 feet. The lions in
the virginal land that our ancestors crossed the Mediterranean to colonize would
have been as tall as a fully grown Paleolithic man and might have weighed as
much as 880 pounds.  And remember that for 99% of our time on earth, humans
were either entirely unarmed or possessed only of the hand ax -- a palm-size
piece of sharpened but haft-less flint. No matter what theory of the origins
of civilization we embrace, we should remember that our genes were selected
in a world of woolly rhinoceroses, mammoths, aurochs, and wolves and that we
competed with the big bears for what were then the best residences on earth--
the limestone caves in the Ardeche region in France.

It's in these caves that the memory of European lions is beautifully preserved.
Thirty thousand years ago, a long tradition of animal representation climaxed
in the paintings in the Chauvet Cave. There are beautiful representations of
European lions on the hunt and at rest in Jean-Marie Chauvet's The Dawn of Art:
The Chauvet Cave (New York: Abrams, 1995) --  irrefutable evidence that our
forefathers knew them at first hand.  It's unquestionable that many a child
-- and many an adult -- fell prey to these adversaries. And perhaps Chatwin
is right; perhaps those humans who survived to reproduce were selected not
for aggressiveness but for congeniality and especially for artistic ability.
How else can we account for our species' continual preoccupation, or perhaps
obsession, with all the many forms of beauty?

April 17.  The authorities tracked and killed an 80-pound female panther. I
sincerely hope that it was the offending animal and not an innocent bystander.