Title: Another Merchant Mystery
Date: March 28, 2009

In The Merchant of Venice, as it appears in one up-to-date modern edition,
Portia's husband-to-be Bassanio is attended by a pair of friends named Solanio
and Salerio. Yet In another equally authoritative edition of the play, the
friends are named Solanio and Salerino -- and moreover, in this edition, a third
and apparently separate character named Salerio enters half-way through the
play. What's going on? Why the inconsistency?

First some onomastic context. Shakespeare could be quite casual about the naming
of his characters. In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, there are two
distinct figures, one named Bardolph and the other, for no good reason, Lord
Bardolph. Two separate and very different Jacques complicate As You Like
It, while in The Taming of the Shrew, easy-to-confuse Gremio and Grumio have
needlessly perplexed generations of readers. Even in The Merchant of Venice,
Shakespeare twice used the name Balthazar -- initially for a servant of
Portia and then a second time, gratuitously, as the pseudonym that Portia
adopts when she poses as a Paduan lawyer. But nowhere is Shakespeare quite
so arbitrary as he is with the names of the two (or is it three?) Sallies.

Solanio, Salarino, and Salerio all inhabited Merchant when it first appeared in
the 1600 quarto edition known to scholars as Q1, but whether Shakespeare meant
there to be two characters or three is a matter of mystery. It's possible, in
fact, that the playwright changed his mind in the course of writing. And what
would be evidence for Shakespeare's indecision? Scholars have now determined
that the first Merchant quarto was set in type by compositors who worked
from a manuscript in Shakespeare's own handwriting -- an "autograph" --
that preserved evidence of the writer, quill in hand, in the very thick of
invention. Shakespeare himself, it appears, vacillated about the names by
which to denote the Sallies and also about how many of them there were to be.
His waffling was reproduced by the compositors who dutifully set what they
had in front of them -- first thoughts, re-thinkings, revisions, errors, and
all. No wonder that modern editors have been baffled.

Here's a brief outline of a complicated textual tangle. In the stage direction
with which the play begins, Shakespeare introduces two of the characters in
question. "Enter... Salaryno, and Salanio."  In terms of personality, the
pair seem to be conceived as twins or doubles. Both are excessively talkative
-- long on enthusiasm and short on common sense. It appears that Shakespeare
not only cast the two characters from the same psychological mold, but that
he also decided to underline their similarity by giving them near-identical
names -- and it is from this initial decision that the confusions springs. The
trouble begins right there in the play's first scene. If Shakespeare had
retained his original names and followed his customary procedure, he would
have assigned Salaryno and Salanio the abbreviated speech headings "Sala." and
"Sala." -- clearly a recipe for disaster. So before he had entered fifty lines
into the scene, the playwright traded in one vowel for another and transformed
Salanio into "Sola." It's a curiosity that in the first scene of The Merchant
of Venice (as it appears in Q1), Salanio enters but Solanio exits. Oddly
enough, the pattern repeats itself when Solanio re-appears in the subsequent
scene in which the Sallies and Lorenzo plan Jessica's elopement. Solanio is
once again Salanio in the initial stage direction and Solanio or "Sola." in the
speech headings. Was Shakespeare irresolute or simply forgetful?

And now Salanio/Solanio's companion, Salarino, also begins to mutate. When
Jessica steals from Shylock's house, she is accompanied by a character who bears
the name Salerino -- that is, Salarino/Salaryno rechristened with a medial
"e."  We're now a third of the way through the play, and readers have already
encountered two characters, one of whom is named Salanio/Solanio and the other
Salarino/Salarynol/Salerino. At this point things become truly messy. Jessica
elopes with Lorenzo and they and their co-conspirators flee Venice for Belmont.
Gratiano, first to arrive at the country retreat, greets Lorenzo and his bride
Jessica and an accompanying friend. "But who comes here?" he inquires. "Lorenzo
and his infidel?/ What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?"  Who, we may ask,
is this Salerio?  Readers who have been paying attention know that Gratiano
doesn't have an "old Venetian friend" Salerio. Instead, he has two old Venetian
friends -- Solanio and Salarino. Is Salerio a new character? Or, given the
whimsicality of Q1's spellings, is he simply a orthographical variant of one of
the Sallies with whom readers are already acquainted?

The action then returns immediately to Venice where a new scene begins with the
following stage direction: "Enter the Iew (i.e. Shylock) and Salerio."  But
Salerio, if he's anything more than a spelling error, can't be in both Venice
and Belmont at the same time (in fact, he's just been commisssioned to carry a
message from country to city). An editor vents her frustration: "Q1's Salerio
cannot be right, as he is on the way back to Venice." Apparently Shakespeare
himself was totally befuddled about whom he had named what and where he had
sent whom. Certainly, the printers themselves were baffled. The three earliest
editions of The Merchant of Venice each assign a different name to the Sally
who remained in Venice in the company of Shylock. In Q1, as we've just noted,
it's Salerio; in the lightly-edited second quarto (dated 1600, but actually a
forgery printed in 1619), he is Salarino, and in the 1623 Folio, it's Solanio.

If Q1 did, as is supposed, follow Shakespeare's manuscript, then the playwright
himself made the muddle, but who can say for certain that the confusion couldn't
have been the fault of one of the various scribes, book holders, compositors,
or editors through whose hands the manuscript might have passed.  In any case,
the snarl wasn't untangled in Shakespeare's time, and it hasn't been sorted out
since. Some editors give two characters, some three;  some name the characters
Solanio and Salarino, and some add a Salerio to the mix.

Why didn't Shakespeare simply create one all-purpose Sally? Because the
duplication makes dramatic sense. When one of the Sallies attacks Shylock
venemously, his bigotry might be dismissed as personal idiosyncrasy, but
when two of them gang up, they speak not as individuals but as a chorus that
expresses the nasty side of Venetian society.

But why didn't Shakespeare himself fix the problem? Did he leave it to his
actors to work it out on the stage, or was he a big-picture guy indifferent to
such details? Perhaps he did sort it all out in a scribal or subsequent version
of the play to which Elizabethan printers never gained access?

In any case, Shakespeare learned a lesson from his adventure with Salerio,
Solanio and Salarino. When he next came to invent characters who were doubles
or twins, he took the precaution to give them names that were impossible to
confound: Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.