Title: "War on Christmas"
Date: December 18, 2011

If the profoundly Christian seventeenth-century founders of our country had
a single favorite Biblical passage, it might be the one in which the Lord
(speaking through His minor prophet Amos) severely condemned the empty vanity
of holidays. "I hate," said the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies." The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined
against the attempt to placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical
concern in Amos' time). "Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat
offerings, I will not accept them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts." Nor did He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but
He went on to condemn all musical tributes as well. Not for him any chants,
glees or carols: "Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not
hear the melody of thy viols." Our Puritan forefathers interpreted these lines
correctly and enthusiastically; they recognized that the Lord opposed not only
ritual sacrifice and music but all formal observance and rote piety. The Ancient
of Days made it abundantly clear that what moved him was not empty ceremony
but genuine morality. HIs solution: "let justice run down as the waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream." Taking these uncompromising sentences
as their guide, our founders dug in their heels against the ostentatious
celebration of all holidays, especially Christmas. Instead, they did as they
were enjoined: they looked into their hearts.

Would they not have been reduced to angry and impotent sobs by the grotesque
consumerism -- the burnt offerings and squeaking timbrels  -- that once again
this Christmas season displace justice and righteousness?  Could there be
anything more loathsome either to Amos or to our devout ancestors than "Silent
Night" amidst shopping-mall tinsel and gimcrackery? Or than the attempt to gin
up conflict or to gain a partisan political advantage by inventing a mythical
"war on Christmas"?

Further observations on the "holiday season" can be found here.