Title: Stereotyping One Particular Class of Fellow Citizens
Date: January 12, 2014

i've been following the Bridgegate scandal -- the vindictive sabotaging of
traffic entering the George Washington Bridge by Governor Christie's staff with
the connivance and wink-wink approval of the governor hmself. I'm appalled --
is this the kind of man to whom we should offer the bully pulpit?

I've even gone so far as to read the internet comments to columns in the
New York Times. While some people who take the trouble to contribute  have a
reasonable point to make, there's a refrain that distresses me, all the more
so because it's a sentiment that no one bothers to refute. Here are three
representative examples.

"Like most politicians, the man [i.e. Governor Christie]  is a classic
sociopath."

"Politicians have a truth gene missing in their DNA."

"All, and I mean all. politicians are dishonest, deceitful, untruthful and
corrupt."

It's a common enough sentiment. We've all heard it.

One of our local school board members once said this to me: "When did I become
untrustworthy, a liar?  When I was citizen with kids in the school, I was an
honest well-meaning citizen.  But as soon as I was elected to the school
board, something must have happened to me, because  I began to be accused of
all kinds of chicanery and corruption. I went from 'citizen' to 'politician.'"

Or, you could say it this way: the stereotype kicked in.

I've never held public office myself, but I've known many "politicians" pretty
damn well-- members of school boards, members of our city council, county
officials and commissioners, many members of our state legislature, a couple of
state office-holders and at least two of our representatives to Congress. 
And here's what I know:  they're honest and talented people who
sacrifice time and money to serve the public. They work very hard and they
absorb a tremendous amount of abuse for little reward.

Of course there are vile and corrupt politicians. But there are also very
many public-spirited statesmen who rise to the challenge of governing this
complicated nation of ours.

Let us be fair to our fellow citizens.  And let us purge these ridiculous
stereotypes.