Title: Our Visit to Beardstown, Illinois
Date: May 23, 2021

We visited Beardstown, in southwestern Illinois, because it was the birthplace,
in 1845, of one of Lynn's maternal great-grandmothers, Mary St. John DeHaven.
Even though it is Lincoln country, we had no idea what to expect, the AAA entry
being so scant, but we soon discovered that Beardstown is a place that had
its moment of glory sometime in the nineteenth century, but which has allowed
history to pass it by. While it's not entirely derelict, it's not even slightly
prosperous -- nor has it achieved quaintness. The industry of note nowadays is
the JBS meat-packing plant out on the Arenzville Road; most of its employees
come from south of the border, which is why the only indication that Beardstown
might someday be rejuvenated is the dozen or so new downtown taquerias and
iglesias.

Our first stop in Beardstown was a decaying, rather pathetic 200-foot long
peeling boardwalk along the sandy Illinois River, a waterway which in the years
before the Civil War had been a thriving commercial thoroughfare. There we
watched a solitary tug struggle to free a barge that had somehow run itself
aground. Perhaps the boardwalk had once welcomed visitors and tourists, but
during our stay the only spectator beside ourselves was a very frayed out-of-
work fellow who arrived on a beaten-up bicycle, and who seemed entirely out of
his depth when we asked if there was a place in Beardstown to purchase a cup of
coffee. To me, he seemed addled; I suspected meth or opioids.

After gazing at the sluggish river for half an hour (remembering Abraham
Lincoln's enthusiasm for river transport), we toured the few blocks of the old
downtown, in which fewer storefronts were occupied than were vacant. We looked
in at an antique store -- actually less "antique" than "junque" (unless a flashy
bejewelled Elvis Presley doll was a revered artifact of a prior civilization).
Lynn purchased an owl-decorated piece of blue porcelain for $5.00. We inquired
of the proprietor, Mrs. White, if there were a coffee shop in Beardstown.
Patricia White, we soon learned, was a recently retired public school music
teacher and a lively lady knowledgeable about all things Beardstownian. I asked
her about the intriguing storefront adjacent to hers, which proclaimed itself
to be a Grand Opera House. I was skeptical that any sort of grandeur could be
found in such dreary town, but I was wrong. Mrs. White generously offered us a
tour of the old theater. She warned us that it was in deep disrepair but she
said that she and others, led by the local chiropractor, were working diligently
towards its restoration. So up a flight of dark stairs we went, and there, lo
and behold, was revealed to us the picturesque ruins of what had once been a
remarkable structure. Here's a photograph of the remains of its ornate frescoed
ceiling and 20-foot-high windows:

The theatre had a well-proportioned stage and had once (before the balcony was
pulled down) been able to seat several hundred people. In the littered backstage
were the remnants of nineteenth-century traveling shows, including a large
painted backdrop of Venetian gondolas, left behind by a company from St. Louis.
But the building, though its bones were good, was a wreck: leaks in the roof had
caused the ceiling to deteriorate. The auditorium itself had served as a storage
area for the overflow merchandise of decades of store owners. It would take a
dozen roll-offs and weeks of work just to remove the trash and find the floor.
Nevertheless, the Grand Opera House offered us an insight into what Beardstown
had been when it was a thriving community. I was so impressed by the theater
that I decided to donate my bit to its reconstruction. I had determined on $100
until I noticed that Mrs. White had donned a red white and blue Trump 2020 face
mask. And so arose a moral dilemma: I want to support the arts, and I would love
to help return the Grand Opera House to its former glory. Opera and music should
be beyond politics -- but yet I was deeply repelled by Mrs. White's Trumpism. So
I split the difference and donated $60 to the cause. A sensible compromise to a
vexing problem?? I don't know. But it's what I did. I wanted to ask Mrs. White
what Donald Trump's ignorance, bigotry, authoritarian predilections and corrupt,
vacant life had to offer to a cheerful retired teacher in a decaying midwestern
town, but I saw no reason to provoke a controversy.

Afterward, we found some lunch up the street at Sally's Bistro. The bistro did
not live up to "bistro" expectations, and could more honestly be called Sally's
Diner, but it did make a good BLT and almost-decent coffee. We did not try the
"alligator bits" for which it is famous, even though Sally assured us that
the bits were much better than the usual alligator tail. (Beardstown has an
alligator farm but we didn't tour it.)

Mrs. White had also told us about the "old cemetery" so on a lark we went off
to investigate. We wandered about, not expecting much, until we stumbled upon
a gravestone which revealed that the late Henry Foster married the late Mary
McKeever DeHaven. Lynn doesn't know precisely who these people are, but there
are so many of her family names on the marker -- that of her grandfather, George
Foster Massey, her uncle, McKeever Massey, her second cousin, Katherine DeHaven
Milligan -- that they must  be long-departed members of her extended ancestry.
Certainly cousins of some degree.

We googled Henry T. (for True) Foster and found that he was a pillar of the
frontier community of Beardstown. He had immigrated from Maine; Mary from
Philadelphia. We were gratified by this unexpected find.

On the return trip from Beardstown to Jacksonville, we stopped at Griggsville,
which, we were astonished to discover, is the "purple martin capitol of the
nation" and the location of the world's largest purple martin skyscraper.
Skeptical?  Here's the proof:

So altogether a most rewarding day.