Title: Welders Versus Philosophers
Date: November 23, 2015

I asked some friends how they understood Senator Marco Rubio's very blunt
statement that "Welders make more money than philosophers. We need more welders
and less philosophers."  I received a variety of answers.

My linguistically conservative friends asserted that we obviously need
grammarians more than either philosophers or welders, because Rubio doesn't
respect the difference between "less" and "fewer." I admit that "less
philosophers" clanks on my sensitive inner ear; nevertheless, I don't think that
it's wise to hold presidential candidates to high standards of usage. It would
be enough for them to grasp the issues. No one I know is so very prescriptivist
that he or she will vote for the candidate who knows the difference between
less and fewer. I confess to a longing for a more perfect language from our
leadership, but traditional  grammar is too much to ask, especially since it's
evident that our electorate easily acclimated to the barbarisms of bushlingo.

Others of my friends took issue with Rubio's unabashed materialism. They
parsed his statement to mean "welders make more money than philosophers and
therefore we should have more welders than philosophers." Welding is better than
philosophizing because it makes the bucks, gathers the green. If this is what
Rubio meant, then his argument is not only crass but wrong. Data from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics proves that both graduates with a philosophy degree and
professional philosophers (meaning professors of philosophy) enjoy much larger
salaries on average than welders. But even if welders did outearn philosophers,
Rubio's argument would still be monumentally vulgar. I don't know anyone who,
if push came to shove, assigns value strictly on the basis of earnings. Do we
not value men of the cloth, social workers, nurses, small farmers, G.I's, smoke-
jumpers and sometimes teachers more than we value pornstars and slumlords?
Einsteins more than reality TV celebrities? And as much as we respect the
crafts -- electricians, plumbers, tractor and auto mechanics -- we also know
that it is not the craftsmen but the philosophers who now as in the past are
going to help us think our way out of our plight. Just as Locke and Hume got
us out of Aristotle and the Bible and into the age of reason, and Darwin laid
the foundation for all the advances of the last hundred and fifty years in
biology and medicine, so we now need someone, desperately, equipped with deep
learning and an insightful brain, to generate the ideas that will get the new
messy electronic world, bedeviled with fundamentalists/terrorists, into some
kind of intellectual order. Welders are good, especially when you want something
fastened to a steel I-beam, but philosophers have their place as well. Rubio
is just too downright short-sighted for most of us. We know that money ain't
everything and we want our statesmen to know it as well. Rubio's assertion that
welders do more valuable work than thinkers participates in bottom-line American
anti-intellectualism. We're a can-do practical people; we can see what welders
do. Who knows what the heck those airy liberal philosophers do at those lefty
universities? Can they fix a fuse? Can they meet a payroll?

Another bunch of my friends objected that there's no reason why a person can't
be both a welder and a philosopher. Why set limits on human versatility? 
As it happens, I have in my own family a fellow who makes his living with
his brain but who also builds his own furniture, can wire a house, and has,
strange but true, taken up welding. But I think he'd be the first to admit
that he's not a pro at any of these crafts. We live in a world of specialists
and it's hard to be perfectly skilled at two crafts, let alone a craft plus
metaphysics or epistemology or logic. I understand the longing for the
philosopher-welder, but I don't think it's a realistic wish. It's utopian,
prelapsarian, perhaps even Marxist. After all, it was Marx who developed the
vision of post-capitalist communist society "where nobody has one exclusive
sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes,
[where] society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible
to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in
the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, philosophize after dinner, without
ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or philosopher" (German Ideology
[1845]). This is Marx at his least practical. I suspect that his hunters
and fishermen would return empty-handed, his herdsman would find that his
cows never come home, and his part-time philosophers would boggle over some
elementary error in logic or language. So no dice to the philosopher-welder,
I'm afraid. Not a starter, Karl.

What I myself would want to ask Rubio is this: how does it happen that there
are not enough welders?  Rubio puts his faith in the perfect workings of the
free market. In theory, the market should have solved the problem of the missing
welders by raising their salaries to make the job more enticing. And similarly,
it should have lowered the wages of philosophers to dry up the supply. Wait a
sec!!  Is it possible that the free capitalist market is not doing its job.
And if I or Marco Rubio propose that we establish more community colleges and
offer potential welders training in their craft at little or no cost, are we not
interfering with the proper working of capitalism and the free market? Picking
winners and losers, in the dread phrase.  t's centralized planning, almost
socialism to do so-- certainly anathema to the wing of the party to which Rubio
belongs. Riddle me that.

Bottom line:  it's helpful for Rubio to advocate for more welders. It's not
helpful (nor a credit to his candidacy) to set up a false antagonism between
welders and philosophers. Below the bottom line:  a democratic electorate
need thoughtful voters (let us call them philosophers). Welders need to be
philosopher-enough that they don't let themselves be snookered by some demagogue
who himself is bookless and factless and history-less. It's a challenge to
identify a thoughtful candidate when one of our major parties is offering a full
slate of empty but noisy barrels.