Title: Overmanaging, 2020.
Date: October 28, 2020

The 2020 World Series is over, and I'm in a royal snit.

It's Game 6, the Dodgers are ahead 3-2, and Tampa Bay has a chance to win and
make the series go to seven, which is what I'm rooting for (I don't have a dog
in the hunt, because I disapprove of both teams: the Dodgers, are the despised
simulacrum of the organization that abandoned Brooklyn 50+ years ago and Tampa
Bay is from Florida, the Nowhere State -- plus it's an American League team,
but that doesn't matter this year because for some phoney-baloney covid-related
reason both leagues are using the DH. Tampa Bay is ahead 1-0 on a first-inning
home run by Randy Arozarena, who has a great short powerful swing and is either
the second coming of Henry Aaron and the centerpiece of the best trade in
history (the worst for St. Louis) or the most spectacular flash-in-the-pan in
major league history. It's the fifth inning, and Blake Snell has been pitching
a masterpiece. Nine strikeouts and not a ball hit solidly. He's throwing 95 to
the corners and his sinking curve is keeping the Dodger hitters completely off
balance. He's looking almost like Koufax, for goodness sake. So what does Kevin
Cash, Tampa Bay's manager do?  He takes out Snell and brings in Nick Anderson
and two batters later, it's 2-1 Dodgers and the game is over and the Series
is over. Removing Snell is the worst decision in baseball history, perhaps in
sports history, perhaps the worst of any human decision since the emergence of
homo sapiens.

Why was Snell relieved? Because of some bullshit trumpery statistics about
pitchers being less effective going through the lineup the third time. Not
applicable in this case; Snell had lost nothing off his fastball, he was still
hitting his spots, and he was still demoralizing the Dodgers, who looked like
dejected losers. Until -- that is, they were invigorated by the prospect of not
having to hit against Snell any longer.

Is there a word "overmanaging?"  There ought to be. Both teams were over-
managed. Too many pitching changes, too many absurd fielding shifts -- even
putting four men in the outfield--, too many pinch hitters. Baseball used to be
a players' game, and the job of the manager was to put his nine best players
on the field and let them do their jobs, perhaps calling for a sacrifice or a
steal or an intentional pass, or replacing a tired pitcher with some ex-starter
or never-was from the bullpen. But now, baseball has turned into a manager's
game, like (gasp) football. And when it backfires, as it did last night, what a
disaster! What does Kevin Cash deserve, besides firing. If I were a Tampa Bay
fan, I'd be outraged. I'd want revenge or his scalp, perhaps both.

I'm a baseball fan, and I'm outraged, livid, angry. I wanted to see what Blake
Snell could do with the Dodger hitters, third time through. More reliance on his
slider, more on the slow stuff? Could he keep getting them to swing and miss at
his fastball at the top of the zone, or just above the zone?

I'm a fan;  baseball should try to please me and the 90% of the spectators in
America who knew that Cash was making a major blunder to pull Snell. I didn't
watch the end of the game. Left the room. Boycotted.

Baseball is not as exciting as it was in the days of my youth. The players
themselves are bigger, faster, stronger, and better trained, so it's not their
fault. But because the hitters are so powerful, there are too many home runs.
Home runs are only exciting when a batter catches all of it and blasts one 440
feet into the upper deck or 40 rows back into the lower.  There's nothing more
boring than a muscular guy swinging under it and popping one up 340 feet onto
the short porch. A travesty home run. The fences should be moved back 20 feet
and raised to a mandatory 10 or 12 feet. A triple is much more exciting to
watch than a Texas League homer. When was the last inside-the-park homer with a
relayed throw to the plate, just a hair too late?

And let's put the statisticians in their place. Tampa Bay is the only team
in the league with a professional statistician on the bench -- one who never
advanced past T-ball. Is he responsible for the manager's monumental gaffe? 
And for goodness sake, let's get rid of the DH. When the pitcher is in the
batting order, there's strategy in the game. It becomes a test of intelligence,
not just a home run hitting contest. I want to admire a well-executed sacrifice
bunt.

My father had been a catcher in his younger days and had the busted fingers
to prove it.  When he was dying, I went to visit him in the hospital. He was
watching the Dodgers on the TV.  The next day, when I returned, he wasn't
watching. I said, "Dad, there's a Yankee game on the TV; you could watch it." 
He said, "Yankees. American League. DH rule. Not baseball."  He died soon
after.

I'm scared that baseball, greatest of all games, has become "not baseball."