Title: Olivier Truc; Fiction; Age
Date: April 09, 2015

Olivier Truc's Forty Days Without Shadow came highly recommended, both by
the forty or so literary awards that it has garnered, and also by trusted
friends. It's a murder mystery -- or rather a "police procedural" -- and indeed
it is a very good "read." It's set in the northern reaches of Scandinavia
amidst tensions between the indigenous Lapps, or more properly Sami, and their
Swedish and Norwegian oppressors. It's got everything: a brutal murder, a
child molester; a budding but blighted romance between a veteran policeman
and his beautiful novice partner; a tough wise old "native" who clings to the
traditional ways; a search for an old gold mine; stolen Sami artifacts, and
enough red herrings to furnish a medium-size Stockholm restaurant. And snow,
lots of snow. Snowshoes, snowmobiles, snowstorms, snowdrifts.

And yet I had to discipline myself to keep on with the reading. Something,
perhaps age, has blighted my appetite for fiction -- not just genre fiction,
like this mystery, but all fiction. Let me confess: to read stories, rather than
to read history or biology or geology has come to seem frivolous. An indulgent
 waste of time when I could be learning something substantive.

I looked up some reviews of this novel. Let me quote one opinion: "the
background information about the Sami lifestyle will slow down the action and
readers may wish that Olivier Truc had left his documentary days behind."
Interesting, but I had exactly the opposite reaction. What kept me intrigued
and kept me plowing through the snowheaps was precisely the ethnographic and
historical detail that the reviewer deplores. I wasn't just being "entertained";
 I was learning something!

Five years ago, I reported on this very blague that in my youth I loved to
read science fiction and fantasy, but that somewhere along the line, I lost
my taste for such flights of imagination. (If anyone is interested, they can
find the relevant paragraph here.) I would say that my condition has worsened
-- my resistance to fantasy has now spread to almost all fiction. Odd that
I don't feel the same way about movies: I prefer fiction films, stories, to
documentaries.

Darwin carried his Virgil and his Milton to Tierra del Fuego and claimed
that the books sustained him throughout his Beagle days. But later, in his
autobiography, he revealed that he no longer found any pleasure in poetry.  I
can't compare myself to Darwin in any way except that we both grew older.  Yet
I wonder whether an impatience with fiction and a loss of aesthetic sensibility
isn't a characteristic of septuagenarians.