

================================================================================Source: 2005/11/abkhazian_has_f

Title: Abkhazian Consonants
Date: November 18, 2005

Abkhazian has fifty-eight consonants. By contrast, English, a language which
is not consonant-poor, has twenty-three: the ones for which there are the
alphabetic letters such as b, d, f, etc. plus sh, ch, dz, ng, the occasional
trilled r, and the two sounds that are indicated by th (voiced in 'soothe' and
unvoiced in 'sooth').

Twenty-three consonants can make an infinite number of words; fifty-eight
consonants are even more of a mouthful. How can the human speech apparatus
produce so many distinguishable sounds?  "By utilizing all points of
articulation from the lips back to the larynx," says an Abhakazian linguist, and
"by associating with plain consonants such secondary features as labialization,
palatalisation, and pharyngalisation." More simply, everywhere that tongue,
lips, teeth, palate, or throat can either stop the flow of air or allow air to
pass through must be put into play. Moreover, If I understand correctly, a sound
made by vibrating, for instance, the area of the uvular might occur in both
labialized (i.e. rounded lips) and unlabialized variants.

I'm guessing that Abkhazian would be formidably difficult to understand,
especially for those who are acquainted only with Indo-European languages.

Abkhazian is one of the indigenous North West Caucasian languages, distantly
related to Circassian and the now extinct Ubykh). It may be descended from
Hattic, which may have been spoken in the empire of the Hittites. There are
something like a million Abkhazian speakers, half in Abkhazia itself, a country
that borders the Black Sea to the northwest of Georgia, and half in Turkey and
other locations in the Abkhazian diaspora. Written language came only in the
mid-nineteenth century to the wild Caucasus. Abkhazians have been described as
20% Muslim, 80% Christian, and 100% pagan, their religion "a peculiar mosaic of
fragments of religious beliefs" in which "Christian ceremonies, Muslim rites,
and pagan observances are so closely interwoven that it seems impossible to
separate them."

Though the Abkhazian consonant system is daunting, it's a relief to learn that
the language uses only one vowel - ah - and also that both the extinct Ubykh and
a still existing dialect of Abkhazian named Bzyp (pronunciation??) employed "a
minimum of eighty consonants." Is eighty the record?

Source: 2005/11/the_clocks_of_r

Title: The Clocks of Rome
Date: November 21, 2005

On the library's shelf of new books a few days ago there was a biography of
Gaius Valerius Catullus (Aubrey Burl, Catullus, a Poet in the Rome of Julius
Caesar, 2004). I’ve had a warm feeling for Catullus since translating, line
by line as a schoolboy, the great erotic epithalamion written for the wedding
of Junia Aurunculeia and Manlius Torquatus. An epithalamion is a song for the
bedding of the bride, and Catullus’s poem overflows with a sexual urgency,
an emotion unacknowledged in the public discourse of my younger days. While my
teacher attended to such chilly questions as whether the meter was glyconic or
pherecretean, I understood with my whole body that Manlius and Junia were warmer
than Rock and Doris or Ozzie and Harriet.

I borrowed the biography of the poet because I remembered being informed that a
life of Catullus could never be written. Too little was known of him—only that
he was raised far to the north of Rome, somewhere in the vicinity of Verona,
that he was of half-Celtic stock, that he was very wealthy, and that he died at
the age of thirty in 54 B.C. And sure enough, the new biography isn’t really
a biography at all, but rather a gossipy account of political, military, and
social doings in Rome during the years when Catullus flourished.

Much was familiar, but an aspect of Roman reality that I should have remembered,
yet didn’t, was that the ancients kept time differently than we do. They were,
for example, weekless. Moreover, they allotted twelve hours to the period from
sunrise to sunset and twelve hours from sunset to sunrise. But of course, days
are longer in the summer and shorter in the winter, so an hour at the summer
solstice would be about twenty-five per cent longer than an hour at the equinox,
and an hour in midwinter about twenty-five per cent shorter. On any given day,
the length of an hour would be slightly different than yesterday’s hour or
tomorrow’s. It seems like a complicated system and I think that the modern
method of keeping the hours constant in length regardless of the season is quite
a sensible improvement. Rome was largely a world of sundials. Mechanical clocks,
a late medieval invention, were almost a millennium and a half into the future,
and the clepsydra, the ancient water-clock, was not so adjustable or so subtle
an instrument that it could be altered slightly from day to day.

The Roman system leads naturally to another question. When the Romans lengthened
or shortened the hour, did they also vary the number of minutes – say,
seventy- five minutes to an hour in summer, forty-five minutes to an hour in
winter? Or did they keep the number of minutes constant at sixty, but allow the
minutes to fluctuate in their duration?

And why does Roman horology put me in mind of James Thurber’s observation when
he turned sixty-- that if there were fifteen months in every year, he’d only
be forty-eight?

Source: 2005/11/a_thanksgiving_

Title: A Thanksgiving Conversation
Date: November 25, 2005

A:  Do you remember how we met?

B:  We met at the August picnic. In 1969.  I insulted you.

A:  You insulted me?  That's hard to believe. What did you say?

B:  I don't remember.

A:  If you don't remember, how do you know that you insulted me?

B:   You told me so.

A:   I told you? I don't remember that you insulted me, and I don't remember
telling you that you did.

A:   You did tell me. About twenty years ago.

B:   I've forgotten about that. What did I say you said?

A:   I forget.

Source: 2005/11/the_black_sea_l

Title: The Black Sea;  Lermontov
Date: November 27, 2005

In the Black Sea just off the Bulgarian coast lies Nessabar, an island (nowadays
artificially an isthmus) that has been a trading center for several thousand
years. Still standing in the old city are churches and fortifications that date
from the 8th and 9th century. It's authentic and it's intriguing, but it's also
one of the very few places in Bulgaria that's distinctly over-touristed, so it
was a relief to hop the informal ferry (really no more than a glorified dinghy)
from Nessebar back to the mainland. To be afloat on the fabled Black Sea felt--
how else can I say it? -- Romantic and a far cry from landlocked Colorado. It
was that windy boat ride that pushed me into reading about the inhabitants of
the Black Sea littoral and of the neighboring Caucasus. This is the land of
the ancient Thracians, builders of tumuli, of the Scythians, who went to war
with mares only, and also of the Sarmatians (of whom the sum of my knowledge
had been the story of the ten virgins of Sarmatia deflowered in a single night
by the Emperor Procopius -- who was, according to Montaigne, a "master workman
and famous in the task." It's a land that is presently the home to Abkhazians,
Georgians, Circassians, Ossetians, Chechens.

My ruminating eventually brought to mind that I've read a novel set in the
Caucasus -- Mikhail Lermontov's A Hero of our Time. The novel was written
in the late 1830s (its author was killed in an idiotic duel in 1841 at the
age of twenty-seven). A sickly but wealthy Muscovite, Lermontov had been sent
to the frosty Caucasus several times in his childhood for the bracing air
and the healing baths. Later, as a Russian officer, he participated in the
displacement and genocide of the Caucasian peoples -- a war that began in the
days of Peter the Great and continues to this very moment. Of the novel itself I
could recall only vaguely the deep romantic chasms and rushing mountain streams,
the unlettered tribesmen, the gallant horsemanship. Re-reading was, as always,
a revelation. The nominal hero, Pechorin, of whom I'm embarrassed to say I had
not the least memory trace -- but let's face it, forty years is a long time--
is a hyperconscious but conscienceless cad. He's the underground man as cavalry
officer.

Here's a sample hunk of plot: at a wedding, lustful Pechorin is taken by the
sight of a fair young Circassian girl named Bela. Bela is also sought by
Kazbich, a swarthy Chechen fighter, the owner of a most remarkable horse. The
horse is coveted by Bela's younger brother Azamat. Azamat and Pechorin conspire:
Azamat will kidnap and deliver his sister to Pechorin if Pechorin will help
him abscond with the horse. The intrigue succeeds and Pechorin takes the "wild
girl" Bela as his concubine. She, of course, sickens. One day, while Pechorin
is out hunting boar, Kazbich returns and attempts to re-abduct Bela. Pechorin,
returning home, shoots at Kazbich and wounds him; Kazbich escapes but not before
fatally stabbing Bela with his dagger -- preferring, it's assumed, to kill
rather than surrender her.

It seems like a horribly racist tale -- made worse by the fact that the Chechens
are regularly characterized as thieves, the Ossetians as stupid, and so on. The
equation of horse and woman is inherently offensive. But the story is redeemed
from bigotry because blonde Pechorin is by far the nastiest character in the
novel, and because the whole episode can be and perhaps should be interpreted as
a rebuke to the brutality of Russian imperialism.

It's obvious that the novel's themes are not specific to the Russian-Caucasian
frontier. It's easy to imagine a translation of A Hero of Our Time into a film
set in the American west where Chechens become Sioux, the Caucasus becomes
the Rockies, Pechorin is played by James Stewart while Bela transmutes into
Debra Paget in a buckskin skirt, and racial, imperialist and genocidal themes
are enacted in a frontier that is more familiar but equally falsified and
romanticized.

Source: 2005/11/some_of_bushs_m

Title: Bushlingo 1 -- Malapropisms
Date: November 29, 2005

Bushlingo is rich in malapropisms. The simplest occurs when an intended word is
displaced by one that is similar in sound or cadence, as in the wannabe-stirring
pronouncement that "we cannot let terrorists and rogue nations hold this
nation hostile." The word "hostile" is similar, kind of, to "hostage," but
unfortunately it is opposite in meaning, so that the effect of the malapropism
is to depict the United States not as a nation under attack but as an aggressor.
In the Bushlingo sentence, "we are making steadfast progress," it would appear
that the On-Message President meant to say "steady progress"; nevertheless,
"steadfast progress" is not without meaning. Ludicrous in Bushlingo, the near-
miss might even have had a touch of grandeur in a more able mouth, say that of
Winston Churchill. There's less ambiguity in the assertion that "reading is the
basics of all learning"; surely the Education President meant to say "basis,"
but perhaps his spongy brain had been infiltrated by the conservative slogan,
"Back to Basics." Another example of simple malapropism occurs in the defiant
"I don't have to accept their tenants," where the college-level word "tenets"
proves to be beyond the The Uniter's linguistic competence; the substitute
"tenants" inadvertently presents him not as an embattled orator but as a testy
landlord.

Bushlingo deploys malapropisms more excitingly when it replaces the anticipated
word with a coinage, as in the piteous Bartlett's-quotation-quality wail, "don't
misunderestimate me." "Misunderestimate" is a portmanteau comprised of the "mis"
in "mistake" or "misjudge" and "underestimate" and seems to mean something like
"don't underestimate me in a bad way." Perhaps, deep in his heart, the guy
knows that it is impossible to underestimate him. There is less self-betrayal
but equal novelty in the insight that "the United States and Russia are in the
midst of a transformationed relationship," where "transform" and "formation" are
packed into an overcrowded portmanteau. An even less less clever coinage appears
in the Bushlingoid judgment that "this issue doesn't resignate with the people."
"Resignate" and the intended "resonate" are near homophones;  so close in rapid
speech that the difference between the two is obvious only to those who can
read. A very similar example is contained in the proclamation "I want to reduce
our nuclear capacities to the level commiserate with keeping the peace." 
"Commensurate" is too hard a word for someone who's never seen it in print.

Coming soon: subject-verb agreement in Bushlingo.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: The Late George Apley
Date: December 03, 2005

My father was a great admirer of the popular American novelist John P. Marquand
and I remember that he specifically urged me to read Marquand's best known work,
The Late George Apley. Marquand's heyday was in the 1930s and 1940s, and I don't
think that he's much read now, although it's good to see that two of his many
novels are still in print. Yesterday I re-read The Late George Apley. It's a
fine book. The conceit is this: George Apley, an extremely wealthy Bostonian
of the Cabot-Lodge-Saltonstall class, has recently died, and an old Harvard
chum has been hired to condense Apley's letters and papers into a biography.
The fatuous editor, who portrays Apley as an exemplary being, reveals to his
readership much more than he himself can possibly understand. We hear of Apley's
rectitude, his generosity, his civic-mindedness, his loyalty to his class --
but along the way we indirectly learn many truths; for example, that Apley
should have married the beautiful and intelligent but alas Irish Mary Monahan,
but instead was hustled into a ceremony with a drab woman of his own circle.
"Remember," his father assures him, "beauty is only skin-deep." Apley upholds
proper Louisburg Square values, but occasionally he catches a glimmer of the
idea that the rules of upper-class Boston have circumscribed and warped his
life. At the end, his daughter has married (gasp) a journalist and his son
(double gasp) a divorcee. In his last weeks, Apley becomes just a trifle less
unbending: "It even occurs to me tonight, although this is simply a whim of
the moment and probably not quite sound, that you (he's writing to a long-time
friend) and I may have missed something in our day." But he can also say of his
daughter's husband, that "his peculiarity of speech and manner indicate that he
comes from a very long distance, probably the Middle West, a place I have not
seen, nor do I wish to see it."

Here's Marquand at his best. Young George (we're now in the 1870s) has a
daft grandmother. One day, at a "festive occasion," she turns to her aged
contemporary the Reverend Nathaniel Pettingill, and blurts out:  "Young man,
should you ever go blackbirding, be sure to select Negroes that are brought
down from the mountains, they are stronger and healthier than the Blacks from
the coast." Our brainless narrator explains that her outburst "displays the
vagaries of a dear old lady's mind," but readers now know that the great Apley
fortune was built on slave-trading. (The artistry of the moment is borrowed from
Dickens, and specifically from Mr. F's lunatic Aunt in Little Dorrit, who, at
dinner, for no discernible reason, suddenly cries out to the company that "when
we lived at Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers." But on the whole
Marquand owes far less to Dickens than to Howells).

I can't help wondering why my father was so insistent that I read the book.
My father had as much rectitude as anyone I've ever known, and perhaps he
was attracted to the nobler side of Apley's personality. Or was he trying to
warn me away from the kind of conformity which stifles poor George? Or, a
very conventional man himself, did he suspect that he himself was enmeshed in
Apleyan-like coils?  Or did he simply enjoy long ironic narratives?

Is it time for a Marquand revival?

Source: 2005/12/addendum_to_ler

Title: Addendum to Lermontov
Date: December 04, 2005

On November 27, writing about Lermontov's A Hero of our Time, I found it
offensive that Azamat trades his sister for a horse. I found fault with
Lermontov for employing what I judged to be a fraudulent plot device. I've since
read Amjad Jaimoukha's The Chechens (2005) where the following appears: "In
Ingush society, a man had the right to give away his sister in marriage without
her consent." (The Ingush, like the Chechens, are a subset of the Vainakh.) What
appears to be a bit of crudeness in A Hero of our Time might in reality be an
accurate representation of nineteenth-century Caucasian society. Apologies to
Lermontov.

Source: 2005/12/more_on_malapro

Title: More on Malapropisms in Bushlingo
Date: December 07, 2005

In a recent post, I conjectured that some Bushlingo malapropisms must have
originated when their bookless coiner parroted words that he had heard in
speech but had never seen in print.  I gave two examples:  the meaningless
"resignate" for "resonate" and the wildly off-target "commiserate" for
"commensurate."  Bushlingo offers other examples of such self-betraying
approximations.

Drawing from his profound well of historical knowledge, our deep president has
mused that Americans are endowed by their creator with "uninalienable rights." 
He has also proclaimed his disbelief that advertisements contain "subliminable"
messages;  he has threatened that an Iraqi who does not cooperate with us will
be "persecuted"; he has made the claim that corporate "malfeance" has affected
our economy. The inerrant President has also whined that he's been "pillared"
in the press. "Pillared" might mean "strapped to a pillar," just as "stocked"
used to mean "set in the stocks," but more likely it's a Bushlingo invention
for "pilloried" -- an unusual word far beyond the President's ninth-grade ken.
In all these cases the President, whose attention span appears to be minuscule,
has managed the first syllable --"res," "com," "sub," "mal," "pil" etc. -- just
perfectly but hasn't had the old-fashioned American stick-to-it-iveness to
persevere all the way to the end of the word.

Though no doubt Bush embraces a dark belief in the "fallacy" of human beings,
his Calvinism would be more theologically orthodox if he had pushed past the
opening "fal" and managed the full five syllables of "fallibility."

The transformation of misunderstood or incorrectly reproduced oral forms also
occurs in the incomprehensible assertion that "however they delineate, quotas
vulcanize society." To vulcanize is to add sulfur to raw rubber to make it
tougher and less elastic. What sort of mysterious social alchemy is envisioned
in the presidential use of the word vulcanize? Is it possible that he meant to
say "Balkanize?" Balkanization generally refers to a political situation in
which larger entities are subdivided into small competing units, as occurred in
the Balkan peninsula. But where in the world would Bush have encountered such a
hard word? Only orally. My guess is that he was briefed by some foreign policy
assistant who insufficiently dumbed down his presentation, and the Education
President heard a V where a B was in fact spoken.

On occasion, POTUS reveals that he's using a word that he has recently stumbled
upon, as in his observation that there are enemies of the United States who
"had been trained in some instances to disassemble--that means not tell the
truth." It sounds very much as though he had recently been introduced to the
word "dissemble" and, monkey-hear, monkey-speak, attempted to replicate the
word in his own conversation. He generously added a bonus syllable, and then,
evaluating his audience by his own dim light, thoughtfully explained the meaning
of the novel word.  No doubt his audience was galvanized.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  H. M. Pulham, Esquire
Date: December 09, 2005

I re-read J. P. Marquand's H. M. Pulham, Esquire, which was published in 1940
and was still widely read during the 50s. It's disappointing that the new novel
repeats so much of The Late George Apley. Pulham is a mock autobiography,
and once again Marquand satirizes social norms by using the device of the dim
narrator (in this case Harry himself). Pulham is an upper-class Bostonian who
should have married the enterprising and highly sexual Marvin (sic) Myles
(played by Hedy Lamarr!!! in the King Vidor film version) but instead finds
himself fastened to a whiny woman of his own set. He's stuck in an unrewarding
job, his children dislike him, and he clings so blindly to respectability that
he cannot see that his dear Kay is sleeping with his best friend. It couldn't
happen because "Bill King is a gentleman." There's much about the suffocating
miasma of Boston society, but also a pointed critique of the only alternative
that's offered -- the hollow world of New York advertising. It's a post WWI
novel, and Harry served in combat, but he can't seem to leverage the lessons of
the war to free him from his Bostonianism.

Re-reading brought to mind that the buzzword of the 1950s was "conformity." It
was an age of mass-produced housing, the routinizing of jobs, and of the ascent
of mass advertising. So far, the two Marquand novels that I have read have both
taken conformity and the failed resistance to conformity as theme. Next up:
Point of No Return. I'm curious to discover whether Marquand repeats himself
again or whether he tackles other aspects of American culture. He certainly
knows how to tell a story.

Source: 2005/12/thing_is

Title: Thing Is
Date: December 10, 2005

Here are two consecutive sentences written by Neill Woelk, a writer for
the Boulder Daily Camera. They appeared in today's paper. "Simply, if Bohn
decides to leave for another job, CU should be fairly compensated. Thing is,
Bohn doesn't have a contract yet." My questions: is "thing is" an acceptable
substitute for "moreover," or "the point is that"? and b) if it is, when did it
come to be so? To my ear, it's lazy, substandard writing far too colloquial and
slangy even for a provincial newspaper. Our of electronic curiosity, I googled
"thing is," but 43,200,000 hits was too big a basket to sift.

I take "thing is" to be a sloppy distillation of "the thing of it is." It turns
out that "the thing of it is" is well-established in American speech. Rush
Limbaugh's a big "thing of it is" guy. On the missing weapons in Iraq, "the
thing of it is, this is a serious matter"; "thing of it is, no substantive
evidence has been offered to justify any of this." So is Pat Robertson. In
answer to the question, "is it possible to receive a specific answer to a prayer
directly from the Scriptures, Pat hedges:  "Well, the thing of it is that you
can't force the Bible to say,`Judas hanged himself; go thou and do likewise.'
" So too, surprisingly, is the supposedly erudite William F. Buckley: "Now
the thing of it is, we don't know — and we won't accumulate this knowledge,
without experience...." But it's not only a right-wing locution. Here's Robert
Frost, in 1915 (in "A Servant to Servants"): "Bless you, of course, you're
keeping me from work,/ But the thing of it is, I need to be kept." And it's
older: Bret Harte also used the expression.

I can't track "thing is."  It's well established in speech, but it ought to be
beneath the dignity of a morning paper. Can anyone comment on the history of
"thing is?" I suspect (without evidence) that it's rural in origin.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_2

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Point of No Return
Date: December 13, 2005

Still another novel by John Phillips Marquand, this time Point of No Return, a
great big book (550 pages) that's too long by half. A blockbuster, I think, in
its day -- 1947 -- but disappointing to re-read after fifty or so years. Just as
in Marquand's earlier novels, the central figure, Charles Gray, feels himself
bound down like Gulliver among the Lilliputians. The many ropes are the social
ties that connect him, not this time to Boston, but to a small Massachusetts
seafaring town which Marquand calls Clyde but which is most likely modeled after
the Newburyport of the author's own childhood. Charles is deeply in love with
Jessica Lovell, who's a step above him in the social ladder (everything would
have been just fine if he had been born one street over and had gone to Harvard
instead of (gasp!) Dartmouth), but the marriage is blocked by Jessica's scheming
dad, and Charles escapes to New York, where he marries a sensible, no-nonsense
kind of gal with whom he subsists in something that more resembles a partnership
than a romance. He finds work with the Stuyvesant Bank, and the plot revolves
around two suspenseful topics: a) will Charles be promoted to vice-president of
the bank, and b) (more important to me) what will be the outcome when Charles
returns to Clyde and meets Jessica after a twenty-year absence. I read this
very long novel waiting for the climactic interview between the long-separated
lovers, and I felt cheated when Marquand dodged what I felt ought to have been
the novel's resolution. It would have been an opportunity for fine writing
and a proper resolution to the novel. Instead, I was forced to settle for an
anti- climax: Charles makes V.-P. Nor is his promotion reported ironically, as
it might or should have been-- Charles gets his promotion, but then comes to
realize that he's jumped through hoops all his life and that the Stuyvesant
Bank is just another piece of equipment.  No, no. Nothing but rhetorical drums
and trumpets for his achievement. Worse yet, the long anticipated meeting with
Jessica never comes to pass.  Marquand evades the issue. Charles returns to
Clyde, meets various friends and relatives (including his doppelganger Jackie
Mason -- not the cornball pseudo-Semitic comedian, but the accountant from
Clyde) -- who's recently become engaged to Jessica, and then hightails it back
to the big city, leaving in his wake at least one very frustrated reader.

What to make of a novelist who has made a career of satirizing the stuffy,
constricted business world and who then gives us a novel in which we're expected
to rejoice because someone makes vice-president! There's always been a certain
glamor to the lonely entrepreneur, the Thomas Edison figure, puttering in his
garage and coming up with a Big Idea, struggling to find support among the
banker-skeptics, and then, against all odds, becoming rich and successful,
providing employment for untold thousands, leading Americans to a new world of
progress, etc. etc. But what in the world can be glamorous about climbing the
corporate ladder (an action, which, as Samuel Johnson said, is performed in the
same posture as creeping)?

Charles is the conformist, not one who rebels inwardly against conformity, but
one who embraces it and turns conformity into achievement. It's no wonder that
the Fifties were so oppressive.  While in The Late George Apley, Marquand
punctured social constriction, in this novel he's come around to the dark side.

Not only that -- the linguistic surface of the novel is bland. There's no style
-- just serviceable gray prose.There are a number of good moments: a little
flirtation -- just winks and nods -- carried on between Charles and a bored
daughter-in-law while Charles discourses on stocks and bonds that's insightfully
written and suggests that there might be a bit of distance between our hero and
his chosen profession. But it's a loose end that goes nowhere.

Is this the end of my Marquand project, or do I have the initiative to tackle
yet another big novel? Stay tuned.

Source: 2005/12/border_relation

Title: Bush's Knowledge of Geography
Date: December 14, 2005

Our president's knowledge of geography is famously shaky. He seems to be under
the impression that the Kingdom of Jordan is a gulf coast country, that Africa
is a nation, and that Europe is one of America's key allies. On being shown a
map of South America, he said, to the president of that continent's largest
country, "Wow, Brazil is big." Perhaps he merely misspoke when he said that
"border relations between Canada and Mexico have never been better," but you
never know, do you?

Iraq is a large country -- over 170,000 square miles. It's larger than
California and two-thirds the size of Texas. In population it's just about the
same as Texas-- about 22,000,000 people. Does our president know these facts? 
Did he know them when he decided to invade and occupy Iraq?  Did anyone on the
diplomatic side say to him: Iraq is comparable in size and population to Texas.
Imagine that Texas was invaded and occupied by Iraqis who overthrew a native
Texan dictator and tried to replace him with a sharia-based government. How
would Texans respond?  Will it be a cakewalk?  Will Texans throw flowers at
the Iraqi soldiers?  Or will they, possibly, make a bit of a fuss?"

Source: 2005/12/edward_gibbon_c

Title: Edward Gibbon Comments on Randall (Duke) Cunningham, Halliburton, etc.
Date: December 15, 2005

"At this important crisis (i. e. the attack on Rome's Balkan outposts by Huns
in 375 A. D.), the military government of Thrace was exercised by Lupicinus and
Maximus, in whose venal minds the slightest hope of private emolument outweighed
every consideration of public advantage; and whose guilt was only alleviated by
their incapacity of discerning the pernicious effects of their rash and criminal
administration."  Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Chapter XXVI.

Source: 2005/12/flower_names

Title: Flower Names
Date: December 17, 2005

When I was a just a young sprout, every summer I would grow, from seed, in my
father's crowded backyard garden, a small plot of snapdragons. Inasmuch as I
had, or seemed to have in those years, endless time, I became a connoisseur of
the plant's growth habit: its elongated long smooth leaves with their pastel
undersides, its spikes of buds, opening from bottom to top, its varied colors,
and especially its unusual flower. I'd watch the bees lift the "dragon's"
jaw, squeeze inside, sometimes to temporarily trap themselves within. As much
as loved the flower, I think I loved its name even more. "Snapdragon"-- a
euphonious, crunchy, satisfying, evocative sound -- scary too, but how can a
flower be scary?

I recently opened the first of this year's seed catalogs to find the favorite
flower of my springtime listed as "antirrhinum." The scientific name is not
inaccurate -- it's Latinized Greek for "snoutlike" -- but I have to say that
antirrhinum is not a word that sings to me. It sounds less like a border annual
than a cold remedy..

The modern plant breeders, intent on appearing to be learned and scientific,
have gone too far. I want the old names back. Not lathyrus, but sweet pea;
not achillea, but yarrow; not dianthus barbatus, but sweet William; not
calendula, but marigold. Let us even do away with the almost naturalized name
of delphinium; bring back the larkspur. Not veronica, but speedwell. I want
a garden that's filled with stocks, lilies of the valley (not convallaria),
loosestrife (the yellow variety, not the invasive purple), love lies bleeding,
love-in-a-mist, marguerites, brushwood.

I make one exception: liverwort. Not that anyone would want to grow it, but just
in case. In fact, I banish all flower names that contain the element "wort." In
my garden, spiderwort grows under the name tradescantia. (Tradescantia, poor
thing, has a second and equally unacceptable name: cow slobber.)

Am I alone in this preference?  Not a bit.  I'm in the best company. In the
noblest poem in the English language, John Milton lists the flowers that "strew
the laureate hearse" of the dead poet Lycidas. ("Rathe" means "early"-- it
survives in "rather," which used to mean "earlier";  "freaked" is "streaked.")

Bring the rathe primrose, which forsaken dies,

The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine;

The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet,

The glowing violet,

The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine,

With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head.

It's a great swelling litany. Savor again the music of that lovely last line:
"With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head." Instead of cowslip, Milton
might have written "primula veris, family primulaceae," but he was too smart to
do so. Words like cowslip, lady's mantle, goldenrod, forget-me-not, and, yea,
snapdragon live and breathe and are laden with metaphorical perfume. Cowslips
hang their heads; primula, like antirrhinum, have no heads to hang. Moreover,
if Milton had been looking about for alternatives for the cowslip, he would
not have consulted the plant breeders but returned to popular lore and he
would have chosen from such tasty words (alternatives all to cowslip) as herb
peter, peggle, key of heaven, fairy cups, mayflower, lady's keys-- all of which
are human, humane, and evocative. But John Milton, who exhorted "daffodillies
to fill their cups with tears," had an ear, and I can therefore affirm with
absolute, unimpeachable, and total confidence that he would have rejected with
horror another synonym for the common cowslip: the palsywort.

Source: 2005/12/crosspatch_draw-1

Title: "Crosspatch, draw the latch" and Industrial Capitalism
Date: December 18, 2005

One of the most joyful of nursery rhymes, and a personal favorite, is this:

Crosspatch,

Draw the latch.

Sit by the fire and spin.

Take a cup,

And drink it up.

Then call the neighbors in.

The clicky rhymes and jaunty meter are undeniably beautiful -- and there's much
more meaning than poems of this kind usually contain.

In the first triad, a "crosspatch," -- a "cross or ill-tempered person, usually
a girl or woman" -- is at work, spinning. In the second triad, she's exhorted to
drink and also to invite her neighbors "in" -- presumably into the room, or just
as likely, the tiny cottage -- where she lives alone. In the first strophe, the
theme is isolation, but in the second, isolation is challenged by the calls of
society and by the hope of a more satisfactory and convivial life.

What can we know or imagine about the surly individual addressed by the
evocative designation, "crosspatch?"  The first element in the name --"cross"--
implies not only sourness, but also resistance, as in "cross-grained." The
second element -- "patch" -- suggests that the crosspatch's discontent is
not without cause. We can infer that she's poor because she's a person
whose garments are either assembled from various rescued materials, as in
"patchwork," or that her clothes are, in another sense of the word patch,
repaired. In addition, it's possible that ill health has caused her skin to
become "patchy."  But "patch" also signals a degree of mental stress, as in
Shakespeare's "patched fool." In this signification, patch derives from Italian
pazzo, crazy. The crosspatch is therefore disabled physically, socially and
psychologically.

At the outset of the poem, our "crosspatch" sits glowering, impoverished,
perhaps muttering indistinctly, friendless, without family, her youth blighted
by poverty, huddled against the last embers of her dying fire. What is it
that she is spinning? No doubt she ekes out a meager living in the impersonal
mercantilist "putting-out" system. Some exploitative proto-capitalist venturer
has delivered to her lonely door a quantity of unspun wool or cotton;  her job
is to return the material to him in the processed form that will then be passed
on to an equally poor weaver, then to a tailor, etc. She works alone and never
sees the fruits of her labor except for the occasional, paltry farthing that
allows her a bare subsistence. No wonder she is slightly barmy and has "drawn
the latch" -- closed herself off from her fellows. But then, suddenly, comes
the antistrophe, and in a series of importunate injunctives the crosspatch is
asked to rejoin the company of humanity. "Take a cup,/ And drink it up,/ Then
call the neighbors in."  What's in the cup?  Spiritous liquors, no doubt,
which, though designed to dull the pain of wage-slavery, also act to augment the
revelry with which the poem climaxes. The wine is not sipped, but it is drained
to the lees. And once the door is unlatched, and the neighbors -- neighbors of
both sexes, no doubt -- are called "in," why then, let the libations and the
wild rumpus begin! Alienated labor is suddenly set aside and replaced by the
natural bonds of one human being to another, and the stasis of the opening lines
of the poem transforms in a flash into a wildly kinetic bacchanal. Emotional
weakness transmutes into healthy liberated pleasure. Dour Puritanism, with its
punishing work ethic, yields to the spirit of holiday and to pagan, perhaps even
dionysian, excess. Here, in miniature, is the essence of the comic vision. In
a few powerful lines, freedom, good humor, and natural appetite triumph over
bondage, artificiality, social constriction and repression; the justifiably
sullen crosspatch, in a burst of energy, reintegrates herself into the social
nexus from which she has been banished.

Whether or not the crosspatch can permanently liberate herself from the
oppressions of industrial capitalism, or whether the anodyne and spurious relief
of alcohol is a merely transient solution is left unresolved. To ask a short
poem, however dense with meaning, to answer so difficult a question would, just
possibly, be to ask too much of it and, perhaps, to push the evidence the merest
tad too far.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_3

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit
Date: December 23, 2005

Sloan Wilson's 1955 best-seller is saturated with alcohol. Nary a character can
carry on a conversation without first mixing a highball, a scotch, a manhattan,
or a batch of martinis. "Let's have a drink" is the lubricant without which the
novel couldn't proceed. In The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, the characters
not only drink like fishes but they also smoke like chimneys. There's not a
social interaction that isn't punctuated with lighting up, puffing, flicking,
extinguishing. But the use of alcohol and tobacco do not pose moral challenges;
they're just there, like food and water, and do not become issues for either the
characters or the author. Were the 50s so rich in nicotine?  I think they must
have been: our house, like everyone else's, was a thick blue haze. Between my
mother's cigarettes and my father's pipes and cigars, I must have inhaled many
lifetimes worth of second-hand smoke during my childhood. On the other hand, we
departed from the norm in that we were not spiritous. While there was always a
bottle of something or other on hand to offer to the very occasional guest, I
never once noticed either of my parents drink liquor, or beer or wine for that
matter, unprompted. Omnipresent alcohol, or rather the manners that surround its
consumption, dates The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit. Right there, in the middle
of the Beat Generation, is an old-fashioned Bourbon Generation novel.

The "gray flannel" of the title refers to the ubiquitous 50s costume of the
upwardly mobile. I re-read the novel, which I remembered more from the Gregory
Peck-Jennifer Jones epic than from the book, with the expectation that it would
be another Marquand-like story of conformity and thwarted rebellion among the
aspiring execs. In truth there is some of that, for Tom Rath, the central
figure, is for a while caught up in corporate climbing. But the button-down
world is not as vividly realized as is the prevailing suburban angst. Basically,
the novel is a story of a marriage that's lost its juice. Rath, a good man but
one who's become extremely cautious and tightly-wound, had been a paratrooper
who dropped behind enemy lines in Europe and in the Pacific. He's killed
seventeen men, most with his bare hands -- one an eighteen-year-old, and one
(accidentally) his best friend -- but he's never been able to tell his wife
Betsy about the war and about the way the war altered his values. In the last
chapter he finally breaks through the barrier, but only because he has to admit
to Betsy that, while waiting to be shipped from the European to the Pacific
theater, he lived with and fathered a child with a Roman "soldier's girl." Rath
asks a very good question -- why is it that he's not ashamed to have killed,
but he is ashamed to have loved. Rath's revelations are the heart of the novel,
but they're given curiously short shrift (as though Sloan Wilson unconsciously
allies himself Tom Rath's impulse to suppress the truth).

I think the book was so popular because it must have helped to purge some of
the psychological traumas of the war. It's a moderately good story written in
moderately bad prose.

It was sad to read Sloan Wilson's obituary (he died in 2002) and discover that
he was an alcoholic for much of his life.

Source: 2005/12/the_caucasus_ha

Title: The Caucasus; Hadji Murad
Date: December 24, 2005

When I read Neal Ascherson's Black Sea, I had to admit that I knew nothing at
all about a huge and contested part of the world. I followed up on Ascherson's
bibliography and read a series of ethnographic studies of ancient Black Sea
peoples -- Scythians, Sarmatians, etc. -- and from there moved eastward to the
Caucasus and leaned about the Abkhazians, the Ossetians, the Chechens, etc.
Yesterday I finished Nicholas Griffin's Caucasus (2001), which is half travel
book and half a biography of Imam Shamil. Shamil, of whom I also knew zero until
a few days ago, is the legendary Avar guerrilla leader who led the opposition to
the Russian conquest of the mountains in the mid-nineteenth century. He's the
national hero of the Chechens, and is a compound of Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse,
and Geronimo-- with a little Islamic fervor added in. The Russians conquered
the Caucasus with a combination of overwhelming force, superior technology,
and ruthlessness: they systematically obliterated villages, murdered as many
civilians as possible, and when all else failed, cut to the ground the primeval
beech forests -- defoliation not then an option -- in which Shamil and his
Murids found refuge.

Reading about Shamil led me to Hadji Murad -- Tolstoy's extraordinary last novel
and one in which Shamil is a minor character. In 150 pages or so, Hadji Murad
says as much about the brutality, the stupidity, and the vanity of war as War
and Peace says in ten times as many pages. Tolstoy, who had soldiered in the
Caucasus, wrote in his diary (according to Griffin) that the war was "so ugly
and unjust that anybody who wages it has to stifle the voice of his conscience."
Hadji Murad is a charismatic leader who's involved in a foolish feud with
Shamil; he surrenders to the Russians, tries to escape, and is killed and
beheaded. That's the plot, but the genius is in the telling. After recounting
an atrocity in which the Russians, in sport, destroy a small settlement, ruin
the crops, and bayonet a small child, Tolstoy describes the feelings of the
remaining villagers as they set about the hopeless task of rebuilding: "It was
not hatred, because they did not regard those Russian dogs as human beings,
but it was such repulsion, disgust and perplexity at the senseless cruelty of
these creatures, that the desire to exterminate them  -- like the desire to
exterminate rats, poisonous spiders, or wolves  -- was as natural an instinct
as that of self-preservation." Tolstoy is disgusted by the Russian actions, but
he's equally repelled by the brutal mountaineers, and he goes out of his way
to draw parallels between the utterly cruel Imam Shamil and the fat, ignorant,
vainglorious Nicholas, the Czar of All the Russians.

In the nineteenth century, the Russians cut down the forests; in 1999, they
conquered Grozhny (the capitol of Chechnya) by dynamiting every significant
building in the entire city.

Source: 2005/12/what_we_read_in_4

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Women and Thomas Harrow
Date: December 28, 2005

Women and Thomas Harrow was John P. Marquand's last novel. It was published in
1958; Marquand (born in 1893) died in 1960. It's another good but not great
book. Despite the witty surface, it's very sad. Thomas Harrow (clearly a
surrogate for Marquand himself) is a successful but not brilliant playwright;
in the course of the novel, he comes to realize that he's squandered his talent
and made a mess of his personal relationships. The last line of Women and Thomas
Harrow: "In the end, no matter how many were in the car, you always drove
alone."

I'm still trying to figure out why my father thought so well of the novels of
John Phillips Marquand. For one thing, Pop was clearly in tune with the author's
relentless anti-modernism. In form, Marquand's novels are Victorian. There's
no experimentation, nothing unusual or original in content or presentation.
Moreover, in all the novels, not a landscape but has been destroyed, not a
custom but has deteriorated, not a value but has been compromised. The modern
world in Marquand's view has become too subject to analysis, too Freudified.
Sometimes Harrow employs, with some resistance, the exact words that I heard
without irony from my father's mouth: "No one could escape from convention for
long....  It was advisable to accept the mores of one's time, no matter if they
shifted. It was better to be in tune... with the beat of marching music."  No
dancing to a different drummer either in Marquand or in my father.

Source: 2005/12/otto_premingers

Title: Otto Preminger's Laura (1944)
Date: December 28, 2005

Laura is a stylish noir whodunit that holds up well even after the passage of
sixty years. It is cleverly written and handsomely cinematographed but it also
comes with some murky psychological baggage that may or may not make sense. At
the heart of the enigma is Waldo Lydecker (played by Clifton Webb). He's so
head-over-heels in love and so ferociously jealous of Laura (the ingenue Gene
Tierney) that he'll resort to anything, even murder, to keep her from other
men. The premise is good whodunit fare, but it would make more obvious sense if
Lydecker weren't both old and gay.

Clifton Webb was fifty-five when the picture was made, but he looks and acts
ten or fifteen years older. He may be a bachelor, but he's not an eligible one.
There's a rumor that Webb had a clause in his contract with Twentieth-Century
Fox that barred the company from alluding to his homosexuality, but the
prohibition, if it existed, didn't stop him from playing Lydecker with a
pronounced gay affect. He's fussy, he's bitchy, he's a queen -- in short a stage
homosexual in every aspect except that he's not obviously interested in men.
(Well, almost never;  he does expose himself to the detective Mark McPherson
[Dana Andrews] when he steps out of the bathtub and asks McPherson to throw him
a robe.)

One clue to Lydecker's character occurs in the first scene. He's spying on the
detective, who's wandering around Lydecker's apartment, browsing an extensive
collection of fragile objets d'art. McPherson goes to pick up a piece of glass
and Lydecker calls out "Careful, that's very valuable" (I'm quoting from
memory). From this incident we learn two things: Lydecker is a collector of
beautiful works of art, and he's willing to let people look but not touch. This
same attitude controls his relations to Laura: he cherishes her beauty, he
molds her in a Pygmalion-like way, but he's also hyper-protective. For him, she
becomes an untouchable work of art (the portrait of Laura, on which the camera
focuses so obsessively, is the metaphorical signifier of her place in his mental
world). His cool sexuality (he's perfectly content with twice-a-week dinners)
and his age (he's more interested in fathering Laura than in making love to her)
are less significant than his pygmalionism.

By transforming Laura into a work of art, he attempts to preserve her virginity.
He therefore shoos away her potential lovers: he destroys the career of Jacoby,
the painter, by writing a vitriolic attack on him; he collects revealing
information about the southern gigolo Carpenter (Vincent Price), and he competes
with McPherson. It's a neat turn that to do so he becomes a detective himself
-- loitering in the snow outside Laura's apartment, eavesdropping behind a post
in a night club, etc. Eventually he comes to understand that he can't preserve
Laura's "purity;" it's then that the film turns to violence. After all is lost,
he gives away the game when he says to McPherson, with horror, "I suppose you'll
have a disgustingly earthy relationship" [i.e. with Laura].

It's fascinating that McPherson, though he has all the outward marks of the
macho gumshoe, is himself tepid about sexuality, lacks charisma and emotion, and
that the film allows him and Laura only one slight awkward peck of a kiss.The
detective is not a creature of passion, but he may be, like Lydecker, a lover of
art; it's revealed that Laura's portrait will be auctioned and that McPherson
has put in a bid on it.

Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Blackboard Jungle
Date: January 01, 2006

In Blackboard Jungle, neither the author Evan Hunter, nor his lead character
Richard Dadier, who recently started to work at North Manual Trades High School,
can keep their eyes off teacher Lois Hammond's "full and rounded breasts."
She's so "busty" and "big-breasted" that every time she so much as shrugs her
shoulders, both Hunter and Dadier continually focus on the way that "her breasts
move." These remarkable bazooms are at some times concealed by a blouse that is
"thin nylon" and at other times by one that is "peekaboo." There are occasions
when the Hammond breasts are enhanced by "the delicate lace of her slip and the
slender straps of her brassiere," and other times when the "firm abundant cones
of her breasts [are] caught tight in a white cotton bra." But whether enhanced
or restrained, not only the "thrust of her brassiere," but even more so "the
obvious thrust of her breasts" are under constant scrutiny. After an inadvertent
sighting, Hunter and Dadier are able to report that one of these breasts (it
isn't specified whether the left or the right) is "a youthful breast, firm, with
a nipple large and erect."

It is dispiriting to recall that for high school students in the 1950s, this
romance-novel twaddle seemed like a breakthrough in the direction of realism.
But consider the context: in the novels that were read in Erasmus Hall English
classes, none of the heroines (Eppie, Rebecca and Rowena, Lucy Manette) had
any breasts at all, or at least, none that came to the attention of author
or reader. The Blackboard Jungle seemed to be frank, honest, down-to-earth,
and it was recognized in the schoolyard-and-drugstore culture of mid-century
adolescents as a "hot" book, and along with The Amboy Dukes and Forever Amber
was passed in cheap paperback editions from hand to sweaty hand. It reflected
a reality (bad language, sexual urgency, near-anarchic disorder, gratuitous
cruelty) far more present and immediate than did our 'official' reading.

Returning after all these years to Blackboard Jungle has been a sad revelation.
As a work of literature, it's piss-poor. The tough-guy prose aims to be hard-
boiled, but it's undercooked ("the boys in the class considered English a
senseless waste of time, a headless chicken, a blob without a goal"). The story
is padded with interminable didactic digressions, and many of its episodes are
either woefully overwrought or just simply meretricious -- Dadier's infant son,
for example, is stillborn for no earthly reason except to squeeze a sob from the
reader.

Nevertheless, and in spite of its amateurism, it's still a disturbing
book. Blackboard Jungle covers the first four months of Dadier's teaching
career: in the course of one melodramatic semester, he prevents the rape of a
fellow teacher, he's attacked and beaten on the street by a gang of students,
and he's slashed in a knife-fight in his own classroom. So much violence in
so short a period of time seems to be beyond belief. Does it accord with the
facts?  Wasn't it the case that the local bully-boy, Herbie W.,, attacked
Mr. Proshan, our seventh-grade social studies teacher and wrestled him to
the classroom floor?  Didn't the gang leader Runzi Marfeta terrorize the
schoolyard? Weren't there fights outside the Bedford Arch almost daily? Wasn't
it the case that every tenth student wore a "garrison belt," the three-inch
buckle of which was ground razor-sharp, just in case? It was the heyday of
"juvenile delinquents" and zip-guns and gravity knives and gang fights, and in
many of my classrooms the out-of-control ambience was established and sustained
by the psychopaths and sociopaths among whom I was educated. And isn't it also
the case that Blackboard Jungle doesn't even tell the whole truth but is a
sanitized version of real life? There's not a single mention of drunkenness,
of heroin and other widely-used drugs, of accidental pregnancy and illegal
abortion, or even of what used to be called, euphemistically, "broken homes."

Almost entirely anti-nostalgic, the novel did nevertheless provoke an occasional
smile: Delaney cards, "official class," "daddy-o," street corner harmonizers.
There's also one very brilliant comic touch in Blackboard Jungle. At North
Manual Trades High School, there's a men's teacher's lounge in which Richard
Dadier seems to pass a lot of his time, smoking. In the lounge is a couch, and
on the couch is a man -- a teacher -- lying prone, his face concealed. He's
asleep at the beginning of the novel, and he's still asleep at the end; Dadier
never sees his face and never learns who he is or what subject he's supposed
to be teaching. It's an exquisite metaphor for an exhausted and overwhelmed
educational establishment. Blackboard Jungle is a bad book, but Evan Hunter
earned his place in the story by bringing the scandal of high schools like North
Manual Trades to public attention.

Source: 2006/01/one_of_the_only

Title: One of the Only
Date: January 01, 2006

Call me prescriptive, but the all too common phrase "one of the only" offends
both ear and logic. What does it mean to say that "the $11 billion Crusader
artillery rocket system is one of the only weapons systems canceled by the Bush
administration?" If it's the "only" cancellation, say so. If it's "one of the
few," or even, one of "very few," why then, let's just go ahead and say that.
"One of the only" is an unpleasant and chilling redundancy -- it means no more
than "one of the one."  What's wrong with the word "only" that it needs help?
 Isn't "only" only enough?  Perhaps "only" is wearing out, and "onliest" --
now confined to rural or comic speech -- will someday replace it. Onliest has
the appearance of a superlative, but, logically speaking, "only" can't have a
superlative. But logic, as we know, doesn't always govern the path of language.
Redundancies and illogicalities abound, and awkward formulations such as "one of
the only" aren't all that very one-of-a-kind singly unique.

Source: 2006/01/the_replacement

Title: The Replacement Child:  Juliet
Date: January 06, 2006

In the narrowest definition, a "replacement child" is a being who is
intentionally conceived because an older sibling has recently died. Such
substitutes must endure the lifetime burden of competing with a lost and often
idealized child. Because it is almost impossible for them to please their
parents, they easily become confused and frustrated, or worse.

Here's a dry summary from a learned journal: "When bereaved parents give birth
to a child or children subsequent to a perinatal death, their constructions
of the family necessarily change. The subsequent child is thought to be at
risk of psychopathology (the replacement child syndrome) if parents have
not sufficiently grieved their losses."  "At risk of psychopathology" is a
hesitant, euphemistic formulation.

The term "replacement child" has also been defined more broadly: it may, for
example, refer to any child in a family that has lost one or more of its
offspring (rather than solely to one conceived as a direct consequence of a
death). In an even larger sense of the term, there are all kinds of 'symbolic'
replacements: one psychologist has gone so far as to suggest that any Jewish
child born after the European holocaust should be so considered. This idea seems
extreme.

In pre-industrial societies, replacement children received no particular notice
because infant deaths were so very commonplace. While there must be many
replacement children in traditional literature, the earliest who comes to mind
is Juliet in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, which was written in 1595.

Juliet's biological mother is aloof and distant, but she has a second and more
loving parent -- her nurse -- who does much of the actual work of mothering.
The nurse has lost her own daughter, Susan, and has become wet-nurse to Juliet.
"Susan and she -- God rest all Christian souls --/Were of an age. Well, Susan is
with God;/ She was too good for me." Clearly, Shakespeare suggests, Susan has
been idealized in her natural mother's mind. The Nurse has a replacement child
in Juliet, a state of being that goes far to explain the profound bond between
surrogate mother and surrogate daughter.

It is uncharacteristic of Shakespeare to discuss the infancy of his heroines,
nor can I think of any other pre-modern work that devotes so much space to
wet- nursing or to the trauma of weaning. Although he depicts in detail the
relationship between Juliet and her nurse, Shakespeare does not seem to
anticipate or foreshadow the interest that later centuries would take in the
replacement child syndrome. Instead, he focuses on Juliet's sexual alacrity.

The nurse tells a pertinent story (and leaves us with the impression that she
has told it many times before): when Juliet had just learned to walk, she fell
and "broke her brow"-- cut her forehead, as we would say. "And then my husband
--God be with his soul,/ He was a merry man--took up the child,/ 'Yea,' quoth
he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?/ Thou wilt fall backward when thou has more
wit,/ Wilt thou not, Jule?'  And by my holidame,/ The pretty wretch left crying
and said 'ay.'"  "Falling backward" is bawdy talk for a woman's posture in
sexual intercourse. Retelling her husband's tale, the Nurse dramatizes her
expectation that when Juliet comes of age, or "has more wit," she will be eager
to fall backward. To this proposition Juliet -- "the pretty wretch"-- says
'Ay.'  Juliet's personal psychology, Shakespeare seems to hint, formed itself
to gratify the suggestions of her surrogate mother.

The vigorous sexuality that might be appropriate for the nurse's natural
daughter Susan, who would have been a servant girl, has been transferred to the
bourgeois Juliet, who, if she had followed the example of her birth mother,
would have been properly restrained, repressed, and diffident. In effect, the
nurse contrives to live her own desires through her replacement child; the
result is Juliet's sexual impetuosity and subsequent death.

William Shakespeare was born in 1564, but an older sister Joan was baptized in
1558 and another, Margaret, in 1562. Both died in infancy. The future playwright
was therefore doubly a replacement child.

There's an additional complexity in the family drama because the infants he
replaced were female. How this oddity affected his own psychological development
is open to speculation. Perhaps because he was the oldest son in a family that
had lost two daughters, he was especially cherished. Or perhaps a boy who
replaced girls developed the empathy to create complex female characters in an
English drama that, until Juliet, had limited itself strictly to one-dimensional
stereotypes.

Source: 2006/01/phrasal_verbs_p

Title: Phrasal Verbs:  Put .*.
Date: January 13, 2006

The caprice of phrasal verbs (formerly called verb-adverb combinations) came
to my conscious attention sometime in the 1950s, when I first read Mansfield
Park. Fanny Price, the heroine, is lying on a couch; her sailor brother William
cries, "Poor Fanny!... how soon she is knocked up! Why, the sport is but just
begun. I hope we shall keep it up these two hours." I was shocked. In the P. S.
217 schoolyard where I learned my English, "knocked up" had one and only one
definition: made pregnant. There could be no doubt-- especially when the meaning
of knocked up was confirmed by such transparent sexual equivocations as "sport,"
and "keep it up these two hours."  When did proper Fanny Price find time to get
herself knocked up and how could I have been so inattentive a reader as not to
notice?  And where did Jane Austen learn schoolyard slang?

How in the world was I to know that in nineteenth-century England, "knocked up "
was an innocent phrasal verb that meant "tired.                                "

Phrasal verbs are treacherous. There's nothing in the basic definitions of
either "knock" or "up" that yields tired (or pregnant either, for that matter).

I was equally confused when Othello, quelling a disturbance, commanded the
contending parties to "Put up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them."
Inasmuch as I wasn't familiar with the phrasal verb, "put up," which means
"sheathe," I guessed that "put up" meant its exact opposite -- "brandish." "Put
up" is misleading: what's "up" about sheathe?

Just as there is nothing "up" about "up", there is nothing "out" about the
"out" in "put out." The meaning that I knew was the demotic one to which my
dictionary provides the formal "to indulge in promiscuous sexual intercourse." A
woman who puts out can get herself knocked up. But "put out" has other equally
unpredictable meanings: "make an effort," for one, and "annoyed" ("I was put
out by his use of verbs") for another. Moreover, a person who's put out, can
also be "put off," or dissuaded; "put on," or deceived; "put up," or lodged;
"put up with," or tolerated; "put down," or harshly criticized. A person can
be persuasive and "put across" a point, or be insane and be "put away" in an
institution, or can be frugal and "put by" money for a rainy day; or can be
gullible and "put upon."  Phrasal verbs are exceedingly nasty little critters,
and they must drive English language learners off their collective gourds.

Next week; same time, same station: got .*.

Source: 2006/01/my_campaign_for

Title: My Campaign for City Council
Date: January 16, 2006

My positions:

1)  NO DOGS WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal and near-fatal dog attacks,
dog bites, barking dogs, whining dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs annoying
citizens in parks and open space, the indulgence of dog owners. But what about
seeing-eye dogs? Slippery slope, that. Sorry, no dogs (except for purposes of
vivisection).

2)  NO CHRISTMAS LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce
resources. Global warming. Bad taste.

3)  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897? Death of
Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music in a motor vehicle that is audible
outside the vehicle.

4)  NO SMOKERS. Rationale: lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, bad
odors. Note: not "no smoking" -- "no smokers."  No going outside of city limits
to light up and then re-entering.

5)  NO IDLE CHATTER. Rationale: incontrovertible.

6)  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Rationale: I don't like tattoos. Why visible?  Whole-
body inspections would be intrusive.

7)  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale:
uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. I reject out of hand those
extremists who want to move the holiday to December 25. I'm a uniter, not a
divider.

My slogan:  Brilliant!  Charismatic!  Omniscient!  Hyperbolic!

Source: 2006/01/new_words

Title: Words New to Me
Date: January 16, 2006

There's a small mystery in Tolstoi's Sebastopol in 1855. An officer drives "a
telyezhka, which [says Tolstoi] stands halfway between a Jewish britchka, a
Russian travelling-cart, and a basket-wagon." How in the arithmetical world can
any object be "half-way" between three different kinds of wagons? A translation
problem, let's hope. Moreover, the word "telyezhka" doesn't appear in any
of my English dictionaries. An internet search located the not very precise
definition, "baggage cart." And what the heck is a "Jewish britchka?" In
nineteenth-century Russia, did horse-drawn vehicles have religion?  Not
according Gogol in Dead Souls, where a britchka is specifically located in
terms not of ethnicity, but of class; it's a "light spring-carriage of the
sort affected by bachelors, retired lieutenant-colonels, staff-captains,
and land- owners possessed of about a hundred souls." (Is it like or unlike
a troika or a drozhky?) "Telyezhka" and "britchka" made me realize that my
notions about horse-drawn vehicles are extremely hazy, and that when I read
pre-internal- combustion novels I pay too little attention to the distinctions
that separate Jaguars from jalopies; they're all coaches to me. But surely it
makes a difference whether our hero arrives in a fly ("a horse drawn public
coach") or a trap ("a light, often sporty, two or four wheeled carriage in
which passengers sit face-to face") or a landau ("a large four-wheeled covered
carriage"). Not to mention chaise, phaeton, cabriolet, sulky, surrey, curricle,
barouche, brougham, gig, hansom, buggy, victoria, four-wheeler, and dogcart.

Also in Tolstoi's Sebastopol; frequent references to "gabions," which are
"hollow cylinders of wicker or strap-iron like a basket without a bottom which
are filled with earth and used in building fortifications." If they have no
bottoms, how are they filled?

Other words new to me: from The Return of the Native, a number of lovely
dialect words from Thomas Hardy's county of Dorset: "nunnywatch," predicament;
"stunpoll," blockhead; "gallicrow," scarecrow; "kex," the dry, hollow stem of
a plant; "knap," the summit of a small hill; "vlankers," sparks; "huffle," a
gust of wind; "fess," lively; "withywind," bindweed; "scroff," firewood debris;
"scammish," clumsy; "twanky," complaining; and, most relevantly, "spring-van," a
van "resembling a large wooden box with an arched roof that opens from behind."

Source: 2006/01/sonia_green

Title: Sonia Green
Date: January 18, 2006

My daughter continues to urge me to write something autobiographical. To which I
reply, it’s all autobiographical. But since she wants hard news, not indirect
revelation, I offer this account of my grandmother, born Sonia Chafetz, later,
by marriage, Sonia Usilewski and finally, after a legal name change, Sonia
Green. She was born in 1884 somewhere in darkest White Russia (now called
Belarus). I have no idea exactly where, but I know that she was a distinctly
rural girl -- she loved to fish, to pick berries, to grow plants. Of her life
in the old country, I know almost nothing -– only that she was raised in a
cottage with a dirt floor and that the family brought the cow inside in the
winter to keep the place warm. I know that she didn’t have a proper bed,
and that at least for part of her childhood she slept on the mantle over the
fireplace, which sounds mighty precarious to me. She couldn’t have had much
in the way of formal education, but she did read and write Yiddish and still
understood Russian in her old age. I know this because in the late 1940s or
early 50s I would occasionally sit with her and listen to the broadcast of
debates at the United Nations (in those days there were subsequent rather than
simultaneous translations) and she would render the Russian to me, as best she
could in her halting English. She never did become fluent in the only language I
knew so our conversations were stilted and confined to utilitarian topics.

When she was young -- I’ve seen the pictures—she was dark, attractive, and
voluptuous. By the time I came to know her, when she was close to sixty, her
looks were long gone and she was disfigured by goitre and other diseases and
no doubt by the consequences of her many self-induced abortions. The family
story was that both she and Joseph were engaged to other people when they eloped
to America (my grandfather deserting from the Russian army, where he had been
drafted for the usual twenty-year term, and where his salary was a ruble every
other month). They arrived in New York in August of 1904 from Rotterdam. How
they found their way from Minsk to Rotterdam I was never told, but the Ellis
Island records report that they came through London.

My mother was born in June of the following year, or just about ten months
after her parents arrived in this country. My mother’s story was that at
first her parents had only one pair of shoes between them, so that Sonia had to
stay at home until Joseph returned from work. The family settled in Harlem; my
grandfather, who was urban and more sophisticated than Sonia, had been trained
as a pharmacist, but never found work in his field in the new world. I don’t
know what they did for a living (was he some sort of salesman?) except that for
a short time my grandparents owned a delicatessen at the corner of 4th and 10th
streets in Greenwich Village. I’ve gone to that corner many times and tried
imagine such a restaurant, but of course not a clue remains.

As far as I can guess, their marriage was uneasy. My grandfather was frequently
absent (my father once darkly hinted, “I don’t know whether it was other
women, or what”) and my grandmother frequently ill. My father also told me
that when he and mom married, he laid down a prohibition — it was in the days
when men made prohibitions -- that she wasn’t to act as intermediary between
Sonia and Joseph any longer.

I know that my mother had to leave school six weeks into the ninth grade to
care for her mother and two younger brothers. But that’s about all I was told
and there are no documents. I have a few memories: Sonia trying to teach me to
play fan-tan and five hundred rummy -– I was as bad then as I am now at card
games; Sonia planting in wooden Philadelphia cream-cheese boxes every orange or
grapefruit seed that came into her house, so that her tiny apartment had the
pleasant aroma of a hot-house; Sonia growing avocados in the winter but setting
them in my father’s garden (just around the corner from her third-floor
walk-up) in the summer. And I also remember her attempt to cure my father’s
sterile apple tree with an old-country remedy — rubbing the cut half of an
apple on the tree trunk in midwinter. I remember also stuffed cabbage, the
world's finest blintzes, and jars of apricot jam sealed with paraffin. In her
last years, Sonia lived with my parents; she had her own kitchen, a room that
had been remodeled from my former bedroom. She was weary of life and I suspect
that she died at least in part of malnutrition. I remember also that she owned a
pressed-glass ruby bowl that was always filled with hard candies. I was allowed
one candy per visit.

When Sonia died in 1971, she had no money and precious few possessions, but I
inherited the bowl. It was pretty, and I’m sorry to say that after a few years
I accidentally broke it. But it was easily replaced (it was in a popular pattern
and every second-hand store had the item for sale) and I bought one for about
$25.00. Some years afterward I broke the second one and bought another, but by
that time the price had gone up to $50.00. So, although my inheritance in cold
cash was a negative $75, I was left with grateful appreciation and many warm
memories.

Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Return of the Native
Date: January 24, 2006

In Thomas Hardy’s The Return of the Native (1878), Clym Yeobright and Eustacia
Vye are brimming with impetuous youthful lust. They meet at a deserted spot on
Egdon Heath -- a “vast tract of unenclosed wild” in southwestern England.
Here’s how Hardy describes their moment of passion:

“’My Eustacia.’

‘Clym dearest’

They remained long without a single utterance, for no language could reach the
level of their  condition: words were as the rusty implements of a bygone
barbarous epoch, and only to be occasionally tolerated.

‘I began to wonder why you did not come,’ said Yeobright when she had
withdrawn a little from his embrace.”

Instead of the eager hands and tongues that a modern novelist would supply,
Hardy substitutes a sentence about the inadequacies of language. Even so mild an
allusion to physical pleasure was shocking to Victorian moralists, who regularly
rebuked Hardy for ‘vulgarity.’ Hardy’s last and best novel, Jude the
Obscure, was derided as Jude the Obscene.

I myself had no idea that Hardy was a breaker of sexual taboos when I first read
The Return of the Native in 1955. During the fifty intervening years, I’ve
read almost every one of Hardy’s many books, some of them--Jude the Obscure in
particular—repeatedly and with great admiration. Why did I not revisit The
Return of the Native until this past week? The silly truth is that the novel
was required reading in English class, and inasmuch as I was an alienated and
unhappy high school student, I made it a point of honor to dislike assigned
books.

There’s also a second and more substantive reason:The Return of the Native
was truly disorienting for provincial city kids like myself simply because
so much of it turns on landscape. The novel is all about the way various
characters respond to Egdon Heath, a furze-covered “somber stretch of
rounds and hollows,” that is isolated, extensive, unchanging, brooding,
dotted with primeval pagan barrows, and populated by sheep, shepherds and
heath-croppers. To understand Hardy’s Wessex landscape,I would have had to
overcome two barriers: my appalling lack of imagination and my inexperience with
geography. Perhaps some of my classmates could visualize Egdon Heath. Many of
them came from families that owned automobiles, and had consequently voyaged
beyond city limits. They had looked upon an expanse of land larger than a
baseball field and upon feathered bipeds more exotic than the flocks of pigeons
that guanoed the steps of the Newkirk Avenue subway station.

Had I been less put off by unfamiliar scenery and less hostile to assigned
texts, I might have recognized that sparse Egdon and my crowded concrete
neighborhood had much in common. Both places were backwaters untouched by
modernity. Neither offered much in the way of education -– either individuals
who possessed any, or schools that were genuinely dedicated to providing it. My
territory, like Egdon Heath, was a place which anyone who happened to prosper,
even a little, speedily abandoned -- to the port city of Budmouth in Hardy’s
world, and to “the island,” that is, the new prosperous suburbs of Queens
and Nassau, in mine.

In the 1950s, I myself had only one big idea -- that there must be a world
elsewhere. Why then did I not sympathize with Eustacia Vye, whose sole and
only desire is to get herself away from Egdon?  She is as out of her element
treading aimlessly on the heath as I felt myself to be when I bicycled an
endless series of claustrophobic streets. More to the point, why didn’t I
identify with the reddleman Diggory Venn? Diggory lives alone in his spring-van
and wanders the heath selling reddle (a red dye used for marking sheep). If
I had been capable of reading imaginatively, I would have taken Diggory to
heart. He is Romanticism’s archetypical outsider and a character whom I
should or could have recognized as a fellow sufferer. I too was solitary,
introspective, and on a quest for knowledge, but these traits were not
understood –- as I understand them now -- as healthy questioning but instead
were stigmatized as psychological disability (“Why are you moping? Why is your
nose always in a book?”) An understanding of Diggory Venn might have lent
dignity and historical context to my private woes.

Even more to the point: there I was, awash with the imperious hormones of
adolescence, and yet unable to notice that, although reticent about gropings and
thrustings, The Return of the Native attaches enormous importance to sex. While
I was mesmerized by the superficiality of Blackboard Jungle and suchlike novels,
I somehow failed to observe that Thomas Hardy was very very serious about love
and lust, loyalty and betrayal, passion and jealousy — and that The Return of
the Native challenges its readers to acknowledge that sexuality was as dangerous
as it was redemptive. Was there a more important lesson for me to have learned?
Did my sixteen-year-old self catch the least glimmer of it? Not the slightest.

Source: 2006/01/polite_conversa

Title: "Nature to Advantage Dress'd": Polite Conversation in the P.S.217 Schoolyard, c. 1955
Date: January 28, 2006

Sheldon: Hey, look what the cat dragged in. Arnie: Well as I live and breathe.
Sheldon: You know what?  Arnie: What. Sheldon: That's what. Mel: Big shot.
Sheldon: Who died and made you king?  Mel: Ask a stupid question and get a
stupid answer. Sheldon: Where were you when the brains were passed out? 
Arnie: Yeah, eat this. Sheldon: You wouldn’t know your ass from a hole in the
ground. Mel: So what. Arnie: You’re so full of shit it’s coming out of your
ears. Sheldon: Takes one to know one. Arnie: You know what's a good match? 
Mel: What? Arnie: Your face and my ass. Mel: When you're finished, you can take
the spoon out of my ass. Sheldon: Come again?  Are you cracked? Mel: Eat me.
Arnie: You and what army?  Sheldon: Ain’t that the limit?  Mel:  Hey,
honey, shake it don’t break it. Arnie: Hubba hubba, ding ding.  Sheldon: What
a pair! Arnie: Built like a brick shithouse. Mel: You got the money, honey, I
got the time.  Sheldon: Don’t mean maybe. Arnie:  All talk and no action.
Mel:  Any more at home like you?  Sheldon: She can put her shoes under my
bed anytime. Arnie: Hard work but somebody’s got to do it. Mel: Saving it
for the worms?  Sheldon: Well, back to the salt mines. Arnie: Another day,
another dollar. Sheldon: That ain’t hay. Mel: Long day, no. Arnie: We were
just talking about you. Sheldon: that’s what she said. Arnie: Well, that’s
that. Mel: I don’t bust my hump for anyone anymore. Arnie: Couldn’t care
less. Sheldon: If you don’t like it, lump it. Mel:  Who cut the cheese?
Arnie:  Another county heard from. Mel: Do me a favor. Drop dead. Sheldon: I'm
feeling bright eyed and bushy tailed. Mel: Have a coffin nail? Arnie: Don't mind
if I do. Mel: I’ve been smoking all my life and I ain’t dead yet. Arnie: I
could eat a horse. Mel: He’d lose his head if it wasn’t tied on. Sheldon: He
has as much chance as a snowball in hell. Arnie:  He’s pissing against the
wind. Sheldon: Just a spit in the ocean. Arnie: Well, doesn’t that beat the
band. Mel: Be my guest. Arnie:  Can you beat that? Sheldon: Can’t complain.
Arnie:  Doesn’t time fly when you’re having fun. Sheldon: Who pulled your
chain?  Arnie: Yeah, clear as mud. Mel: You haven’t got the brains you were
born with. Arnie: Cool it. Sheldon: Heads I win, tails you lose. Arnie: Cross my
heart and hope to die. Sheldon: It’s curtains. Arnie: Do it, or else. Sheldon:
Does a bear shit in the woods? Arnie: That and a nickel will get you on the
subway. Sheldon: Close but no cigar. Mel: You know what time it is? Half past
a cow’s ass. Arnie: Same to you. Sheldon: What a crock! Arnie: Your mother
goes down for wooden nickels. Sheldon: Your mother! Arnie: Age before beauty.
Sheldon: All dressed up and nowhere to go. Mel: Doozie pots. Arnie: You know
what. Sheldon: What?  Arnie: That's what.

Source: 2006/01/what_we_read_in_2

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Caine Mutiny
Date: January 29, 2006

In 1951, Herman Wouk won a Pulitzer prize for The Caine Mutiny. The novel
itself was a giant best-seller and along with it came the movie with Humphrey
Bogart and also a Broadway play. It was a big 1950s literary event.

It's almost exactly fifty years since I last read the book, and it's obvious
why it was such a triumph. The Caine Mutiny is a first-rate popular novel:
it’s long but fast-paced, clearly written, literate, suspenseful, timely,
and patriotic. The characters are carefully differentiated (although they veer
toward stereotypes). It’s memorable. Parts of it were as vivid as if I had
read them five months rather than five decades ago. I imagine that anyone
who read the book, no matter how long ago, will remember “the strawberry
incident,” “old yellowstain” and especially Captain Queeg and the two
little steel balls that he rolls in his hand when he is under stress.

The Caine Mutiny is not a novel that requires sophisticated exegesis. Wouk
is heavy-handed; he has a few points to inculcate, and he doesn’t allow
his readers much wiggle room. Perhaps the lack of ambiguity accounts for the
novel's popularity. While the The Caine Mutiny raises important questions about
war and authority, it resolves them too easily. Wouk lays on the patriotism
with a trowel. Although his navy is a nasty, inefficient place, individuals
(at least American individuals) regularly rise above their institutions. Wouk
preserves the optimism about war that Tolstoy lost in the Caucasus.

The main action of the novel turns on the mutiny and on the subsequent court-
martial. There’s also an engaging secondary story that could have been
extracted from a novel by John Marquand. Willis Seward Keith is an upper-class
Princetonian whose mother opposes his romance with Marie Minotti. Marie is
Italian, Roman Catholic, working-class, unschooled, and a night-club chanteuse
to boot, and she may been to bed both with her (gasp!) Jewish agent and with
her (horrors!) saxophonist. Is it possible that Willie can free himself from
maternal authority and marry her? In the Marquand universe, he would jilt Marie,
marry Constantia de Vere Buff-Orpington of the Newport Buff-Orpingtons, and
live a respectable bland country-club (and sexless) existence. But Marquand was
a proper Bostonian born in the nineteenth century, while Wouk was the son of
Jewish immigrants who was born in the twentieth. At first, Willie Keith bows to
his mother and puts an end to his romance, but Wouk rescues him. When the U. S.
S. Caine is kamikazeed, and Keith thinks he’s going to die, he realizes that
he’s made a big mistake. He survives, writes a long, eloquent proposal of
marriage, and in the very last pages of the novel seems to have persuaded Marie
to come aboard. She's amenable and he's euphoric, but whether or not Willie and
Marie can make the marriage work is left very much in doubt.

Is it mere coincidence that my two favorite novels during adolescence were
The Caine Mutiny and Mutiny on the Bounty?  If it's not coincidental but
meaningful, what ever happened to the incipient, budding mutinous spirit?

Source: 2006/01/edward_dmytryks

Title: Edward Dmytryk's The Caine Mutiny (1954)
Date: January 31, 2006

In my experience, film memories are generally sharper than book memories. Film
images crowd out the words. An exception is The Caine Mutiny. I remembered
the novel very well, and I was astonished that the film version, which I saw
last night and must have seen in 1954 or thereabouts, had almost completely
evaporated from my increasingly porous mind. I thought that I remembered
something in black-and-white, but this film is in very bright colors.

Perhaps my memory faded because the movie can't hold a candle to the novel.

Some of my many reservations: a) the actors are just too darn old. The novel
is about young men, dislocated in early maturity, coming to terms with harsh new
experiences. But the sailors who are supposed to be in their early twenties were
played by Van Johnson (38), Fred MacMurray (46), and Jose Ferrer (45). Captain
Queeg, who should be about thirty years old, was Humphrey Bogart, who was 55
and looked it, and who had, in fact, been wounded in World War I. The casting
completely compromises the story and skews naive into conspiratorial. Robert
Francis, who played Willis Seward Keith, was in fact twenty-four;  because
he's so much younger than his shipmates, he looks more like their mascot than
their contemporary. B) the romance between Keith and May Wynn (Marie Minotti in
the novel), which is marginal or decorative rather than intrinsic in the novel,
occupies far too much time in the film, and considerably dilutes the tension. C)
the ship model that’s used in the typhoon scene was ludicrously inadequate.
D) the ethnic tensions that are a source of complexity in the novel are elided:
May Wynn is no longer an Italian Catholic, so it’s impossible to understand
exactly why Keith vacillates about marrying her; Barney Greenwald (the defense
lawyer) is no longer Jewish. Simpler, in this case, is not better.

It seems that the U. S. Navy wouldn’t cooperate with the project until the
writers made certain changes in the script. It would be fascinating to learn
how much of the film was censored, and for what reasons.

Source: 2006/02/an_overheard_co

Title: An Overheard Conversation
Date: February 03, 2006

I was at Peet's Coffee in Alameda, California this morning, drinking hot
chocolate and reading Lord of the Flies. There were three retired guys a couple
of tables away, chatting. I overheard the following story:

"He was a lawyer for an intellectual property firm--a big-time litigator. He met
this woman and fell in love with her. She wasn't at all interested. She owned a
window-washing company. He quit his job and went to work as a window washer so
that he could be close to her."

That's as much as I heard, but I would have liked to know what happened next.
It's possible that the lawyer's perseverance was rewarded. The window-washer
lady came to understand that he loved her so much that he was willing to give up
his career to follow her. Eventually, she relented, married him, and together
they developed the biggest window-washing company in San Francisco. But then
again, perhaps she realized that he wasn't really in love -- in fact, he was
one of those obsessive stalkers that regularly appear in horror movies. So she
was forced to escape by selling her company, taking a new name, and moving to
Pocatello. He continued to wash windows, and started to specialize in eighty-
story buildings. One day, he failed to hook his belt properly and fell. No one
ever knew if it was an accident or suicide. Meanwhile she was happy in Idaho,
where she married a mild-mannered lawyer.

Or --another thought -- he forgot all about her but found that he liked washing
windows more than corporate law. But one day, he was hooked outside a skyscraper
window, and looked inside and there she was at a meeting. And he fell in love
all over again.

February 13:  I now think it most likely that he forgot all about the lady,
moved to rural Connecticut, changed his name to Seymour Glass, and became a
recluse who lived a house with very clean windows.

Source: 2006/02/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Lord of the Flies
Date: February 06, 2006

In my daughter's basement I found a dried-up, stained, pages-hanging-out 1959
paperback edition of William Golding's Lord of the Flies. On the cover:
"Copyright 1954." "Over 4,450,000 copies in print." "Sixty-second impression."
"Now Available For Students And Teachers: the Casebook Edition  containing
the full text of the novel, critical essays, notes, and bibliography." Lord of
the Flies leaped into public prominence in the mid-1950s and quickly became a
classroom staple. A quick googling found half a dozen websites designed to help
high school students generate reports on the novel's "symbolism," etc.

I didn't like Lord of the Flies when I read it back then and it's become less
likable-- and less worthy of respect-- over the last half-century. It's a
variation on Robinson Crusoe, except that this time a score of boys land (how?
and not a one of them injured!!) on an uninhabited island in the Pacific. They
very quickly degenerate into savages, murder two of their own number, and are
hunting down the last boy who possesses a modicum of civility when a naval
officer (nauta ex machina?) arrives to take command. Lord of the Flies is a
dyspeptic, dystopian novel; it's also, according to the websites, a story of the
contest between civilization and barbarism and,-- guess what?-- it's barbarism
by a country mile.

Robinson Crusoe himself was no perfect model of psychological health, but
Defoe's story has been admired for centuries (it's the most reprinted novel in
history) at least in part because it asserts that a resourceful human being
can triumph over a bad situation. Crusoe reads his Bible, keeps a calendar and
a diary, domesticates goats, develops a working agricultural system, learns
pottery, carpentry and other crafts, and builds himself both a summer and a
winter domicile. Lord of the Flies, on the contrary, is entirely pessimistic
about human capabilities: its flat, book-less, unskilled characters devolve
rapidly into war-painted, violent tribesmen. Robinson Crusoe embodied Age of
Reason optimism; Lord of the Flies is a post-Nazi novel in which there is no
culture, government is nothing more than incipient dictatorship, and religion
deteriorates into cruel scapegoating.

Why was it imagined that Lord of the Flies had something of value to say about
about human nature? It's a sure thing that if Golding had written a novel
in which an isolated group of people behave like reborn Crusoes and work
cooperatively to tame the forest and create a communal utopia, he would have
been derided as a simpleton. No room in the Cold War inn or on the best-seller
lists or in high school curricula for optimism!

Golding arranges it so that the descent into barbarism appears to be not
circumstantial but inevitable. He banishes from his island women and therefore
any need for reciprocity in social institutions. (Violence without heterosexual
sex--just what's needed in the high school classroom!) Moreover, the boys who
land on the island are not a representative set of human beings: they are
English public school children who've already internalized poisonous notions of
hierarchy, hazing, power and class. When, at the outset, they choose a chief,
they're really selecting a head boy for whom lesser creatures will "fag." Of the
island's inhabitants, the only one with more brain than earwax is the physically
repulsive Piggy, while the only boy whose instincts are democratic is slow,
tongue-tied, and indecisive. Meanwhile, Jack, to whom Golding grants leadership
abilities, is a slick soulless demagogue. The author may appear to be impartial,
but in fact he's stacked the deck so that the emergence of a proto-fascism
appears "natural." Golding, both a student and a teacher in English public
schools, seems to think that adolescents of his own circle somehow represent
common humanity. His analysis of culture is therefore as shallow as a parking-
lot puddle. And because it's so shallow, the novel is a treasure-trove for the
kind of teaching where the identification of "symbols" substitutes for genuine
thought, or emotion, or aesthetic revelation. It's a convenient opportunity
-- a casebook -- for the kind of bad reading that has damaged generations of
students.

Golding's island abounds not in intelligence but in absurdities. Is it credible
that three or four pre-adolescent boys armed only with sharpened sticks could
a) confront a wild boar and b) actually bring down a mature sow, and that the
sow would lie still, or allow herself to be held to the ground while one of
the boys repeatedly stabs and eventually kills the animal with a penknife, and
c) that the same boys, using no other tools than the single penknife, could
quickly skin, butcher and behead the sow, and then d) cut and drive into the
ground a post stout enough on which to mount that head?  Or e) that a few boys
could dislodge and push a rock that is "as big as a tank." Or that f) there
could exist an uninhabited Pacific atoll so small that a group of boys could
systematically search every inch of it like beaters on a hunt, but yet so large
that, without experiencing much in the way of rain, it could have streams and
pools of fresh water and, in addition, g) an inexhaustible supply of wild pigs
(indigenous? feral?).

If Lord of the Flies is an allegory, then perhaps such howlers don't matter. Yet
even an allegory should not cause a reader to guffaw at inappropriate moments.

Source: 2006/02/in_the_latest_n

Title: Beethoven Manuscript;  Missing Shakespeare Play
Date: February 12, 2006

The latest New Yorker reports the discovery of a long-lost manuscript by
Beethoven. It's not a new piece, but an arrangement for piano, four hands, of
the composer’s “Grosse Fuge,” or “Great Fugue,” -- which is one of
the most exciting and challenging pieces of music in the known universe. The
manuscript was sold at Sotheby's in December to an unnamed buyer for $1.95
million. I know the Grosse Fuge very well in the form of a string quartet; I
would love to hear the four-hand piano version sometime soon.

The Beethoven discovery renews my hope that some day another long-lost item
will re-emerge -- the Shakespeare play that's been missing for just about four
hundred years.

In 1598, Francis Meres compiled a list of the plays of Shakespeare that were
known to him: he mentioned, among a dozen others, Shakespeare's "Loue Labors
lost, [and] his Loues labours wonne." No one gave much credence to Meres, who
was thought to have hallucinated the second play, until 1953, when a book by
Thomas Gataker called Certaine Sermons (1637) was rebound and two sheets of
paper covered with Elizabethan handwriting were discovered in the backing. The
papers were part of the ledger of an otherwise unknown stationer in Exeter and
listed the books that were in his stock in August, 1603. Among them: "marchant
of vennis," "taming of a shrew," "loves labor lost" and "loves labor won."  So
Meres was right all along; Shakespeare had in truth written a play called Love's
Labor's Won. And it had been published. But the play must have soon disappeared
because the diligent compilers of the great 1623 Folio either didn't know of it
or couldn't locate a copy.

It's possible that the play has vanished into oblivion, but it's also possible
that a copy lies in a closet, drawer or vault. The Beethoven fugue was found by
a librarian who was cleaning a cabinet at the Palmer Theological Seminary in
Wynnewood, Pennsylvania  -- how the manuscript found its way to that location
is anyone's guess. The Thomas Malory manuscript -- one of the most important
literary discoveries of the last century -- was lying unidentified in plain
sight on top of a safe in Winchester Cathedral. So it's not at all impossible
that a quarto of Love's Labor's Won still lurks somewhere, waiting.

There are some other Shakespeare items of interest (and no doubt of monetary
value) that might also resurface. There's the missing quarto zero (Q0) of The
First Part of King Henry the Fourth (only a few pages of which are known,
and then only because they were accidentally bound into a copy of a later
quarto); there's Cardenio (co-authored with John Fletcher), which was probably
Shakespeare's last effort; there might also be a fuller manuscript version of
Macbeth (the Folio play seems to have been deliberately shortened for provincial
performance).  Also of interest: the anonymous Hamlet that was written a
decade or so before Shakespeare's, and which the playwright used as the basis
of his revision. Only a single line of the earlier play has survived: the ghost
is known to have cried, as shrilly as a street-seller of oysters, "Hamlet,
revenge."

Source: 2006/02/why_an_old_huma

Title: Why an Old Humanist Sometimes Feels That the World Has Changed
Date: February 18, 2006

Here's the description of a project posted on a literary website by (I'm
guessing) a young Shakespeare scholar: "I want to create a comprehensive
XML schema for Shakespeare's plays, and then apply the schema in an online
prototype. The schema will conform to TEI standards where possible and
appropriate, and exceed them where necessary. Creating a DTD will not give us
the versatility we want, so we have moved to a schema instead."

"XML schema?"  "TEI standards?"  "DTD?"  What language are we speaking?

Source: 2006/02/reading_proust_

Title: Reading Proust to the Grandchildren
Date: February 18, 2006

We were in California tending the grandchildren (a girl, 6, and a boy, 4) while
"the daughter" and her husband were on a sun-and-sand vacation down in Baja. The
children are in the habit of coming into their parents'  bed when they have
trouble going to sleep. We're in the habit of reading aloud before putting out
the lights. At present, I'm reading Swann's Way. One night, the children, as is
their custom, came in to snuggle. After they settled down, I resumed reading:
"I was not quite Bergotte's only admirer; he was also the favorite writer of a
friend of my mother's, a very well read woman, while Dr. du Boulbon would keep
his patients waiting as he read Bergotte's most recent book; and it was from
his consulting room, and from a park near Combray, that some of the first seeds
of that predilection for Bergotte took flight...." The children fell almost
immediately to sleep; Proust's undiagrammable sentences were too much for them.

The next night, same scenario. We're in bed. The children came in to snuggle;
they thrashed about for a few moments, giggled, eventually settled down.
I picked up Monsieur Proust. "To Mme. Verdurin's great surprise, Swann
never abandoned them. He went to meet them wherever they were, sometimes in
restaurants in the outlying districts where no went went much yet, because it
was not the season, more often to the theater, which Mme. Verdurin liked very
much;  and because one day, at her house, she said in his presence that on
evenings when there were premieres, or galas, a pass would have been useful
to them, that it had inconvenienced them very much not to have one the day of
Gambetta's funeral...."  And then, the young lady looked at the young man, and
he looked at her, and without a word, the two of them rose from our bed and
padded back to their own room.

Literary criticism in its most elemental manifestation.

Source: 2006/02/tell_her_about_

Title: Alien Abductions and Other Irrationalities
Date: February 18, 2006

In Abducted:  How People Come to Believe They Were Abducted by Aliens (Harvard,
2005), Susan Clancy recounts interviews with fifty or so "abductees." Each
person's experience is unique, but the various stories can be melded into a
composite narrative. "I was having problems with anxiety and depression. I was
at Fenway Park with my buddies watching a game. The next thing I remember, I
was on Mission Hill and it was five in the morning. I was always interested in
science fiction. I read Communion; I saw E. T and Close Encounters. I went to a
hypnotist, and memories started flooding back. I started sobbing uncontrollably.
They were long and tall, with huge black eyes that went around their heads. I
remembered them fastening a device like a suction cup to my genitals to suck out
the sperm painfully. They inserted a foot-long tube into my nostril. I know it
happened because I get nosebleeds. My dad thinks it's a transmitter they put in
there.  They've programmed other memories to disappear. Until I experienced the
aliens, life was empty, meaningless. Now that I have my memories, I understand
everything. What happened to me was overwhelming. It was real. I can't explain--
I felt it. I was changed from the person that I was.  It was the most positive
event of my life. It helped me to see life as beautiful, as a gift."

Alien abductees may hold to false beliefs, but they have powerful faith. Clancy
reports that once, at a convention of abductees, she tried to talk about the
unreliability of anecdotal evidence, the fragility of memory, the nature of
the sleep-paralysis syndrome, the creation of false memories under hypnosis,
Occam's Razor (the employment of the most economical hypothesis to explain a
phenomenon), etc. According to Clancy, there was a long silence, and then one of
the participants said, "tell her about the metallic tube that came out of Jim's
nose, the one that went down the sink before you both could catch it."

Eventually Clancy brings herself to discuss the obvious parallel of abduction
to religion, which, she says, she is reluctant to do because she has "about a
thousand Irish Catholic relatives [she] doesn't want to offend." Nevertheless,
she concludes that "alien-abduction beliefs can be considered a type of
religious creed, based on faith, not facts." Kind to her extended family, Clancy
does pursue the argument to the next logical step: that ordinary, accepted
beliefs of supernatural intervention in human affairs are exactly as credible --
no more, no less -- as belief in macrocephalic waifs with black wraparound eyes
who stick needles into your navel to produce hybrid children.

She also reports that one of her informants, when challenged, responded, "I
trust my gut and my gut says aliens." Is there a better argument for listening
not to our guts but to our brains?

Source: 2006/02/reduplicatives_

Title: Reduplicatives
Date: February 22, 2006

Reduplicatives, sometimes called "echo words," or "echo phrases" are
formulations such as hobnob, pell-mell, herky-jerky, hoity-toity, itsy-bitsy,
niminy-piminy.

In English, there are two principal classes of reduplicatives. Category one
consists of rhymes such as hodge-podge, willy-nilly, helter-skelter, kowtow,
harum-scarum, jeepers-creepers, okey-dokey, heebie-jeebie, gang-bang, hocus-
pocus (reputed to derive from the words of the Latin mass:  hoc est corpus
meum);  the second category contains words that are formed by ablaut or vowel
shift, such as ping-pong, shilly-shally, zig-zag, bibble-babble, pitter-patter,
splish-splash, flim-flam.

There are also some lovely oddities that resist classification: dipsy-doodle,
topsy-turvey, hunky-dory, tilly-valley, and, at the outer limit, hullabaloo.

Of the hundreds (perhaps thousands) of reduplicatives, almost all are comprised
of one or two syllables, but there are occasional threes: higgledy-piggledy,
jiggery-pokery. To the best of my knowledge, there are no four-syllable
reduplicatives.

Many are diminutives or are dismissive: hanky-panky, namby-pamby, claptrap,
mumbo-jumbo.

The language continues to generate reduplicatives. Some now common
reduplicatives were unknown to my youth: Maui-wowie, boob-tube, creature-feature
(a horror movie), fender-bender, gender-bender, chick-flick, AC-DC, fag-hag,
chop-shop (a place where stolen cars are cut into parts), brain-drain, artsy-
fartsy.

But reduplicatives are as old as the language. Shakespeare, who was fond of
reduplicatives, used them not just for comic effect, but at critical dramatic
moments. Some well-known examples: the weird sisters in Macbeth will meet again
"When the hurly-burly's done,/ When the battle's lost and won." "Hurly-burly"
signals the sisters' contempt for human effort. In Hamlet, Claudius admits that
it was a mistake to bury Polonius in secret haste: "we have done but greenly/ In
hugger-mugger to inter him."  The Catholic Hotspur (in The First Part of King
Henry the Fourth) complains that the great pagan magician Glendower speaks "such
a deal of skimble-skamble stuff/ As puts me from my faith."  A less famous but
still wonderful reduplicative appears in All's Well That Ends Well, where the
braggart soldier Parolles argues in purple pentameters that his young master
Bertram should abandon his bride and go the wars:  "He wears his honor in a
box unseen,/ That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,/Spending his manly marrow
in her arms,/ Which should sustain the bound and high curvet/ Of Mar's fiery
steed."  The rare "kicky-wicky," which some derive from French quelque chose,
is brutally insulting.

Three men come into a restaurant: one is from Walla-Walla, one from Pago-Pago,
and one from Ryukyu. They order cous-cous, mahi-mahi, and a kiwi salad. They ask
the mu-mu clad waitress (who suffers from beri-beri) about the quality of the
food. In some versions of this edifying story, she replies, "So-so."  What else
might she have said?

Source: 2006/02/what_we_read_in_1-1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Catcher in the Rye
Date: February 22, 2006

J. D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye is an anti-bildungsroman -- a "novel of
education" without the least shred of moral, intellectual, or spiritual growth.
Holden Caulfield, the novel's naive yet jaded narrator, learns absolutely
nothing either about himself or about life. Unable to profit from his various
encounters, he dismisses almost everyone he meets as "phony." The incessant
drumming on that one particular adjective leads a reader to hope that Holden
will find authenticity somewhere in his horizon, but The Catcher in the Rye
is not a novel that rewards optimism. It concludes with a vision of Holden's
pre- pubescent sister Phoebe going "round and round" on a symbolic carousel --
going nowhere, it would seem -- and in a brief coda Holden himself has been
institutionalized and placed under the care of an unsympathetic psychoanalyst.
Nor does the whiff of Humbertism in the relation between Holden and young Phoebe
contribute any last-second learning or cheer.

Even in the 1950s, The Catcher in the Rye enjoyed a cadre of fiercely loyal
partisans who powerfully identified with Holden Caulfield. I didn't believe
then, and certainly don't believe now, that Holden Caulfield mirrored the
anguish of my own particular soul. I was not a true believer, and I was not
entranced by Holden. For me, the novel was nothing more than a better-than-
average coming-of-age story -- although a dispiriting one because Holden does
not mature but instead remains stranded in perpetual, painful adolescence.

A novel without hope, The Catcher in the Rye has become an inspiration for the
hopeless. In Los Angeles, in 1989, twenty-one-year-old Robert Bando shot and
killed a young actress whom he had been pestering with trinkets and messages. In
a nearby alley, police found a .357-caliber handgun, a bloody shirt, and a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye. Two years later, John Hinckley shot and crippled
James Brady and almost succeeded in assassinating Ronald Reagan. Hinckley had
fantasized that killing the president would impress the actress Jodie Foster,
whom he imagined that he was wooing. In his pocket he carried a well-read,
tattered paperback of -- you guessed it --The Catcher in the Rye. In 1980, on
Manhattan's West Side, Mark David Chapman, concealing his pistol under a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye, shot John Lennon five times at point blank. He had
inscribed his copy of the novel with the words "To Holden Caulfield from Holden
Caulfield" -- Chapman had tried to legally change his name to that of Salinger's
troubled narrator. From jail, the proud murderer issued an endorsement: "My wish
is for all of you to someday read The Catcher in the Rye." At his trial Chapman
asserted that he had killed Lennon because the singer had become "phony,"
and at his sentencing he read to the judge the section of the book in which
Holden tells his sister Phoebe that he imagined himself in a field of rye with
"thousands of little kids" whom he must prevent from falling off "the edge of
some crazy cliff."

The Catcher in the Rye still sells well (15,000,000 copies in print by 1996) and
has become a fixture in the high school and college classroom, where successive
generations of adolescents can calibrate their degree of angst against Holden's.
But increasingly, and paradoxically, attention has turned from the novel to
Salinger himself, who has not published anything since 1965 and, secluded in his
Cornish, New Hampshire retreat, has become the world's most notorious hermit
since St. Simeon Stylites mounted his pillar in sixth-century Antioch.

Although he is a hermit, Salinger is anything but a saint. In 1987, in a bizarre
echo of Holden-obsessed stalkers, Salinger, then sixty-eight years old, flew to
California and barged onto the set of the TV show Dynasty in search of one of
the series's starlets, Catherine Oxenberg, with whom he had apparently fallen
into long-distance electronic infatuation. He was "escorted" off the set.

Did Catherine Oxenberg have a precursor?  She did, indeed she did. Several, in
fact, including Joyce Maynard, described as "the Lolita of all Lolitas," who
was eighteen and a freshman at Yale in 1972 when Salinger, at the age of fifty-
three, initiated a romance by sending her a fan letter.

These and other even less savory details about Caulfield-Salinger's life can be
found in Paul Alexander's thin, amateurish biography Salinger (Los Angeles: 
Renaissance Books, 1999), which does not propose, although it might, that J. D.
has learned as little about life as his most famous character.

Source: 2006/02/naked_came_the_

Title: Naked Came the International Publishing Conglomerate
Date: February 24, 2006

When The Naked and the Dead was published in 1948, the word "naked" still had
shock value. Mailer's novel was followed by books with such titles as The Naked
Society, The Naked Ape and the moderately oxymoronic Naked Lunch.

It wasn't long before shock devolved into cliche. The publishing world has
now transformed itself, at least as far as book titles are concerned, into an
enormous, sprawling colony of nudists. Amazon lists over a thousand books in
English with "naked" in the title.

A reader interested in religion may choose from The Naked Christian, Naked
Buddha, Naked Buddhism, The Naked Soul, The Naked God, The Naked Church, Naked
Angels, Naked in the Promised Land and Praying Naked. The Naked Parish Priest
may imply more than is strictly proper and Buck-Naked Faith suggests that
ordinary nakedness is insufficient.

For the button-down corporate world, there's The Naked Corporation, The Naked
Consumer, The Naked Employee, The Naked Investor, Naked Imperialism, The Naked
Entrepreneur, Naked Marketing, Naked Imperialism, Naked Economics, The Naked
Capitalist, Naked in the Boardroom, The Naked Manager, The Naked Trader, Naked
at the Interview, The Naked Factory, and Work Naked.

There's hardly an area of interest that hasn't been touched by the advent of
naked titling. Politics?: The Naked Empire, Naked Liberty, Naked Justice,
The Naked Communist. Geographical?:  The Naked Tropics, Naked Sun, The
Naked Island, Naked Heartland, The Naked Mountain, The Naked Tree, Naked
Savages, The Naked Airport, Naked in Baghdad, Naked in Da Nang, Naked City,
The Naked Tourist, Naked Wanderlust, The Naked Jungle, Naked Germany, even 
Naked in Cyberspace, wherever that is. Social?: Naked Conversations, Naked
Bitch, The Naked Leader, The Naked Duke, The Naked Marquis, The Naked
Warrior, Naked Ambition, The Naked Roommate, Naked Conversations, The Naked
Crowd.  Gastronomical?: The Naked Chef, Naked Chocolate, Naked Fruit, Eat
Papayas Naked, The Naked Martini. Anatomical: The Naked Face, The Naked
Neuron, The Naked Chiropractor, The Naked Quack. Domestic: Naked Rooms, The
Naked Wall. Artistic?:  Naked Clay, Naked Vinyl, Writing Naked, The Naked
Cartoonist, Naked Poetry. Athletic?:  Naked Skydiving, The Naked Rower,
Swimming Naked, The Naked Runner, The Naked Hunter, The Naked Pilot, Naked
Weightlifting.

It's disappointing to find nothing in the arena of naked basketball, despite
Dennis Rodman's expressed desire to play his last professional game naked-- to
which the NBA commissioner is supposed to have responded, "it would definitely
be his last."

Other professions: The Naked Therapist, The Naked Detective, The Naked Bird
Watcher, The Naked Spy, The Naked Civil Servant, The Naked Counselor, The Naked
Anthropologist.

The field of dance has produced a series of related titles:  Dancing Naked
Under Palm Trees,  ...in the Mindfield, ..at the Edge of Dawn, ...in Front of
the Fridge, ...in the Material World, ...on the Floor, ...in the Sun. There's a
whole genre of books for people whose tastes are more specialized than mine. A
sample:  Naked Hairy Jocks.

Nearly Naked is refreshingly modest.

As might be expected, naked has its parodists. The faux-romance Naked Came the
Stranger was followed by Naked Came the Manatee and Naked Came the Sasquatch.
Naked and the Undead is bloody good, and Naked Brunch is, I think, delicious.
The most exquisite parody: Rita Rudner's Naked Beneath My Clothes. I'm staking
my claim to Naked Came the Nudist.

I was entirely wrong to jump to the conclusion that The Naked Mole Rat was a
parody; it's a serious study of Heterocephalus glaber by an academic zoologist.

Source: 2006/03/hoop_words

Title: Hoop Words
Date: March 01, 2006

Now that "March madness" is nearly upon us, it's appropriate to reflect on
basketball jargon, which is distinguished by its many colorful monosyllables:
hoops, hops, bigs, stuff, slam, jam, slash, dish, board, glass, dunk, pick,
screen, paint, lane, point, wing, trey, rim, post, trap, "D", roll, box, press,
tip, swish, bank, brick, feed, stroke, hole, "J", rock, range.

But down-home slang is not basketball's only linguistic register. Curiously,
there's a contrary tendency toward polysyllabic words of Greek and Latin
origin. Some teams, for example, are said to be "physical." "Physical" (from
Gr. physicos = nature) means, in basketballese, "rough" and does not imply that
the other team plays either an ethereal or spiritual game. Until recently, a
guard played on the "outside" and the center on the "inside"; nowadays they've
become "perimeter" (Gr.) and "interior" (L.) players.  A fast break has become
"transition offense." A player doesn't drive to the basket; he "penetrates." 
Players no longer jump; they "elevate"; they don't block a shot, they "reject"
it.

In an odd linguistic development, a point guard no longer passes the ball; he
"distributes" (Latin: distribuere, to allot) it. In its ordinary meaning, to
"distribute" a basketball would be to cut it into pieces like a loaf of bread
and give each teammate a slice. Only a few years ago, it was still possible
to "switch" from guarding one man in order to guard another; now players
"rotate."  "Rotate," derived from the Latin word for wheel, means "to turn on
an axis, to spin."  A defender who did not switch but rotated would pirouette,
and pirouetting is not an effective defensive strategy. (A better classical
equivalent for switch would be "revolve.")  Even sillier than rotate: "rotate
over" or "rotate around"-- a usage that evokes the grotesquerie of a big guy
in a tutu pirouetting across the baseline -- a vision that is all the more
picturesque now that traditional basketball shorts have been replaced by big ol'
bloomers.

March 5:  Last night I heard a TV announcer say that a seven-foot tall player
had "a lot of verticality."  If he fell to the floor, I suppose that he would
have "horizonality." March 27: Also, "convert" for score, as in, "they had a
transition opportunity  but failed to convert."

Source: 2006/03/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Lolita
Date: March 02, 2006

I know that I read Lolita sometime during my senior year in college, which was
the last year of the socially-constricted Eisenhower presidency. Nabokov was a
celebrity at Cornell and I remember attending a lecture in which he delivered a
hilarious destruction of Soviet realism. He was the first novelist whom I ever
saw with my own eyes (I had sat next to Tom Pynchon in a course in Eighteenth-
Century English literature every day for a semester, but although Pynchon had
published a story or two in Epoch, he was just another gangley guy and hardly
the artist--or the enigma--that he would soon become).

Lolita had been published in Paris in 1955, so it's just a bit more than fifty
years old, and therefore halfway to its centennial, when, it's often asserted,
it becomes possible to distinguish between works for the moment and works
for the ages. An interim report: Lolita is doing very very well.  It's as
impressive now as it was then -- but for different reasons. When I read the
novel In 1959, I was dazzled by its verbal surface: the allusions to Poe, to
Hamlet, to Joyce (whose Ulysses I had read closely even then). Of course I
missed much, especially because at that time I had read almost no continental
literature. But I loved being able to decipher some of the novel's playful
mysteries: that, for example, "Vivian Darkbloom" -- who is Clare Quilty's
accomplice in crime -- was an anagram for "Vladimir Nabokov" and that Lolita's
teachers "Miss Horn" and "Miss Cole" spoonerized an obscenity. It pleased me
immensely that Charlotte Haze ordered a mattress from "a firm located at 4640
Roosevelt Blvd., Philadelphia," because I had spent three dreadful summers
working in the Sears Roebuck warehouse on Utica Avenue, where I might have
composed an Anatomy of Boredom. I knew to whom "Brown, Dolores" alluded, and I
knew why she squatted outside the gates of the cloister. And then there were
Nabokov's extraordinary rhetorical displays. Had there ever been a novelist
who cared enough to write a sentence like "the least pressure would suffice to
set all paradise loose," where "least" balanced "loose," "paradise" balanced
"pressure," and "set" offset "suffice?"

I loved Lolita and I read all that I could find of Nabokov's early works and
then all the new ones as they appeared. But it's been a long time since I last
read the novel and the sexual abuse of children is no longer, if it ever was, a
matter for flippancy. I was worried that Lolita would be insensitive and dated.
But it's not so. It's still satirical, and it's still fun, but now it's less
comic than it is sad. Humbert is still clever, but he's clearly a madman, and
the murder of Quilty is the best apology that he can render to Lolita. Humbert
knows he's the blackest of villains, that he's robbed Lolita of her childhood,
that he lived in "a world of total evil," and that "even the most miserable of
family lives was better than the parody of incest, which... was all I could
offer the waif." The novel shocked Eisenhower America because it was thought to
be lurid -- but it's no more lurid than Oedipus. It's fully, designedly, and
beautifully tragic.

Source: 2006/03/annoying_locuti

Title: Annoying Locutions:  "Within"; "Beg the Question"
Date: March 10, 2006

Why in the living heck do they say that the Nuggets are "within" two points of
the Lakers?  "Within" means less than than the proclaimed margin -- 1.9 points
perhaps. Why not say that the Nuggets are two points behind? Or trailing by
two points?  But not -- goodness gracious -- "within."  It's a perpetually
annoying piece of basketball-announcer slang and a good reason to keep the TV
sound muted. Moreover, why, given everything that I know about language change
and about prescription versus description, does such an ugly locution fill me
with grievous indignation?

And by all that's holy, "beg the question" does not mean "raise the question"
or "leads to the question." "Beg the question" is a term in logic which means
that the conclusion is implicit in the premise. It's a form of circular
argumentation. Aristotle first defined petitio principii and his analysis
served until a dozen or score of years ago, when, for some reason, "beg" became
confused with "beget." Let's try to hold the line on this one-- we need all the
logic we can muster in these perilous times.

Source: 2006/03/life_versus_art

Title: Life versus Art
Date: March 13, 2006

According to A. M. Sperber and Eric Lax (Bogart [William Morrow, 1997] p. 474),
during the filming of Beat the Devil in 1954, legendary tough guy Humphrey
Bogart (Duke Mantee, Sam Spade, Phillip Marlowe) was beaten three consecutive
times in arm-wrestling by legendary limp-wrist Truman Capote.

Source: 2006/03/my_brush_with_g

Title: A Brush with Greatness
Date: March 13, 2006

I'm not generally given to boasting, but it's a fact: the great Don Newcombe
once spoke to me -- me! He asked me to refrain from conversing with him. This
noteworthy event occurred in 1949.

During summer vacation, it was the custom for neighborhood kids to arrive
at Ebbets Field early in the morning. The games didn't start until 1:30, so
we'd take a half a day's supply of salami sandwiches and stand outside the
players' entrance at 10:00 or so in the morning, hoping to catch sight of
Robinson, or Cox, or Furillo walking up the ramp to the clubhouse.  After
the stakeout, we'd watch a couple of hours of batting practice, and then some
fielding practice, and then there would be a long pause while the groundskeepers
spruced up the field, and then we'd listen to Gladys Gooding at the organ,
and at last, anticlimactically, we'd watch the actual game. I sometimes paid
the 60 cents for a seat in the bleachers, but just as often I was admitted
with one of the free tickets that were distributed by neighborhood fraternal
organizations -- the PAL (Police Athletic League) or the Sons of Italy or the
Sons of Norway. What a treat -- you could go to a Dodgers' game and at the same
time be Norwegian for a day!

One morning, there I was, loitering among a crowd of kids just as Big Don
arrived. He was huge. I can't remember exactly what I shouted to him, but it
was probably something like "Hey Don. Are you going to pitch today? How's the
arm?  Do you think you'll pinch-hit. Huh. Huh?" Newk turned and looked directly
at me and said, and I quote, verbatim, "Shut up, kid."  What a thrill!  I had
been noticed by the great man himself. It was a transcendent moment -- even more
exciting than the time when, sitting in the left field lower deck, I scrambled
for a home-run ball off the bat of third baseman Bobby Morgan (a ball that, to
my eternal regret, I later sold for five bucks. But hey, five dollars could take
you -- at 60 cents a ticket, two 5 cent subway fares, and another 5 cents for "a
big delicious glass of Nedick's tasty orange drink,/ It's cool refreshing flavor
you'll adore" -- to five or six games, one of which might be a double-header.)

How can I emphasize this sufficiently?:  Don Newcombe spoke directly,
personally, to me.

Here's another event of titanic importance: in the last innings of a game, when
the guards who policed the bleachers were too bored to pay attention, kids
would sneak down into the good seats. At Ebbets, the Dodgers' bullpen was along
the right-field foul line, so it was possible to sit just behind the relievers
and try to engage them in intimate conversation. One day I was involved in an
exciting unidirectional chat with Hal Gregg, then on the downside of his career
(he had won 18 games in 1945) when the frustrated reliever impatiently swung
himself around and said to me, and once again I quote absolutely verbatim, "What
are you, kid, a magpie?"

As long as I'm in full bragging mode, I should also boast that I once possessed,
on a treasured scrap of paper, the penciled autograph of Bob Ramazzotti, a
Dodger infielder, who, in 1949, batted .154 with one home run and three rbi's.

Let me also add that it was considered the utmost pinnacle of schoolyard wit to
sit in the front seats of the Ebbets Field upper deck and drizzle sticky orange
Nedick's upon the spectators beneath.

Source: 2006/03/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Naked and the Dead
Date: March 14, 2006

I had great hope that I would love to read The Naked and the Dead. Although
Norman Mailer is quite a few years older than I, he's a Brooklyn boy who became
a somebody. Mailer went to neighborhood schools, then on to Harvard and the
Army, and made a quite a splash. (As a matter of fact, he attended P. S. 161 in
Crown Heights, a school that we at P. S. 217 regularly trounced in the summer
softball league.)  But The Naked and the Dead was less fun than I had hoped. It
is 721 exhausting pages long. It has too many words, too many characters, too
much flashback, too much repetitive talk. It's not epic; it's just long.

The profusion of detail swallows an exemplary story: on a south Pacific island,
a platoon of soldiers is assigned to perform an impossible task. The platoon
suffers deaths, injuries, wounds, tensions, and a variety of psychic traumas,
even though, unknown to any of its members, by dumb luck and superior numbers,
the American forces have long since broken through the Japanese lines and the
battle for the island has been won.

The novel had a huge impact in 1948 and throughout the fifties and it started
Norman Mailer on his astonishing and perplexing career. It was much discussed
in the P. S. 217 schoolyard not only as a hot book (lots of talk about sex and
a superabundance of "fugs") but also as a scary account of life in the United
States military.  It certainly frightened me.

It's hard to believe that fifty years have gone by I last read The Naked and the
Dead. I still admire its ambition and I'm impressed that Mailer was just twenty-
five years old when it was published, but I'm deeply offended by the want of
economy, the lack of discipline, the narrow perspective, the philosophical
incoherence, the plot lapses, and especially by the reliance on shallow ethnic
stereotypes. I can't help thinking that, if Mailer had had patience and wisdom
and, most of all, restraint, The Naked and the Dead might have been not a seven-
hundred page monster but a two-hundred page masterpiece.

But I doubt that P. S. 161 put much emphasis on the virtue of restraint.  In
storytelling, Brooklyn guys choose hyperbole over litotes.

Source: 2006/03/no_ham_in_your_

Title: No Ham in Your Hamburger?  It's a Cranwich.
Date: March 17, 2006

The word "alcohol" originates in Arabic as "al-kuhul" (said to mean "tincture
of antimony") and comes into English through Old Spanish. "Alcoholic," as in
"possessing the qualities of alcohol," is an old word, but "alcoholic" does
not acquire the meaning "addicted to alcohol" until 1880. In recent years,
"holic", which had no independent existence, has become detached from its
word of origin and appears as an enclitic or suffix to produce such useful
coinages as "workaholic," "shopaholic," "chocoholic, ""sexaholic."  Holic
is now so well- established as an indicator of compulsive behavior that it's
quite permissible to take almost any noun, slap a holic onto it, and invent a
decipherable adjective. A vacationer, for example, could be a beachaholic, a
swimaholic, or a sandaholic.

A fate similar to that of alcoholic befell the word sandwich. Originally a town
in Kent, Sandwich was later the name of a culinary-minded Earl. "Sand" is self-
explanatory and "wich" designated a tract of salty land. Wich, like holic, has
set out on its own career path and has generated such apparently essential new
words as "bagelwich" and "croissantwich." A croissantwich consists of a quantity
of something or other between two slices of croissant. If a bagelwich is made of
bagel and a croissantwich of croissant, of what is a sandwich made? The obvious
answer: bread, which, by a quirk of language, is signified by the morpheme
"sand."

There's no precise linguistic term for words created by the addition of
holic and wich, but they are closely related to a group known as "cranberry
morphemes." (A morpheme is the smallest unit of sound that carries meaning.) Why
cranberry?  Compare the two words "blackberry" and "cranberry."  Blackberry
resolves into two free morphemes: black and berry. Cranberry, however, is a
horse of another color, because "cran" all by its lonesome has no meaning at
all. (It did, once upon a time; cranberries were eaten by cranes.) "Cran" is
therefore a "bound morpheme." Unlike the black in blackberry, which functions
quite well on its own, "cran" is "bound" because if it were free it would be
meaningless. Technically, a cranberry morpheme is a bound morpheme that exists
in only one lexeme. Workaholic is a variety of cranberry morpheme because, like
cran, holic cannot stand alone; but while cranberry is unique, words containing
holic and wich occur in numerous manifestations.

It's therefore the case that English does not have an adequate word for
workaholic, bagelwich and their proliferating analogues. To supply this need,
I nominate "cranwich" (a coinage that is less than minute old as this is
written and is therefore a neonate neologism). The definition: a "cranwich"
is a cranberry morpheme that has gone wild and no longer limits itself to a
single appearance (like cran), but proliferates (like holic) -- and is easily
proliferable.

A hamburger was originally from Hamburg. At some point, burger detached itself
from hamburger, went wild, and produced such cranwiches as cheeseburger,
baconburger, bocaburger, and gardenburger. Along with these new words comes a
rather paradoxical phenomenon. Just as the sand in sandwich now means bread, so
the ham in hamburger means beef. This linguistic oddity will some day be a thing
of the past: more and more, the word hamburger is being replaced by the less
amusing but more precise beefburger. (Still beyond the horizon: breadwich.) It's
impossible to say why the hamburger yielded burger while the frankfurter (from
Frankfort) failed to cranwich: why do we have chicken franks and tofu franks
rather than chickenfurters and tofufurters?

Other cranwiches of note: Dracula has produced blackula and chocula: "ula" seems
to mean something both frightening and funny (although not in the case of uvula.
A scary uvula would be a uvulula). Godzilla produced hogzilla and bridezilla,
coinages which might lead the cranwich-naive to conclude that the god in
godzilla means god, which it certainly does not. Marathon, the Greek word for
fennel, was also the name of the city where the Athenians defeated the Persians
in 490 BC and from which the messenger Phidippides ran twenty-six miles to bring
the good news home. "Thon" has now severed its relationship with marathon and,
as a suffix, has produced innumerable cranwiches such as as knit-a-thon, jog-a-
thon, dance-a-thon, blog-a-thon, and, believe it or not, masturbate-a-thon. The
"Mc" in McDonald's has not only generated "mcmansions" and "mcjobs," but has
also opened up the possibility that an inferior or sub-standard cranwich could
someday be called a mccranwich. A compendious display of mccranwiches would be a
mccranwichorama.

March 24.   We're in Washington D. C.  On a cab ride we passed the Watergate
complex, the presence of which reminded me that I'd failed to mention one of the
major cranwiches of the last decade. The "gate" in Watergate has become a suffix
that denotes a scandal, as in Korea-gate, Iran-gate, Plamegate or, my favorite
(I like odd rhymes), debate-gate. Debate-gate, now largely forgotten, occurred
during the 1980 presidential campaign, when the fatuous hypocrite and ex-Jesse
Helms speechwriter George Will, using a stolen Democratic briefing book, coached
Ronald Reagan for his debate with Jimmy Carter, then later went on TV to praise
Reagan's "thoroughbred performance."

Source: 2006/03/makamah

Title: William Merritt Chase;  Makamah Beach
Date: March 22, 2006

The American artist most dear to me is the impressionist William Merritt Chase
(1849-1916). Chase painted plein air scenes in Brooklyn's Prospect Park and
Coney Island and also produced a truly wonderful series of landscapes set in the
south fork of eastern Long Island. I knew nothing of these Shinnecock paintings
nor of Chase himself until one day in 1987 when I happened upon an exhibition
of his work in the National Gallery in Washington. Even though I was much
taken with the paintings, I was too frugal to buy the catalog. By virtue of
Amazon, I've at last located a copy (D. Scott Atkinson and Nicolai Cikovsky, Jr,
"William Merritt Chase, Summers at Shinnecock 1891-1902 [Washington:  National
Gallery, 1987]).

In "At the Seaside" (1892), a group of women and children enjoy a lazy day on
an otherwise empty beach. In the distance to the left is a sailboat and to the
right, almost at the horizon, a sandy point. The costumes are of the 1890s,
but the sea and the surf and the clouds are timeless. It's a busy but very
peaceful scene. Similar Chase landcapes depict sea-grasses, scrubby trees,
sandy beaches, empty roads. Many of his canvasses are populated by his wife and
children.

Fully as idyllic as Chase's "Summers at Shinnecock" were my own Wordsworthian
"Summers at Makamah Beach, 1947-1949." Although Makamah was on the Sound (on the
north shore), it was as like as like could be to Shinnecock in the 1890s. My
family spent three magical summers there -- the best summers and by far the best
times of my otherwise entirely citified, asphalt childhood. We rented a very
simple wood-frame beach house. If my memory is correct, the house was mostly
deck with a minimal kitchen and a few sleeping rooms. It seemed like a great
distance to the nearest neighboring beach house, but, in retrospect, it was
probably no more than five hundred or at most a thousand feet. But to a kid from
the schoolyard, a thousand feet was more than plenty. I loved the emptiness --
no trolleys, no radios, no people. I remember wandering alone for hours at low
tide examining, with the patience of childhood, the crabs, snails, seaweeds and
the infinite variety of dead fish. To my vocabulary, I added such novelties as
inlet, point, cove, high tide, squall, blowfish, starfish, perch, sea urchin,
shiner, sinker, fiddler crab, hermit crab, razorback, softshell, float, outboard
and inboard, "sheared a pin," oarlock, dinghy -- words and concepts previously
beyond the outer limit of my imagination. There were porpoises almost every day
-- once I was all alone on the beach when two of them battled furiously for
several minutes right in front of my astonished eyes. No one else saw them, and
no one believed me. There was also an abundance of horseshoe crabs-- not crabs
at all, as I later discovered, but trilobites left over from the Paleozoic.
I think it was the horseshoes that started me reading about paleontology. I
remember also old Mr. van Etten, already more than a child when Chase was
painting at Shinnecock, who took me out in his rowboat to trawl for bluefish.

Wordsworth wrote about his childhood's "fair seed-time" and that he was
"fostered alike by beauty and by fear." While it's easy to exaggerate the amount
of fear back in 1950s Brooklyn, it's a fact that there was an almost absolute
absence of beauty. Makamah Beach offered not only beauty and variety but also
the possibility of different kind of life.

Source: 2006/03/mayflower_hotel

Title: The Mayflower Hotel
Date: March 28, 2006

We're in Washington  D. C., this week and inadvertently wandered by the
Mayflower Hotel.

A memory: in July of 1952, I stayed at the Mayflower for a few days with my
father's sister, my peripatetic and eccentric Aunt Mollie. It was a rare and
unique event. I came from an automobile-less family, and my parents were not in
the slightest bit adventurous. The trip to Washington was the sole occasion in
my childhood when I was in a city other than New York (and by New York I mean
deepest Brooklyn, with an occasional foray to the Bronx Zoo or to the Museum
of Natural History). It's hard to convey the full measure of the naivete with
which this schoolyard boy approached a new city. I knew that Washington was
smaller than New York and therefore assumed that it would consist of a smaller
Brooklyn, a smaller Manhattan, etc. I had no conception that different cities
had different geographies -- let alone different characters.

Highlights:  the Lincoln Memorial (I was exhilarated), the Jefferson
Memorial, a boat ride to Mount Vernon. My strongest memory is of exciting and
down-to-earth Harry Truman addressing a crowd from the base of the Washington
Monument on the Fourth of July. The result of this voyage into the unknown was
the realization that there were other cities, that they were accessible -- in
short, that there was a world elsewhere.

I'm permanently indebted to my Aunt for allowing me the opportunity to grasp
such a big idea.

And also that there was such a thing as a restaurant. It might seem incredible,
but from birth to college, I didn't enter a restaurant more than a half-a-dozen
times at the very most. In our family, there was neither the money nor the
inclination toward such extravagance. I still consider it a something of a
miracle that a guy like me can walk into a shop, sit down, and that people will
generously put food on my plate. All that I have to do in return is fork over a
few bucks.

Exactly thirty-five years later, I stayed at the Mayflower a second time when
AGP was honored and celebrated. At this Mayflower reprise, it was not Truman
but Ronald Reagan whom we encountered. I remember the dyed hair, the unnatural
orange skin, the ventriloquist's-dummy delivery of the speech that was handed
him, and the undeniable inference that he was already deeply incapacitated by
the Alzheimer's that would eventually kill him.

Source: 2006/04/and_speaking_of

Title: And Speaking of Berries...
Date: April 02, 2006

The cranberry, some say, is so named because it is eaten by cranes. Perhaps.
But it's just as likely that the word derives from the similarity between the
plant's stamen and the crane's beak --  as the common geranium or cranesbill
is named after the flower's distinct enlarged pistil. (The American cranberry
has an English cousin that is known, from its watery habitat, as the fenberry.
The fenberry is neither eaten in nor by fens.) But if in fact cranberries were
the food of cranes, what about the common bearberry (also known as crowberry,
foxberry, and hog cranberry) -- did this plant also derive its name from its
consumers?  I'm skeptical, as I am skeptical about the derivation of the word
lingonberry or cowberry, cows not being famous for berry eating. In fact, lingon
means berry in Swedish, so the lingonberry is, etymologically speaking, a
berryberry. Inasmuch as berryberries contain thiamine, they may help to prevent
beriberi.

The bunchberry, a member of the dogwood family, is also known as the
squirrelberry, pigeonberry, and crackerberry (from crake = crow), but never as
mooseberry, though it's prized by moose, who have themselves provided a name for
a favorite food -- the mountain maple or moosewood.

The circumpolar cloudberry is sometimes called the salmonberry, but no one
claims that it is nibbled by salmons. And what about the gooseberry?  There's
no discernible relation between gooseberry and geese.  There are also
gooseberries that have shed whatever goosiness they may once have possessed.
The plant that was originally known as the Chinese gooseberry was transported
to New Zealand, where it was selected, hybridized, and cloned, to emerge after
commercial re- christening as the kiwifruit or kiwi -- the name gooseberry not
considered classy enough for international export. To the best of my knowledge,
kiwis are not eaten by kiwis.

Blackberry and blueberry pose no etymological challenge, but raspberry is a bit
of a mystery, there being no obvious rasp to the berry. The word raspberry was
most definitely not derived from the slang term for a rude derogatory sound
-- a usage that is only traceable to the last part of the nineteenth century.
The unpalatable bristly dewberry has no particular connection to dew. It's
popularly said that the serviceberry is so called because, when it flowers early
in the spring, the ground has thawed enough to bury -- or conduct a service --
for last winter's dead. But it's a false etymology -- in fact, the service in
serviceberry comes directly from its Latin ancestor sorbus (just as the mul
in mulberry derives from Latin morus). The juneberry does in fact derive its
name from its month of flowering. The loganberry is named for its hybridizer,
James Logan, who crossed the blackberry and the raspberry. Although the name
huckleberry -- also known as a hurtleberry or whortleberry -- is sometimes
applied to the blueberry, it describes a botanically distinct species. The
slang term huckleberry for a layabout -- nowadays a slacker -- was in use a
generation or so before Mark Twain made it famous. Huckleberry Finn might just
as easily be known as Whortleberry Finn. The bilberry is more distinguished
when it is called a fraughan. The jostaberry is brand-new to the market; it's
a cross between a gooseberry and a blackcurrant. (Currants are berries even
though not called so; the word currant derives from their older name -- raisins
of Corinth.) The strawberry has nothing whatsoever to do with straw. Some
think that name derives from the chaff-like external seeds or achenes which
cover the fruit, but it's more likely that the name is drawn from the plant's
habit of growth: runners stray or are strewn over the ground. A thousand years
ago strawberries were called earthberries, a name not especially suitable for
commerce.

Source: 2006/04/motherhood

Title: Quintessence of Motherhood
Date: April 04, 2006

A friend, a retired nurse, was keeping watch when her ninety-plus-year-old
mother was about to breath her last. The mother, who had not been coherent for
some days, was either unconscious or sleeping deeply when she suddenly roused
herself, looked closely at the daughter, uttered the words "you need rouge," and
died.

This story is self-explanatory but nevertheless I feel compelled to embark on a
course of no doubt supererogatory explications. The mother expresses a variety
of emotions: some positive, some not so good.  Primarily she is affectionate
and protective. She wants her daughter to take care of herself and be her best,
so she proposes a practical cosmetic enhancement. But at the same time, she is
intrusively judgmental, because the statement "you need rouge" clearly finds the
daughter deficient and in need of cosmetic enhancement.

The mother is also impolite -- but only in the way that people who know each
other intimately can sometimes be unmannerly. This particular mother wouldn't
speak nearly so frankly to anyone in the world but her own daughter. In
addition, she's competitive. "You need rouge" means not only "you're pallid, you
need help," but also hints at "I never needed rouge."

It's a humorous anecdote, because it's about the eternal continuity of
mothering.  Even at the moment of death, the mother remains entirely and
unequivocally maternal. The phrase "you need rouge" also makes us smile because
it displaces other last words  -- words of wisdom or serenity or love -- that
we might anticipate or for which we might hope.

And what about the daughter?  Was she, or should she be, pleased, resigned,
offended, amused?

Source: 2006/04/there_was_an_ei

Title: Beast in the Backyard
Date: April 08, 2006

On the night of August 23, 1990, an eighty-pound, two-year-old female mountain
lion wandered into our backyard.

The story appears in a book on cougar-human interactions (David Baron, The Beast
in the Garden [New York: Norton, 2004], 182-187) -- a book which also contains a
picture of "our" lioness, lying drugged on the ground (167).

My strongest memory of that encounter doesn't appear in the book and deserves a
report.  The lioness was crouching on a low branch of a box elder, and a goodly
number of police loitered on the street and in the yards and alleys waiting
for the wildlife-control officer and his tranquillizing dart. Eventually the
marksman arrived and shot the lioness. The animal leaped down from the tree.
As soon as she hit the ground and started to run, we could hear the sound,
resonating throughout the neighborhood, of car doors being slammed shut as
the officers rushed into their vehicles -- to re-emerge only when the lioness
collapsed.

Last week, there was another mountain lion in a near neighbor's backyard. It was
daylight;  the owner of the house had her video camera available and produced
a very clear record of a magnificent animal -- much larger and more formidable
that the one we had seen. Two nights ago, the neighbors held a meeting and the
author of The Beast in the Garden, who lives in town, came to tell us about
cougars in our county and what to do if we encounter them. The good news is
that the odds of being attacked are small: only one local person (a high school
student jogging alone near Idaho Springs) has been killed -- or taken, the
word is -- during the last decade. The author's advice: bring a companion with
you when you go walking in the mountains-- it's unlikely that a catamount will
attack two people, and if he should attack, then there are two of you to fend
him off. (He didn't repeat a familiar bit of local humor: "Always bring  a
friend with you when you walk in mountain-lion country. Remember, you don't have
to outrun the lion; you just have to outrun your friend.")  He also reminded
the audience that it's wrong to run away (because you will look like prey) but
that you should make yourself look big, make noise, throw rocks, etc. Do not,
repeat do not, play dead -- or worse yet, get down on all fours and try to crawl
away. But on the whole it's not the mountain lion you see who's the danger; it's
the mountain lion whom you don't see, but sees you. The one you feel.

A jogger was in the mountains with his faithful pooch at his side.  He came to
the top of a rise and there, on the road, was a big panther.  The jogger's dog
immediately disappeared into the roadside vegetation. The man did everything
right -- shouted, threw things, stared the lion down. Eventually, and slowly,
the big beast moved away and the jogger continued on his run. When he came to
the bottom of the hill, Faithful Companion, who had taken the long way around, 
reappeared and resumed running  with his master.

Man's best friend, but within sensible limits.

Source: 2006/04/prayer_science

Title: Prayer Science
Date: April 10, 2006

According to The New York Times (3/31/2006), the world of prayer science is
all in a dither. A new study has apparently demonstrated that "prayers offered
by strangers had no effect on the recovery of people who were undergoing heart
surgery." The study was a big, expensive deal: ten years of work at a cost of
$2.4 million (contributed by the ever-zealous Templeton Foundation, a powerful
supporter of prayer research). The details are utterly and weirdly fascinating.
"Researchers monitored 1802 patients at six hospitals who received coronary
bypass surgery. The patients were broken into three groups. Two were prayed
for; the third was not. Half of the patients who received the prayers were told
that they were being prayed for; half were told that they might or might not
receive prayers. The researchers asked the members of three congregations -- St.
Paul's Monastery in St. Paul; the Community of Teresian Carmelites in Worcester,
Mass.; and Silent Unity, a Missouri prayer ministry near Kansas City -- to
deliver the prayers, using the patients' first names and the first initials of
their last names. The congregations were told that they could pray in their own
way, but they were instructed to include the phrase "for a successful surgery
with a quick, healthy recovery and no complications.'" The shocking result:
"researchers found no difference between those patients who were prayed for and
those who were not." Prayer, it would appear (or intercessory prayer as this
variety is called), does not change things.

I admire the dedicated men and women of science who put heart and soul into this
project, but with all due respect, I must question both their conclusions and
their protocols. For starters, the inference that prayer doesn't work is far too
broad. Inasmuch as the scientists engaged only Christians to pray, all that they
proved was that Christian prayer doesn't work. It's marvelously ethnocentric to
suggest that just because Christians tanked, other religions could not succeed.
It was Bailey Smith, the President of the Southern Baptist Convention, who
authoritatively proclaimed that "God does not hear the prayer of a Jew." And
yet, in a stunning theological upset, the scientific evidence now proves that
God Almighty does not hear the prayers of Christians. But such a conclusion
is itself far too hyperbolic. In actual fact, all that the study established
is that God did not hear the prayers of three particular groups of prayer-
providers. It's certainly a black mark against the Teresian Carmelites and their
friends, and it will be a cold day in hell before they see another Templeton
prayer contract, but there's nothing to say that Southern Baptists, even Bailey
Smith himself, with his private line to the Almighty, might not have had more
sway with the Great Jehovah.

If the researchers had not been so blindly and thoughtlessly ethnocentric,
they might have solicited the prayers of people of various faiths, especially
those praying to different gods. Or even better: they might have assembled
disparate groups of prayer providers. In one set, for example, there would be
a Catholic, a Jehovah's Witness, and a Hindu; in another, a Muslim, a Wiccan,
and a Methodist; in a third, a Scientologist, a Baptist, and a Muggletonian.
Although the number of possible permutations is intimidating, the cause is
noble: to determine impartially which of these groups can best cut the prayer
mustard. It's wrong to put the entire burden on Christians. Scientists need to
mix and match the various religions so that they can discover the most effective
synergistic combination, or as it might better be called, the appropriate prayer
cocktail.

In addition, the study is guilty of flagrant mishandling of dosage. There was
simply no control over the amount of prayer that was administered. Just as
traditional medicines come in cubic centimeters, prayer comes in units of time.
Let's say that one person praying for one minute yields one prayer unit. 
Pending further study, there's no way to establish exactly how many prayer units
a heart patient might need. For a bypass, fifty prayer units might be a minimum
dosage, but perhaps twice or three times as many units might be necessary to
alleviate the symptoms of a hallucinator of witches, extraterrestrials, or
other supernatural beings. It's entirely possible that the prayers in this
study failed simply because they didn't meet a minimum prayer-unit threshold.
Moreover, it's important not to over-prescribe. For all we know, excessive
prayer might precipitate iatrogenic illnesses. And it's also a question of
efficiency: once an optimum dosage can be established, prayer providers can
go about their business and not waste their time generating superfluous and
expensive prayer units.

Moreover, prayer scientists seem to have given no serious consideration to the
group power of prayer providers. Given the present abysmal state of prayer
science, it's still unknown whether prayers are more effective when delivered by
just one or a very few providers, or in large choruses. Jews seem to think that
a minyan, or quorum, is ten, but hard science has not confirmed this number.
It's therefore imperative to experiment with different size groups in order to
establish a proper medical-minyan. This is not easy, or inexpensive, but it's
essential.  It would indeed be unfortunate if it turns out that a thousand
prayer providers are necessary to improve the condition of just one bypass
patient, but good golly, the Ancient of Days works in mysterious ways, and it's
not for us to question His prayer needs.

There are some other areas in which more scientific rigor is required. A) 
different diseases: just because prayer didn't work for bypasses doesn't mean
it won't work for scrofula. Perhaps some diseases are more prayer-responsive
than others. B) fervor: prayer science has made the naive error of assuming that
all prayer providers are equal. Yet the unalterable laws of random distribution
determine that some people will pray more effectively than others. In point of
fact, it's entirely likely that some prayer providers will be more effective
with one disease than another. If I were a patient, I'd be mighty bent out of
shape (and might even seek legal recourse) if I were assigned a prayer provider
who had a proven track record with ulcers but who amounted to zilch for my hip
replacement.  C) identification: prayer providers were given only the first
name and initial of their prayee. But "Bob S." is entirely too vague-- there
might be hundreds of "Bob S"'s all over the world undergoing bypass surgery at
any given time. How the blue blazes is the Lord of Hosts supposed to know which
particular "Bob S" is meant?  Fortunately, there's an easy solution to this
problem. Prayer providers should continue to pray for Bob S., but just remember
to add the last four digits of his social security or major credit card number.

I'm not the only person disappointed with this study. According to the Times,
"Bob Barth, the spiritual director of Silent Unity, the Missouri prayer
ministry, said the findings would not affect the ministry's mission. 'A person
of faith would say that this study is interesting,' Mr Barth said, 'but we've
been praying a long time and we've seen prayer work, we know it works, and
the research on prayer and spirituality is just getting started.'"  Bob B's
assertion that "prayer works" is anecdotal thinking and has absolutely no merit
whatsoever, but I can't imagine a single person who wouldn't agree with him that
prayer science is "just getting started"-- and also that it has a long bumpy
road to travel. Fortunately, the Bush administration invested over $2 million
of our tax revenues in prayer research, with more in the pipeline, so some
revolutionary breakthroughs in the spiritual sciences soon might be achieved. 
We'll be waiting.

Source: 2006/04/more_on_prayer_

Title: More on Prayer Science
Date: April 12, 2006

In my post on the Templeton prayer study, I did not mention the outcome least
congenial to prayer enthusiasts: not only did prayer do no good, it also caused
real harm. “A significantly higher number of the patients who knew that they
were being prayed for — 59 percent — suffered complications, compared with
51 percent of those who were uncertain [whether or not they were being prayed
for”].

How could it happen that prayees did worse than patients who were just let
alone?  Dr. Charles Bethea, co-author of the Templeton study and cardiologist
at the Integris Baptist Medical Center in Oklahoma City proposed that "it may
have made [patients] uncertain, wondering am I so sick they had to call in their
prayer team?"  It's a possible scenario -- it’s no secret that depressed and
anxious patients do worse than happy ones. But the “patient is anxious”
explanation doesn’t work for those who didn’t know that they were on the
receiving end of prayers.  Among the group of unwitting prayees, “18 percent
suffered major complications, like heart attack or stroke, compared with 13
percent in the group that did not receive prayers.”  Researchers offered no
hypothesis for this unanticipated result except to say that it was a chance
outcome.

So let us review: when prayees know that they’re being prayed for, their
decline is a product of anxiety; when they don’t know that they're being
prayed for, their decline is the result of chance. In both cases, the unwanted
phenomenon is explained by natural rather than supernatural causes.

Let us now imagine that the study produced contrary results and that the prayees
had lower rates of complications than the unprayed. Would there not have been
banner headlines in newspapers and on Fox proclaiming that prayer has been
proven to be effective remedy for the complications of surgery?

The error in logic is enormous and obvious. When prayer fails, it's for
natural reasons. If and when prayer succeeds, it's because of supernatural
intervention. It's a flagrant double standard where a symmetrical standard
should be mandatory. If prayer succeeds because of divine intervention, it's
only logical that it must fail because of symmetrical supernatural intrusions --
because, for example, malificent demonic forces located the prayer providers,
hijacked their prayers mid-flight, and turned good into evil. It's a difficult
hypothesis to prove, it's true, but it's exactly as credible as the ideas that
are put forward by prayer science.

Source: 2006/04/lions

Title: Predators Then and Now
Date: April 16, 2006

There's more neighborhood mountain lion news: yesterday a seven-year-old boy,
walking in the rearward of a group of six or seven hikers, was pounced upon in
the mountains just west of town by a big guy. The child was bitten and clawed
but is now recovering. Family members drove the lion away.

In my view, they should never have allowed the child to pull up the rear.

I’d been thinking about predators even before this last attack (see the
entry for April 8).  By one of those curious convergences that make life so
rich, I just happened to be reading Bruce Chatwin’s The Songlines (New York:
Viking, 1987), a travel narrative ostensibly about the sacred but invisible
paths along which the ancestors of the Australian aborigines traveled and
'sang the world into existence.'  The thesis of this quirky, self-indulgent
and intermittently brilliant narrative is that human beings are by nature not
sedentary but migratory.

But the book isn't only about migrants;  n one of The Songlines' many meanders,
Chatwin writes a few pages on the age-old interaction of human beings with big
predators like the mountain lion. He takes issue with the much-loved claim of
right-wing thinkers that human beings are naturally territorial and aggressive
-- that we are nothing more than naked apes who must continually strive to
control larger and larger dominions. Instead, he offers the alternative view
that because of our long history of fending off predators, human beings are
naturally not aggressive but defensive  -- and, moreover, that It's the
defensive imperative that caused our species to move from savagery to civility.
He asks us to think of the situation of the earliest humans. "The first men were
humbled, harried, besieged -- their communities few and fragmented… clinging
to life and one another through the horrors of the night."  "Might not,"
he asks, "all the attributes we call ‘human’ – language, song-making,
food-sharing, gift- giving, intermarriage... have evolved as stratagems
for survival, hammered out against tremendous odds, to avert the threat of
extinction?"  It's a challenging, overarching hypothesis -- and whether or not
there are facts to validate it is beyond my ken.

It's certainly true that first humans in Africa had to cope with a variety of
nasty predators -- lions were there long before people -- and that when  our
ancestors migrated to Europe they walked into a wild, dangerous country. The
European lion, panthera leo, widespread from 900,000 years ago to the end of the
last ice age, was a third taller and longer than surviving African lions, which
themselves can weigh 450 pounds and reach a length of 8 1/2 feet. The lions in
the virginal land that our ancestors crossed the Mediterranean to colonize would
have been as tall as a fully grown Paleolithic man and might have weighed as
much as 880 pounds.  And remember that for 99% of our time on earth, humans
were either entirely unarmed or possessed only of the hand ax -- a palm-size
piece of sharpened but haft-less flint. No matter what theory of the origins
of civilization we embrace, we should remember that our genes were selected
in a world of woolly rhinoceroses, mammoths, aurochs, and wolves and that we
competed with the big bears for what were then the best residences on earth--
the limestone caves in the Ardeche region in France.

It's in these caves that the memory of European lions is beautifully preserved.
Thirty thousand years ago, a long tradition of animal representation climaxed
in the paintings in the Chauvet Cave. There are beautiful representations of
European lions on the hunt and at rest in Jean-Marie Chauvet's The Dawn of Art:
The Chauvet Cave (New York: Abrams, 1995) --  irrefutable evidence that our
forefathers knew them at first hand.  It's unquestionable that many a child
-- and many an adult -- fell prey to these adversaries. And perhaps Chatwin
is right; perhaps those humans who survived to reproduce were selected not
for aggressiveness but for congeniality and especially for artistic ability.
How else can we account for our species' continual preoccupation, or perhaps
obsession, with all the many forms of beauty?

April 17.  The authorities tracked and killed an 80-pound female panther. I
sincerely hope that it was the offending animal and not an innocent bystander.

Source: 2006/04/three_cheers_fo

Title: Three Cheers for the Blue, White and Red
Date: April 18, 2006

It's been a Krzysztof Kieslowski festival here the last few days. We've watched,
two times each and with concentrated and astonished attention, Kieslowski's
Trois Couleurs films: Bleu, Blanc, and Rouge. Individually (which is how
we viewed them in 1993-94 when they first appeared) they're splendid; taken
together, they're an even more wonderful achievement.

Kieslowski tells complicated stories with economy and precision; I don't know
any filmmaker who can make every corner of the frame count for so much. It must
be his training as a maker of documentaries that accounts for the rich, factual
surface of his narrative. And yet his chosism -- his thing-ism -- is always in
the service not of plot only but of the enigma as well. Kieslowski knows what
accomplished novelists also know -- that an object, studied closely, becomes
a metaphor. The three films share a common theme -- that it's impossible to
find happiness outside of society  -- but the presentations are so various and
imaginative and the characters so rich that philosophical questionings are as
unobtrusive as they are omnipresent.

Kieslowski swore off directing when he finished Rouge, but had apparently
relented and had started on another trilogy (Heaven, Hell, Purgatory) when the
heart attack killed him. But there's the earlier work; we'll track backwards to
watch, once again, The Decalogue and The Double Life of Veronique.

Source: 2006/04/spellcheck_humo

Title: A Little Spellcheck Humor, Maestro
Date: April 20, 2006

I first stumbled over Spellcheck's wayward sense of humor years ago when I was
writing about Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. Spellcheck rejected Capulet,
which is Juliet's family name, and presumptuously instead offered the choice of
either "co-pilot" or "copulate."

Spellcheck is deeply offended by proper names, uncommon words, neologisms, words
in a language other than English, etc., and sometimes makes its impatience known
by suggesting dadaist or absurd substitutions.

For example, everyone (everyone except Spellcheck, that is) knows that
Muggletonians are members of a religion founded in England in the 1650s by
Lodowick Muggleton which held, among other doctrines, the idea that heaven was
only slightly above the reach of our uplifted arms. Spellcheck has an irrational
animus toward this harmless, near-extinct religion and proposed as substitutes
for Muggletonian, the words "Argentinian," "Miltonic," "Macedonian," "Justinian"
and (as a pure instance of spellcheckian whimsy) "melatonin."

Apparently untutored in geography, Spellcheck rejected the ancient north African
and modern upper New York state city of Utica in favor of "Attica," which makes
a kind of sense, but also "Utah," which is a bit off-the-wall, "Utopia," which
is nowhere, and the imaginative but bizarre "erotica."

A recent entry on berries provoked an orgy of spellcheckian absurdity.
For fenberry, "Canberra"; for crowberry, both "crowbar" and "crockery";
for lingonberry, "linguine," "lingerie" and "nunnery"; for whortleberry,
"wheelbarrow";  for earthberry, "authoress"; for cloudberry, "glittery" and the
truly wild, out-of-left-field "Goldberg."  Speaking of left field: for rbi's,
Spellcheck proposed both "ribs" and "rabbis"; for Ebbets (as in Ebbets Field),
simply "beets";  for Newcombe, as in the great Dodger pitcher Don Newcombe,
"encumber."

In another recent post I invented the word "mccranwichorama," defined as a
display of inferior coinages of words in which detached segments (such as the
wich in cranwich) acquire new meaning. I knew that when I batted mccranwichorama
over the net, I would probe the outer limits of Spelllcheck's powers, but I must
say that the program rose to the occasion when it parried with a transcendent
absurdity: for mccranwichorama:  "mercurochrome."

Source: 2006/04/purity_baseball

Title: Baseball Purity
Date: April 30, 2006

My father played excellent tennis and basketball -- he was a guard on the CCNY
team under Nat Holman until he left school to put a few cents in the family
coffers.  During the 20s and 30s he also played some semi-pro baseball. He'd
make $5.00 or $10.00 a game as a "ringer" -- and in those days, an extra buck or
two went a long way.

He was a catcher and had the busted-up fingers to prove it. He paid for the
broken bones when the arthritis caught up with him. Although he had been an
unusually strong man, in his last years he didn't have enough left in his
twisted fingers to pull the match out of the matchbook to light his pipe. But he
could still discuss "inshoots" and "outshoots."

Sometime in the early 80s (it was after mom died), he was in the hospital
recuperating from a hip replacement. He was not a good patient and the
confinement left him testy and bored, but he could be a little cheered by
watching whatever sports were on the TV. One day I visited him and found the
television off.

"Pop, there's a Yankee game on. Why aren't you watching it?"

He waved his gnarled old hand. "American League. DH rule. Not baseball."

I'm glad he didn't have to see the changes since he left the scene. It's a new,
impermanent, history-hostile, TV-friendly, high-scoring production: franchises
jumping all around the country; new stadiums with mighty short porches; players
coming up to bat wearing not only gold necklaces and earrings, but also helmet,
gauntlets and greaves; the incredible shrinking strike zone; pitchers no longer
allowed to knock down the over-aggressive batter; an epidemic of steroids that
has led to  unnaturally bulked-up sluggers; balls flying out of the park as if
the guys were playing Sunday-afternoon slow-pitch softball; mediocre hitters
slamming 40 hr's a year -- not to mention baseball played in the thin Colorado
atmosphere where the batted ball takes off like a rocket and where curve balls
can't curve.

I know exactly what my father would have said: "Not baseball."

Source: 2006/05/whats_the_deal_

Title: What's the Deal with Mike Yamagita?
Date: May 02, 2006

In Fargo, a tightly structured film, the extraneous Mike Yamagita episode might
easily have been cut.

Here’s the story (Fargophiles may bypass the plot summary). Mike is a
high- school classmate and possibly an old boy friend of Marge Gunderson. He
telephones Marge when he learns that she’s the police chief investigating the
Brainerd triple homicide. When they  meet in a hotel bar in Minneapolis, Mike
makes a half-hearted pass which Marge decisively rebuffs. Mike then reveals
that he had been married to a mutual friend, Linda Cooksey, but that Linda
died of leukemia. Because he’s lonely and, it would appear, because he’s
embarrassed to have crossed the line with Marge, he breaks into sobs. A couple
of scenes later, Marge is on the phone with a girl friend. She is surprised to
learn that Mike never married Linda, that Linda is very much alive though she
had been “pestered” by Mike for over a year, and that Mike’s been having
psychiatric problems.

The Mike Yamagita excursion doesn’t easily connect to the gruesome botched-
kidnapping main story. What, then, is its reason for being?.

The Coens like to toy with audience expectations. When we first hear Mike on the
phone, we recognize the same flat upper-Midwest accent with which we've become
familiar -- and so, we're taken aback to discover that Mike is Asian-American.
But is it a gimmick or does it matter?  Mike himself plays against type. Almost
everyone in the film (although not Carl Showalter, the excitable talkative
funny-looking guy who's destined for the wood-chipper) is laconic and stoical.
Mike's bawling opposes him to both the stereotypical impassive Asian as well as
to the stereotypical low-key Swedish Lutheran. But can his display of sentiment
be trusted? Mike is no less insane than Gaear Grimsrud, the psychopathic killer,
but he’s addled in a sweeter way. He wants desperately to be part of a family.
It's because of this longing that he harasses Linda Cooksey and fantasizes
a romance with Marge. In its own Coenesque way, Fargo is a film that extols
families. Although the Lundegaards are not a good model, Marge and Norm are
emphatically in the process of creating a good and decent family. So perhaps,
taken all together, the Mike Yamagita episode adds an unexpected quirky element
to the film, challenges ethnic assumptions, and reinforces, in a 'funny kind of
way,' Fargo's family values.

The Mike Yamagita subplot also deepens the character of Marge Gunderson.
Although she’s interested in Mike--she primps for their "date" -- she’s not
a bit flirtatious. There must be hundreds of policiers in which the tough cop
engages in gratuitous sex, but Marge is not that kind of policeperson. When she
confines Mike to his side of the table, she reinforces her status as the moral
center of an otherwise amoral film. But Mike catches her off guard and she’s
not nearly as discerning in fancy duds as she would be if she were in uniform.
The Fargo screenplay describes Mike as “bald, paunching.” (The coinage
“paunching” must mean “becoming paunchy.”) By changing direction and
casting the handsome Korean-American actor Steve Park,-- a native of Vestal,
New York, by the way -- in the role of Mike Yamagita, the film makes him less
pathetic and more sexual. While Marge does resist, she’s curious enough about
him to make it her business to investigate. She ably balances restraint with
curiosity.

Finally, there’s a broad sketchy parallel between the Mike Yamagita sequence
and the main action of the film. Jerry Lundegaard attempts a scam that
eventually kills his wife; Mike Yamagita attempts a similar scam when he tries
to insinuate himself into Marge’s life by, so to speak, 'killing' his own
imaginary wife. Marge thwarts both scams.

Three different approaches, then: one about Mike, one about Marge, and one about
plot parallels. But has the heart of this mystery been plucked?  Do we now know
what Mike Yamagita is doing in Fargo?  I don't think so. Is there anyone out
there in the cinemablogosphere who can improve on these suggestions?

Source: 2006/05/rare_baseballsh

Title: A Rare Baseball-Shakespeare Confluence
Date: May 03, 2006

It's not often that there's an intersection of the disparate universes of
Shakespeare and baseball. Yet even such distant areas of experience occasionally
overlap.

A contributor to a Shakespeare discussion group of which I am a member recently
wrote about Jim Bouton's Ball Four (1970) (a very good baseball book),
"Like Bill Bradley's excellent Life on the Road, it was written from the
player's perspective." If I remember correctly from my own reading, it neither
sensationalized nor glamorized professional athletics.

This Shakespeare correspondent had "recently read Howard Bryant's earnest
history of baseball in the 1990s called Juicing the Game (Viking, 2005) and was
reminded that Ball Four did not make Bouton's fellow ballplayers happy." "Bouton
revealed to the world what most everyone in baseball already knew, and what most
people outside it suspected: Players took amphetamines.... They had girls in
different cities.'  Ball Four sold two million copies but Bouton himself was
ostracized and eventually harassed out of baseball."

Now comes the baseball-Shakespeare confluence. Juicing the Game reports
that sometime after Ball Four appeared, Bouton was "on the mound against
Cincinnati... when he heard the voice of Pete Rose bellowing from the top step
of the dugout, 'Fuck you, Shakespeare'. Literary criticism has seldom been more
explicit."

It's a good story, but the correspondent to the Shakespeare list does not
fully explicate its significance. "Fuck you, Shakespeare" uses the epithet
"Shakespeare" as a generic term for a writer -- almost as though Pete Rose could
not think of the name of any other author. Under ordinary circumstances, to call
someone a Shakespeare would be laudatory. This particular usage is either a very
uncommon or a unique instance of the epithet serving as a term of derogation.
In a way, it's a tribute to Shakespeare's prominence. "Fuck you, Flaubert," had
such words been bellowed by Pete Rose, would have carried a dissimilar valence.

I myself feel confident in surmising that Rose's acquaintance with Shakespearean
drama -- and with the written word in general -- is less than profound. No one,
even those who vastly admired the convicted rapscallion's skill with the bat,
has ever confused 'Charley Hustle' with 'Bertie' Russell or Charley Dickens.

"Fuck you, Shakespeare" reminds me of two of my favorite baseball/intelligence
anecdotes. The first is the laudatory evaluation of Yale-educated Yankee
pitcher Ron Darling by his teammate, center-fielder Mickey Rivers: "he knows
the answers to things what I don't even know the question of."  A second
anecdote has a similar valence. I 'll call the participants in the following
genuine conversation Player A and Player B because I no longer recall who they
were (although I do remember that both were Yankees). Player A: "That guy is a
total idiot." Player B: "What are you saying? He has an IQ of a hundred thirty."
Player A: "Yeah?  Outta what?"

May 9.  My brother Jon called to say that Ron Darling never played for the
Yankees. He hypothesizes a memory failure on my part: Darling was with the
Mets and the center-fielder in question therefore must have been Mookie Wilson
(former Rockies outfielder Preston Wilson's uncle and stepfather [note Hamlet
reference] and the man who hit the grounder that went through Bill Buckner's
legs). But the identification of Darling's admirer isn't crucial; let's just
agree that he was someone with the linguistic competence of a Pete Rose.

Source: 2006/05/a_writing_famil-1

Title: A Writing Family
Date: May 07, 2006

Yesterday we learned that my nephew Steven's book on the philosophy of martial
arts will appear in July. Hosannas to him. Steven's wife, Terrylynn, has a book
out on criminal justice.

It's a writing family. The direct descendants of Isaiah and Eta have produced
books on a wide variety of subjects.

It began when my father construed and annotated the standard form of real estate
contract. And then my brother Jon published that novel about the dance and
another family member of his generation wrote that introductory book about
Shakespeare and a bunch of stuff on English literature. NGP''s book on election
technology. My cousin Marian's twin daughters (upon whom I haven't set eyes
since their grandfather's funeral, which was in 1965, I believe) have written a
number of books. Nancy, a folklorist wrote about the hammered dulcimer and about
musical instrument making in New York in earlier centuries. Nora, a medical
anthropologist, has written a classic account of sign-language on Nantucket as
well as volumes about third-world medicine. And then there's Eve's journalism
(not yet in hardcover). If we look to the descendants of Isaiah's father, we can
include Hiram C's book on global justice.

I bet there are other books -- I've lost track of many members of the extended
family.

Also:  my sister-in-law Ellen's book on the internet; my daughter-in-law's
writings on advanced technology, and probably all sorts of other things by non-
genetic family members.           I have no statistics, but I'd guess
there's a higher concentration of published authors in our family than in most.
Is there a gene for scribbling?

It's interesting to me that except for the one novel, there are no other
stories, poetry, screenplays.Our inheritance: facts rather than fantasy.

Source: 2006/05/seven_years_lat

Title: Seven Years Later and Still Going Strong
Date: May 08, 2006

Here's a letter that I wrote to the local newspaper. It appeared in 1999 when
AGGP retired.

"I have read all sorts of commentary in this paper about the public school
system -- letters from parents, students, board members and from both grudging
and supporting taxpayers -- but I can't ever remember reading a letter from the
spouse of a teacher. So here's the perspective of a person who has sat on the
sidelines for almost forty years.

'My wife, AGGP, retired this June from a career in teaching secondary
mathematics that began at Warren Junior High School in Newton, Massachusetts,
in 1960 and continued in the local schools, initially at the junior high school
level and since 1977 at BHS.

'In my considered opinion, public school teachers, especially secondary school
teachers, rank among the genuine heroes of American society -- right up there
with hospice nurses, smoke-jumpers, and astronauts.

'Consider the conditions of employment. Perhaps readers of this letter can
bring themselves to think back to their own youth, or possibly they can remind
themselves what it was like to share a home with one or two young people.
Remember the mood-swings and the erratic behavior. Then try to extrapolate from
this recollection and imagine two thousand energetic adolescents crowded into an
ungracious old building where the air is always too hot, too cold, or too fetid.
Imagine a world in which the girls are slightly more rounded and boys just a bit
hairier on Tuesday than they were on Monday. Two thousand hormone-fueled young
people who are so supercharged that they can't make it from history to English
without playing keep-away with each other's shoes; whose normal mode of greeting
is to shoulder their best friends into a bank of lockers. It is a world of games
and exuberance but I'm sorry to say that it is also a world of troubles -- of
cliques, of alcohol and drug abuse, of private pain and of public disorder. And
yet five times a day, five days a week, an accomplished teacher manages to keep
thirty or so of these young ones focused for fifty minutes on conic sections or
sinusoidal graphs.

'A high school is also a place of increasing expectations and shrinking
resources. Five teachers in an office suitable for one. Larger and larger
classes. it was only a few years ago that BHS's mathematics department could
employ a para-professional to xerox the exams and keep track of the textbooks
and calculators and overhead projectors. Not too long ago there was released
time for a department chairperson to make the schedules and screen prospective
teachers and advise students. No longer: the public as said, "cut out the fat,"
and has decided that teachers can handle these chores between classes.

'What happens after school is out for the day? Piles of exams and notebooks and
homework to be read and returned tomorrow. Lessons to be prepared. I have seen
with my own eyes that it is ordinary for a teacher to put in two solid ten-hour
days on the weekend. And the phone calls. I'd be willing to wager that there are
several hundred people reading this letter who have called our home between 5
p.m and 9 p.m. because Amber or Zack has stopped attending classes and hasn't
handed in homework for a week, or just "can't get" hyperboles, or will have to
miss school next week because of a family ski trip.

'And what of that much-vaunted summer vacation? In my experience, the first half
is spent in a state of profound collapse, and the second spent gearing up for
the the one hundred and fifty new students who will roll in come August.

'But let me report on AGGP's response to working conditions that would crush
mortals not as strong as your heroic secondary school teacher. "I love my
functions class. My algebra students are trying so hard. My basic students are
great. They did a splendid job on matrices. I have such wonderful kids this
year."

'Is it a good job?  For those who are fortunate enough to have a genuine
calling, as AGGP has so clearly had, and who possess tremendous physical
stamina, and who can look with amusement rather than horror at an infected
navel-ring, it's great; for others, better to choose an easier profession.

'And what are the rewards for four decades of teaching?  There is a warm
retirement ceremony and a letter from someone in human resources, a plaque and a
handshake and a very modest pension (health insurance not included).

'But then there are the rewards that truly matter. The first is the pleasure
of knowing that in an "I, me, mine" culture, a teacher has honored the precept
that asks us to promote the general welfare. But more particularly, there's what
happens whenever we stand in line at the movies or take a walk on the mall.
"Oh, Mrs. P. You don't remember me, but I was in your algebra class a few years
ago. I've been meaning to write to you and thank you. I learned so much in your
class. Now I'm a doctor/engineer/chemist/businessperson." And not regularly, but
every once in a while: "Oh, Mrs. P. You'll never guess. I'm a teacher now. it's
exhausting but I love it. You're my model. And someday I hope to be as good a
teacher as you."'

Source: 2006/05/angels_and_fool

Title: Angels and Fools
Date: May 12, 2006

"Earth Angel," by Jesse Belvin's Penguins, offered, or seemed at the time to
offer, a succinct and accurate distillation of relations between the sexes. The
song appeared in 1954, when I was a vulnerable 15-year-old, and was a monster
hit, perhaps because of its ideological clarity. "Earth Angel" is of the genre
that has lately come to be called "doo-wop"; in the P. S. 217 schoolyard, we
just called it "juke-box music." Here's a pithy stanza: "Earth angel, earth
angel, will you be mine/ My darling dear, love you all the time./ I'm just a
fool, a fool in love with you." The heart of the matter, and the essence of life
as we knew it -- the simple-minded, retro-Victorian doctrine that  girls are
angels, boys are fools.

Looking back, I have no doubt that such an oppressive formula was painful for
girls. It must have been hard for young women who knew themselves to be flesh
and blood to pretend to be angelic. But I didn't concern myself with the effect
of the song on them -- girls were clearly and obviously different from us. Not
that I knew anything at all about female culture; the world in which I lived was
rigidly segregated by gender. I didn't have sisters and while the guys talked
obsessively and ignorantly about girls, we almost never talked with them. Even
in the high school lunchroom, girls sat to one side, boys the other. On the
stoop, and In the schoolyard and the drugstore, we talked baseball, flipped
cards, played softball and basketball and stickball, and practiced spitting
for distance. I didn't have a clue what girls were doing -- probably at home
starching their crinolines. It was therefore easy to believe what "literature"
told us: girls were or should be beautiful, aloof, distant, polite, ethereal,
sugar and spice and everything nice, and certainly not sexual -- in short,
angels. Boys, on the other hand, were not just nasty and foul-mouthed, as we
knew from first hand experience, but also pathetic, filled with longings that
they gratified imperfectly several times a day, fumbling, awkward, big-eared,
pimpled, and sloppy. The girls were all Bettys and Veronicas -- desirable but
unattainable. Perhaps in better neighborhoods there was an occasional Archy, but
at the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island, there were only Jugheads. We were, in
brief, exactly what "Earth Angel" had described: anguished adolescent fools.

The notion that girls were unburdened by the flesh took a big hit when I
found myself in one of those lower-level high school English classes where
the disorder was such that weeks would go by without the teacher attempting a
single lesson. Two very young but very tough girls (huge hair, pounds of makeup,
stiletto heels, and bras so pointy that they could a bore a hole in the chest
of any guy brave enough to risk an embrace) were discussing a "health" class in
which chastity had been advocated by one of the maiden-lady teachers. One of
the girls whispered: "She should take up a candle and see how it feels." Whoa,
daddy! And then, a few days after I arrived at college, on a dark, moonless
night, I overheard one "older" woman say to another, "there must be a mile of
cock on this campus and I can't get six inches." At the sound of those words,
"angels" all over America plunged to earth.

And a few months afterwards, "fool," too, gave up the ghost.

Source: 2006/05/within_once_aga

Title: "Within" Again; Backbiting
Date: May 13, 2006

On March 10 of this year, I registered an objection to use of the word "within"
in sportscaster-slang. Here's my complaint: "Why in the living heck do they
say that the Nuggets are "within" two points of the Lakers?  "Within" means
less than than the proclaimed margin -- 1.9 points perhaps. Why not say that
the Nuggets are two points behind?  Or trailing by two points?  But not
-- goodness gracious -- 'within'."  Now, at the website Language Log, an
accomplished young linguist, Benjamin Zimmer, has independently offered a
theory of the origin of this idiom. He claims that "within" is short for "pull
within," as in the case of a rower plying his oars to literally "pull" within a
certain distance from his opponent. Over time, he says, "pull within" migrated
from sports such as racing and rowing, which measure advantage in distance, to
sports such as baseball and basketball, which measure advantage in discrete
numbers, and where, he concedes, "the metaphorical fit was not exact." It's an
interesting theory, and it might very well be correct. It's consoling to imagine
that there's a reason for the irrational use of "within."

Zimmer is less persuasive when he moves from linguistics to chronology. 
He claims that "it became common by the mid-20th century for announcers and
reporters to talk about teams pulling (to) within a certain number of runs,
points, goals, or even games in the standings." He offers no evidence for the
"mid-20th century" assertion. I can't say that my memory supports his version of
history. I've been listening to basketball games on the radio since just after
World War II, when the NBA succeeded the old BAA, and I'm moderately sure that
I didn't hear the idiom "within two points" until the 1980s at the earliest. It
was an unpleasant innovation in language that stuck painfully in my ear. To the
best of my recollection, "within" was the relatively recent invention of Marv
Albert  -- one of his limited repertoire of linguistic tics. Others: "from
downtown," "served up a facial," " yesss," "a spec-tac-ular move."

Marv Albert, it may be remembered, was a protege of the late great Marty
Glickman, sprinter and sportscaster, and (regular readers of these essaylets
will be delighted to learn) as far as I know the only genuine celebrity to
have set foot in the fabled P. S. 217 schoolyard. Glickman would not have been
proud of Albert, who is less well known for his creativity in language than for
his strange sexual exploits. In 1997, Albert plead guilty to sexual assault.
He had proved himself to be a man without a tad of castration anxiety and of
exceptional, perhaps unparalleled, courage, when he first bit a woman fifteen
times on the back, drawing blood, and then forced her to perform fellatio. A
spec-tac-ular move!! Just a couple of months after the Albert nonchalance,
Mike Tyson bit Evander Holyfield on both ears, taking quite a chunk out of one
of them -- the left, I believe. I had high hopes for a great TV moment: the
sportscaster Marv Albert interviews the boxer Iron Mike. Two Brooklyn boys
discuss the theory and practice of oral incorporation. Yesss!

May 19: On Language Log, Benjamin Zimmer responds to my reminiscence that
"within two points" was a creation of the 1980s. He offers comprehensive
evidence that the idiom "pull within" was in print as long ago as the 19th
century. Although he hasn't offered a chronology for "within" without a
preceding "pull," and hasn't discussed radio basketball (how would he access
radio archives, even if they exist?), he's certainly a thorough and imaginative
researcher. But just because a phrase can be found deep in the archives
somewhere, doesn't mean that it was in common oral usage.

Source: 2006/05/the_worst_perso

Title: Adolf Award for Worst Person of the Century
Date: May 18, 2006

The winner of the Adolf for worst person of the century goes to Pope Urban
II. The century in question is the first one of the previous millennium, or
1000-1100. Like many other Adolf award winners, Urban perpetrated evil deeds
that have continued to provoke hatred, war and suffering even to the present
day.

HIs principal crime: Pope Urban fabricated a litany of Muslim atrocities in
order to incite Christians to wrest Jerusalem from a “race” that he called
“absolutely alien to God.” In November, 1095, in Clermont in the south of
France, Urban told an eager audience that Muslims had circumcised Christians and
spread their unspeakable blood on baptismal fonts; that they had “cut open the
navels of others, tearing out their vital organs” and that they had committed
appalling atrocities upon women “of which it is more evil to speak than to
keep silent.”

Some say that his catalog of mutilations and barbarities was based on faulty
intelligence but most think it was his own invention. Urban did not just incite
and condone warfare, he sanctified it. His crusade would be a pilgrimage --
and therefore a form of penance. Combatants who died in its course would be
purified. God, it was claimed, has instituted “holy wars” so that knights
might find a new path to salvation.

Roughly one hundred thousand crusaders answered his call and set out for the
Levant to take Jerusalem from the infidels.On the way, they warmed to their
task by conducting genocidal attacks of unprecedented brutality upon the Jewish
communities of the Rhineland (communities that had been in place before the
advent of Christianity). These quasi-sanctioned raids are now known as “the
first holocaust.”

The passage of the crusaders to the middle East was made easier because
the Muslims were divided into two factions --Shiite and Sunni -- that were
perpetually at daggers drawn. The crusaders laid siege to Antioch in October,
1099, and when they took the city, slaughtered its entire Muslim population.
In possession of Antioch, they found themselves entirely surrounded by
hostile armies. But God was on their side. The timely intervention of
“countless armies with white horses… led by the saints George, Mercurius,
and Demetrius“ allowed them to fight their way out of the city.

The crusaders headed south and in midsummer of 1099 besieged Jerusalem. Muslim
defenders taunted the crusaders by setting up crosses and urinating on them;
in response, the Christians catapulted the bodies of captured Muslims over
the walls. When Jerusalem fell, the celebration was euphoric. The Provencal
crusader Raymond of Aguilers reported that “some of the pagans were mercifully
beheaded, others were tortured for a long time and burned to death in searing
flames. Piles of heads, hands and feet lay in the houses and streets. Infants
were seized by the soles of their feet from their mothers’ laps or their
cradles, and dashed against the wall, breaking their necks.” Covered with
gore, weighed down with plunder, “rejoicing and weeping from excessive
gladness," the crusaders "worshipped at the Sepulchre of Jesus the Savior.”

Although Pope Urban II died just two weeks after the fall and sack of Jerusalem,
there is no question but that his Adolf was well and truly earned and that his
legacy lives on.

Source: 2006/05/the_holy_lance

Title: The Holy Lance
Date: May 20, 2006

In 1098, crusaders were trapped inside the walls of Antioch and their mission to
capture Jerusalem was gravely jeopardized. When things were at their worst, one
of the crusaders -- a Provencal peasant named Peter Bartholomew -- was visited
by St. Andrew, who revealed to him that the lance with which the Roman soldier
Longinus had pierced the side of Jesus was hidden in Antioch's Basilica of St.
Peter. St. Andrew informed Peter that "he who carries this lance into battle
shall never be overcome by the enemy."

Bartholemew's claim met with initial skepticism because it was an established
fact that the Holy Lance lay safely in the relic collection of the Byzantine
emperor in Constantinople. Nevertheless, the authorities agreed to investigate.
Twelve men dug until overcome by exhaustion at the spot to which Bartholomew
pointed, but they could find nothing. Finally, Peter himself dropped into
the hole and brought forth a shard of metal. "All across the city there was
boundless rejoicing." Suddenly invigorated by the possession of this powerful
relic, their morale euphoric, the crusaders broke out of the city, overcame the
armies that surrounded them, and proceeded to Jerusalem.

Some months afterward, Peter Bartholomew had another vision: that the entire
crusade  was compromised because some of its soldiers were polluted by pride or
cowardice. He announced that he himself would choose and put to death soldiers
of the cross who were steeped in sin. There was a backlash against Peter and the
authenticity of the Holy Lance was challenged.

Peter decided to prove his truth in a trial by ordeal. After fasting for several
days, he ran, carrying the Holy Lance, between two piles of burning olive
branches four feet high and thirteen feet long. He was severely burned and died
several days later. The Holy Lance lost its magic and morale plummeted. The
crusaders were forced to seek an alternative. The ingenious Raymond of Toulouse
dispatched his follower Hugh of Monteil to Latakia to retrieve a fragment of the
cross on which Jesus had been crucified. In the end, the discrediting of the
Holy Lance proved to be only a temporary setback.

The facts in this and the previous essaylet come from Thomas Asbridge, The First
Crusade, a New History (Oxford University Press, 2004).

Source: 2006/05/help_from_cyber

Title: My Cyberfriends
Date: May 22, 2006

People out there misjudge me. Marcia Wainwright, for example, is certain that I
need to lose thirty pounds in thirty days. She proposes that I use her "miracle
African weight loss herbs." OK, maybe I'm a few pounds above my fighting weight,
but certainly not thirty -- what the heck is she thinking? Joellie Adella is
concerned about my hair loss situation. Elsie Bertie thinks that I need fuller
and more erotic lips. Susan van Elk wants to help me discover the benefits of a
healthy colon. The "enormity" of my "manhood" is a worry of Penelope French; its
lack of "rockhardness" seems to make Hoodiea Gordoni mighty eager to come to my
aid. Jacklyn Hughes feels that my sperm count is low; she can help (but how? and
for goodness sake-- why?). Thank you very much, guys, but I don't really need
your assistance: hair, lips, colon, etc. are all doing just fine.

There's more:  Caroline McPherson and William McWilliams both think that I need
to accessorize: she suggests "bling watches and designer handbags" while he
proposes "Rolex replicas." I don't know what Natasasha (sic) thinks she  knows
about me, but, frankly, I'm not especially anxious to employ her services as a
"screwbuddy"; nor do I welcome the efforts of Ms. Ginger Snapz -- possibly a
pseudonym -- who has big surprises in store for me and whose specialty is pole-
dancing. These ladies have a wrong impression. So too does Teressa Brandel,
who offers to solve all my problems by introducing me to "horny teen barnyard
slutzz." Not this grandpa.

Considering all the negativity, it's good to know that there are not only
Russian princesses but also a former Nigerian cabinet official out there who
are eager to improve my finances. They both have "unbelievable offers" for me.
Sure I have to send a few thousand bucks to an offshore bank, but I'm promised a
return of great enormity on an investment that is rockhard.

Source: 2006/06/my_life_with_gi

Title: Life with Gilbert and Sullivan
Date: June 01, 2006

When I was no more than a hemidemisemiquaver, I would listen attentively as my
mother sat at her old Hardman piano and sang ditties by Gilbert and Sullivan. I
believe that the first song I ever learned “by heart” was “I’m called
Little Buttercup” with its still mysterious “pretty polonies.” In 1947,
when the D’Oyly Carte company made its first post-war American tour, I was
taken to see a performance of H. M. S. Pinafore. I was utterly transported. No
subsequent theatrical experience has worked equivalent magic. I still think that
it’s a little miracle that I saw with my own rapt eyes such legendary Savoyard
stalwarts as Ella Halman, Darrell Fancourt, and Martyn Green.

Pinafore was the only stage play that I saw until I was past adolescence and
out of the house. What could have prompted such uncharacteristic extravagance
on my parents' part? Whatever the cause, the result was that my infatuation
with Gilbert and Sullivan's operas was early established. The attachment was
difficult to sustain because there was no family phonograph; moreover, those
thick, heavy albums of 78s would have broken the budget. I was fortunate to
possess a tattered old anthology of G  & S songs from which I would pick out
tunes as best I could.

In college I had a roommate who was a genuine savoyardophile and who arrived
with a "hi-fi" and an extensive collection of ‘long playing’ records. I
took advantage of his resources and his knowledge. During the fifties and
sixties I attended performances of the full G & S repertory in various amateur
and semi- pro productions-–even a rare Utopia Ltd. at the Loeb Drama Center
in Cambridge. I also acquired a treasured collection of D’Oyly Carte and
Glyndebourne performances on vinyl. During the seventies and eighties, I
couldn’t clean the house or cook a meal without the assistance of Sir Arthur.
But turntables and 33s went the way of 78s, and then the vinyl itself came to be
sequestered in plastic tubs in the basement.

I was G & S-less for a decade or so, but Topsy-Turvy (1999), the great Mike
Leigh film, rekindled an unfaded love. Now, sixty years after my first Pinafore,
I’m compiling a new collection of recordings (everything’s out there on CD
if you’re patient). I now own reissues of classic D’Oyly Carte recordings
and also of a sparkling Mikado by the Welsh National Opera. In the fall, the
entire collection will be transferred to the iPod. Who would have guessed that
I'd have gone through four or five new technologies in my lifetime? And yet the
song remains the same.

What is the attraction? Gilbert and Sullivan, I think, gave me early
authorization to be silly. The operas licensed criticism of oppressive or
irrational social norms. Everything was fair game. Inasmuch as I was raised in
a rigidly conformist society, the G & S precedent was a great liberation. I’m
absolutely convinced that a great big hunk of my sense of humor was formed
around a Gilbertian core.

When I was a boy, it was the clever patter songs that most struck me. They’re
still good, and some are brilliant. Bunthorne’s soliloquy in Patience,
in which he confesses that “he’s not fond of uttering platitudes/ In
stained glass attitudes” is as fully on target now as it was in 1881. Simply
substitute tired modish Derridadaism for the "high aesthetic line," and “the
meaning doesn’t matter if it’s only idle chatter of a transcendental kind”
jumps right out at you.

But nowadays, it’s not Gilbert's free-standing wit but Sullivan's glorious
ensembles that cause the shiver of delight. Instances: Iolanthe's “Oh, many a
man in friendship’s name”; Ko-ko, Pooh-Bah, and Pish-Tush singing “To sit
in solemn silence in a dull dark dock”; in Ruddigore, the trio “In sailing
o’er life’s ocean wide,/ No doubt your heart should be your guide/ But it
is awkward when you find/ A heart that does not know its mind.” And many
others, including, certainly, the quartet from Yeoman of the Guard: “Strange
adventure, maiden wedded/ To a groom she’s never seen.” Still another
transcendent moment: the high silliness in Pirates, when the assembled choruses
kneel to sing the resplendent, ridiculous: "Hail poetry, thou heaven-born
maid…  All hail, divine emollient." I think that the touchstone of all
touchstones is a truly wondrous brief duet in Iolanthe, when the lovesick Lords
Tolloler and Mountararat, tenor and baritone, rejected by Phyllis, who chooses a
simple shepherd over their dignities, leave the stage singing "Neath this blow/
Worse than stab of dagger/ Though we mo-/ Mentarily stagger,/ In each heart,/
Proud are we innately,/ Let’s depart, dignified and stately.”

In addition to the satire, and the splendid music, G &S also supplies great big
helpings of joy. G & S manage to persuade me, at least for the duration of the
play, to give credence to “rapture, rapture,” and that “pleasures come
in endless series,” and “joy unbounded,” and “laughing song and merry
dance,” and “happier than any/ A pound to a penny,/ A lover is when he/
Embraces his bride."

There’s much to deplore in Gilbert’s creations: nasty racism, an
insufferable obsession with class (embraced even as it appears to be refuted),
jingoism, which is sometimes satirized but often (as in the faux-japonisme
of The Mikado) unconsciously accepted, as well as the constant distasteful
bludgeoning of middle-age women. But just as we forgive Shylock in order to
embrace King Lear, so we must suspend our moral indignation to revel in the best
of Gilbert.

Last week, two of the grandchildren visited for a few days. We rented the DVD of
the Central Park Kevin Kline-Linda Ronstadt Pirates. The kids were attentive,
engaged. Next time they visit: more Gilbert and Sullivan. Perhaps we can plant a
savoyardian seed.

Source: 2006/06/everything_is_c

Title: Everything is Crepuscular
Date: June 02, 2006

When I encountered an excerpt from wunderkind J. S. Foer's Everything is
Illuminated in the New Yorker, I was dazzled. The writing was witty, focused,
intelligent, and emotionally rich.

Now I've read the whole book, and I'm deeply divided about this Jekyll-Hydish
performance. The good parts are still excellent. Jonfen's Ukrainian adventures
in search of Augustine are beautifully managed  -- although I must say that the
joke about Alex's English, so wonderful in the excerpt, quickly grew wearisome.
But the interspersed history of the shtetl of Trachimbrod is just plain bad.
It's boring, embarrassing, and imitative, consisting not only of helpings of
I. B. Singer and of the least attractive aspects of Marquez and his numerous
unmagical epigonoi, but also of an unhealthy dollop of supermarket-checkout
prose. Can Foer discipline his talent, find his own voice, and move into the
big leagues?  It would be tragic if he continues to indulge his genius for
imitation. Or perhaps he'll be both good and bad, like Larry McMurtry, who's
written world-class novels (Leaving Cheyenne,  Lonesome Dove) but has also
squandered his talent on pounds and pounds of glossy trash. Time will tell.

Source: 2006/06/pythons

Title: How to Deal With Enormous, Man-Eating Pythons
Date: June 07, 2006

A few weeks ago, I noted that in The Songlines, Bruce Chatwin made the case that
early humans were prey more than they were predators. Now I've read a new book
on the subject: Donna Hart and Robert W. Sussman, Man the Hunted (Westview,
2005).

The book's title is a bit misleading because it concentrates on primates other
than modern man. Nevertheless, it was good to be reminded of the circumstances
under which our hominid ancestors lived. Seven million years ago and until
recently, our diminutive forbears were forest dwellers who were pursued by huge
crocodilians, outsized eagles, packs of hunting dogs, a variety of giant cats,
and hyenas the size of modern lions who had jaws strong enough to crunch human
skulls in a single bite.

And also man-eating snakes. In the course of their discussion of snakes,
the authors of Man the Hunted report on the instructions provided to early
missionaries to Africa on the proper response to pythons. (A 25-foot-long
reticulated python can weigh up to 300 pounds.)

Remember not to run away; the python can run faster. The thing to do is to lie
flat on the ground on your back with your feet together, arms to the sides
and head well down. The python will then try to push its head under you,
experimenting at every possible point. Keep calm, one wiggle and he will get
under you, wrap his coils round you and crush you to death. After a time the
python will get tired of this and will probably decide to swallow you without
the usual preliminaries. He will very likely begin with one of your feet. Keep
calm. You must let him swallow your foot. It is quite painless and will take a
long time. If you lose your head and struggle he will quickly whip his coils
around you. If you keep calm, he will go on swallowing. Wait patiently until
he has swallowed about up to your knee. Then carefully take out your knife and
insert it into the distended side of his mouth and with a quick rip slit him up.

Well-meant advice, I'm sure, but perhaps difficult to follow. Suppose you're
just not in the mood to allow the python such liberties with your person.
Suppose you've forgotten to bring your knife; suppose the python decides to
start with your head rather than a foot. Suppose you involuntarily wiggle just a
teensy bit. Suppose you just don't feel that it's a good day to be engulfed.

I think that, on the whole, running away and screaming at the top of your
lungs is a more sensible reaction. But then again, I never signed up to be a
missionary.

Source: 2006/06/the_colorado_ro

Title: The Colorado Rockies and the Christianists
Date: June 13, 2006

From 1947, when Jackie Robinson broke the barrier, until 1957, when Walter
O’Malley hijacked the franchise to Los Angeles and cut the heart out of
Brooklyn, the Dodgers represented the best of America. While the United States
remained legally segregated by race and fractured by religion and ethnicity, it
was the Brooklyn Dodgers who offered the nation a vision that was more inclusive
and more just.  One year before Harry Truman issued an executive order banning
segregation in the armed forces, eight years before Rosa Parks refused to give
up her seat on a Montgomery bus, eighteen years before the enactment of federal
statutes protecting the right to vote, the Brooklyn Dodgers hired Jack Roosevelt
Robinson to play first base. And on an unforgettable day in April in Cincinnati,
when racist fans hurled taunts at Robinson, Pee Wee strolled over and put his
arm on Jackie’s shoulder.  It was an iconic moment and one that transformed
not just baseball, and sports, but the world.

The boys of summer made us proud to be democratic, proud to be Americans. All
good men were Brooklynites, at least some of the time. Moreover, the Dodgers
were talented: they won five pennants during those years, and, in 1955, they
won the world championship. Half a century later the Dodgers are still the most
loved, most chronicled, most mythologized team in history.

What will be written about the Colorado Rockies fifty years from now? 
The Rockies’ watchword is not inclusion but exclusivity. They are a
team not of destiny, but of narrow sectarianism. They search for and
hire players of “character”-- which means players of their particular
"Christian" denomination. Their general manager, Dan O’Dowd, is thoroughly
delusional. "You look at some of the moves we made and didn't make. You look
at some of the games we're winning. Those aren't just a coincidence. God has
definitely had a hand in this." A hand in what?  In a history of failure?  In
a losing record?  Last place in their division once again?  God takes sides in
baseball games? Either God is bush league with bat and glove or O’Dowd is a
one helluva sloppy theologian.

O’Dowd, along with club president Keli McGregor and manager Clint Hurdle,
join together for telephone prayer sessions. Is it possible that they hold
on to their jobs not because they are capable of assembling a winning team,
but because they subscribe to the same beliefs as owner Charlie Monfort (“I
believe God sends signs, and we're seeing those")?

Baseball is not about religion. It’s about 95-mile-an-hour fastballs, about
hard sliders, about come-from-behind ninth-inning victories.  Colorado
taxpayers didn’t fund three-quarters of the cost of Coors-–Coors!!! -- Field
so that evangelical ballplayers could testify to their faith.

And what a curious faith! The Rockies depart from established Christian thinking
and veer toward the banal new cult of “prosperity gospel.” Reformation
Calvinism had asserted that an omnipotent deity elects some for salvation and
consigns many more to damnation. Believers sometimes understood material
success to be a sign (but never, ever a reward) of salvation. The Rockies’
unChristian theology turns Calvinism upside-down and defies common sense when
it proclaims that faith leads directly to base hits. (As a matter of fact,
“prosperity gospel” seems to work better for the capitalist owners than for
the players. The team loses, but the franchise increases in value).

There's no hint of supernatural intervention in the Rockies unremarkable record.
If the Rockies were to run away from the opposition, it would indeed constitute
a "miracle" -- but a miracle only in the common secular sense of the word. It
would be a miracle indeed if an incompetent skinflint ownership could somehow
stumble into success.

Are the Colorado Rockies the most foolish, fatuous, and vain organization in the
mountain west?  Not in the least. There's a church in Broomfield that has a
website where “you can send your prayers and encouragement for the Rockies by
clicking here.” Click for Christ. Good Lord!

I wonder if the Rockies ever knew, or if they would like to learn, who it was
who said “do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves
the world, the love of the Father is not in him." If they could answer this
question,they'd be in a position to recognize that there's less real religion
in the entire history of the Colorado Rockies than in five seconds of Reese and
Robinson.

October 19, 2007.  More on the Rockies and religion? Click here.

Source: 2006/08/the_pond_once_b

Title: A Fish Story
Date: August 20, 2006

The pond, once brimful of brekkekkek-kexing, has become virtually silent. What's
happened to all the frogs?  Is it acid rain?  Or is it the great blue herons
who patrol the shoreline morning and evening?

I think we've located the culprit. The pond has been colonized by catfish,
specifically, by the brown bullhead or horned pout.  Omnivores that they are,
the pouts must have been dining on those gelatinous strings of frog eggs, or
perhaps even hunting down the tadpoles. At least that's the theory.

To reproduce, pouts scoop out a nest near the shoreline and deposit a cluster
of eggs. Then they hover nearby for a week or so, fanning the area with their
tails.  One pair made a nest just where we enter the pond to swim and they were
guarding their clutch a little too aggressively, so I decided to take action.
There I was, spade in hand and poised to strike. I felt as though I was a figure
in a diorama at the natural history museum -- "Paleolithic Man Hunted Fish with
Sharpened Sticks."  My technique might have been primitiive, but nevertheless
I managed to nail one of the ugly suckers -- a twelve inch guy with a flat face
covered with nasty barbels -- and a few minutes later I planted him in the
vegetable garden, where he's now recycling himself into tomatoes. Later in the
summer, a guest caught a second pout with a net.  More juicy red tomatoes.

But what about the hatchlings and fingerlings?  Perhaps the herons are on our
side.  Meanwhile, we'll put out a call for a fisherman. Although horned pouts
are hideous, they're reputed to be good table fare -- not my table, however.

We're looking forward to a froggy renaissance.

September 5.  I've now read in Scientific American that herons kill and eat
catfish. They spear them with their long beaks, carry them to dry ground, and
repeatedly wound them. Then they swallow them whole. So when the herons come to
visit the pond, we'll have to maintain both distance and silence and let them
work. It's good to know that the great blues are our allies.

Source: 2006/09/an_iris_anecdot

Title: An Iris Anecdote
Date: September 11, 2006

In my Vermont garden, I grow a number of different varieties of German (also
called bearded) irises. One variety -- a bicolor I inherited a decade ago from
my sister-- had died. I put a spade into the ground to see if I could discover
the source of the problem, and I found that the rhizomes had deteriorated to a
loathsome smelly unholy mess the consistency of overripe bananas. It was a truly
disgusting situation and one that I had never encountered before. For the sake
of garden sanitation, I dug out the decay and some surrounding soil and carried
the filth to the local dump.

Later in the summer, I read this sentence in a garden book: "we cannot confirm
the folk wisdom that bacterial soft rot in irises can be caused by horse
manure."  I knew that rot in iris rhizomes could be spread by iris borers, but
these irises were borer-free. On the other hand, I had been working the soil
with load after generous load of horse manure. So perhaps there's some truth to
the derided superstition. In any case, since I switched to fertilizing irises
with the abundant droppings of sheep I haven't had a recurrence of the disease.
But then again, I haven't been able to re-test the particular susceptible
variety--it being an iris now extinct in my garden.

Source: 2006/09/an_anniversary

Title: An Anniversary
Date: September 12, 2006

On the second Monday of September,1956, I found my way to Rockefeller Hall and
my very first college class. It was a laboratory section of Chemistry 105.

There were more than a thousand people enrolled in the course.

We had all taken a mathematics aptitude test, and I had been placed in an
advanced section of twenty so-called mathematically gifted students.  (Only
rarely in my lifetime have my skills been so badly misjudged.)  In my section
there were nineteen young men, all armed with slide rules -- a device, now
blissfully extinct, that I never mastered -- and one very pretty brown-haired
brown-eyed maid (still sixteen, I was later to discover) with an athletic step
and a musical voice. The guys, brandishing their slide rules, clustered around
the young lady-- bees, or drones rather, drawn to the solitary flower. Many were
the offers to help her insert her thistle tube into her cork. Alas, I could
offer no assistance, introductory chemistry class being both the alpha and omega
of my scientific career.

Nevertheless, in despite of my laboratorical inadequacies, this sunny September
day fifty years later, I'm still married to that brown-haired brown-eyed young
woman.

So today we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the first sighting.

Source: 2006/09/bush_read_three

Title: Bush Read "Three Shakespeares"
Date: September 13, 2006

More outrageous even than "mission accomplished" is the absurd claim that,
during 2006, our very own president, George W. Bush, has read fifty-three books.
It's a fool's game to try to re-invent the class dunce as an intellectual, but
they're trying.

There's some incriminating videotape floating around the "internets" in which
POTUS, heretofore known to devour only the box scores, boasts that he's an "ek-
a-lek-tic" (his pronunciation!) reader. Not only has he been laying into Camus,
he's also read "three Shakespeares." He's both full o' shit and unidiomatic.
Native speakers of English don't say "three Shakespeares"; they say they've
read "three Shakespeare plays."  Next the Great Decider will tell us he's just
hustled over to the Kennedy Center where he listened to three Bachs.

The White House press office has supplied the names of two of the plays to which
Bush lays claim  -- Hamlet and Macbeth. Was there a third play?  If there was,
it's name, like the third murderer and the fabulous WMDs, is lost to history.

If W. had actually turned the pages of Hamlet and Macbeth, he might have noticed
that in both plays, a bad man has become head of state by extralegal means. 
Claudius poured a bit of poison into the ears of Hamlet's father and Macbeth
stabbed Duncan. Neither ruler thrives in his ill-gained position, and neither
has been able to repent his evil deed. Claudius can't bring himself to pray and
Macbeth's way has fallen into the sere and yellow leaf. Fat chance that our
unelected president would notice the parallel to his own situation -- or that
he would be moved to repentance and renunciation. In the world of literature,
there's justice:  Claudius is run through with a sword and Macbeth is beheaded.
No such luck in real life.

And what about the mysterious third play that the Uniter claims to have read? 
If he were looking for parallels to his own career, he could flatter himself by
reading one of the three plays that dramatize the life of King Henry V, in which
a scapegrace prince reforms, gives up alcohol and screwing around, and becomes
the conqueror of France. The parallel is inexact, because Henry enjoyed some
traits of character that George distinctly lacks: courage, eloquence, and the
willingness to endure the same hardships as the soldiers who serve under him.
A better parallel to George II is the succeeding Henry-- Henry VI-- a pious,
immature, weak man unable to control his powerful advisers.

In truth, the character in the thirty-seven "Shakespeares" whom Bush most
resembles is neither Claudius, Macbeth, nor either of the Henrys, but Lepidus
in Anthony and Cleopatra. Shakespeare depicts Lepidus as a man who's happened
into a position far beyond his natural abilities. He's way over his head in
the Second Triumvirate, not at all of the stature of the heroic but flawed
Anthony or the efficient, masterful Caesar. Even the servants recognize that
Lepidus is simply bush-league. One of them tells the audience that "to be
called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in't, are the holes
where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks."  This is a bit
of Shakespearean obscurity certainly beyond the budding intellectuality of
incurious George. It means simply that Lepidus must fill a position as huge as a
Ptolemaic sphere, but he can't because he's tiny and makes no impression at all,
and as a consequence his circle is as vacant as an eye-socket that lacks an eye.
Shakespeare does not think well of Lepidus and soon allows him to be carried off
the stage, drunk. So much for morally and intellectually pitiful men who try to
play with the big boys!

Bush might be even less than a Lepidus, who, when he's not drunk, speaks
plainly enough. Perhaps a better comparison is to one of Shakespeare's braggart
soldiers, like Parolles in All's Well That Ends Well, or to one of the
malapropizing clowns -- as for example Much Ado About Nothing's Dogberry. 
Dogberry is given to such Bushlingo moments as "is our whole dissembly
appeared" and "be vigitant."  And other illiteracies.  But it was beyond even
Shakespeare to imagine a world in which a clown could become head of state.  To
him, such a reversal of the natural order would have been unthinkable.

Source: 2006/09/my_new_tooth

Title: My New Tooth
Date: September 15, 2006

Toward the end of July, while I was in Lyme, New Hampshire celebrating a
friend's third marriage, I bit into a fancy cracker that was topped with a
fragment of sun-dried tomato. With my tongue I felt what I assumed to be small
stone. I spit it into my hand and after a few disorienting moments realized that
I was looking at one of my very own teeth. Number 10, in dentist's language,
upper left front.

I was shocked;  I'm not used to teeth falling out of my head-- especially so
undramatically. No pain, no cracking sound. I put the tooth in my pocket and
found a mirror to inspect myself -- mighty vampirish, I thought.

The next day I saw a dentist down in Thetford and was advised that I needed a
root canal, followed by a "post and crown," which sounded less like a dental
process than a London pub. A week or so later and I was off to White River to
a root canal guy, who hummed Joanie Mitchell songs while digging into my mouth
and kept checking the weather to see if he could get in a golf game before the
rains came. I asked him why the procedure was so damn expensive and he muttered
something mighty unconvincing about the "level of technology."  What with the
abscess and all it took two long visits for him to finish rooting around in my
canal.  And then one day I took a drink of homemade lemonade and felt another
tooth fall out, but -- false alarm -- it was just a lemon pip.

The root canal didn't do anything about the big empty space in my head.  I've
heard that there are some ladies who find that other-side-of-the-tracks look
quite attractive, but in all honestly it didn't seem to do much for my woman. So
back home to Colorado and a visit to still another dentist, who installed a post
and also a temporary artificial tooth and sent me to the "lab" for a "custom
color."  The lab was a surreal experience-- way out in the country in a dumpy
building there's a oversize space where several rows of white-coated-scientist
types with microscopes and very official looking tools sat crafting teeth.
Probably out-of-work sculptors, or possibly impoverished MFA students.

Custom color -- why would I want a custom color?  After the house and the
car, this prosthesis is going to be the most expensive object I own.  I think
it should be gleaming white, not mottled and yellowed like my native teeth.
I'm paying big money, and I want everyone to know that #10 is brand new.  I
wouldn't  buy a new car and immediately dent and scratch it, would I?

Another couple of weeks and I should be all custom-colored, posted, and
crowned.  And from now on I'll remember to stay away from sun-dried tomatoes. 
Dangerous stuff.

September 20.  I've been putting the old tooth under my pillow for a month
now, but no luck.  Apparently the tooth fairy is indifferent to sexagenarian
choppers.

September 28.  The permanent fake tooth has now been installed. I like it
better than the original. It does its job and it's not going to have cavities or
fillings or pain. If I had the cash I'd give thought to a full set.

Source: 2006/09/on_tenure_in_co

Title: On Tenure in Colleges and Universities
Date: September 20, 2006

Most people either don't understand academic tenure or regard it as a flagrant
scam -- nothing more than a lifetime cushy job burdened with little work and
rewarded with long summers vacations. Popular wisdom is entirely incorrect.
Tenure is a good deal for those who achieve it and it's a bargain for America.

The conventional defense of tenure is that it protects freedom of speech.
 Professors, it's thought, are natural born dissenters who are likely to
propound unusual ideas, which, unless they're 'dangerous,' should be tolerated.
(Even though it should be obvious that it's only the dangerous ideas that need
protection.)

There's some truth to this proposition. Some jobs have been saved (but those who
remember the McCarthy period know that university administrators often tripped
over themselves to appease the attackers). The professoriat should be encouraged
to dissent -- it's good for the country to encourage divergent and challenging
views. But it's also true that on the whole, professors are not particularly
controversial. If there have been cases in which scientists, or business
faculty, or professors of literature or music have needed the protections of
tenure, they must be rare indeed. Occasionally, very occasionally, a social
scientist says something just a bit too anti-establishment, and then along
comes some yahoo legislator to demand that the dissenter be fired and tenure
be 'investigated.'   Nevertheless, it's hard to make the case that a hundred
thousand faculty in non-controversial fields need to be tenured so that one or
two people a decade can say something outrageous. I myself think that first-
amendment rights as confirmed by the courts are just as good and perhaps better
protection than tenure for dissenting views.

In my opinion, the best justification for tenure is not freedom of speech but
frugality. Let's begin with the self-evident truth that a person who earns
tenure in a respectable institution possesses some very positive intellectual
and psychological traits. While one doesn't have to be a genius to write a
dissertation, one has to be able to amass evidence and structure a logical
argument and write a decent sentence or two. One must be diligent;  one must
be self-motivated (only half of people who finish graduate courses manage
to complete a dissertation); moreover, in the process of securing tenure, a
person gains experience in presenting information to groups and also learns a
great deal about management and mentoring. These various skills are readily
transferable to the private sector of the economy where they would be well
rewarded. But when a person of talent and ability chooses to work in the
academy, he or she forgoes a large part of his potential earning capacity.
 nstead of a high salary, he receives a lower salary plus the security which
comes in the form of tenure. So it's perfectly reasonable to conceive of tenure
as compensation in lieu of cash.

When an accomplished individual accepts tenure and a diminished salary, society
benefits in a number of ways. It hires talent on the cheap, so education becomes
less expensive. If universities had to match private-sector salaries, the cost
of sending a million young adults to universities would become prohibitive.
There's also a less obvious but equally important benefit. Without tenure, only
the independently wealthy would be able to specialize in, say, in old Mayan,
or Tokugawa Japan, or any of thousands of subjects that require concentration
and effort but do not have any particular market value. These important but
exotic subjects would either disappear from the curriculum, or they would
be taught by faculty who would bring to the table the biases of the moneyed
classes.  (This was indeed the case in America before the 1940s when tenure
became institutionalized.)  Faculties would revert again to what they were when
Harvard had its Gold Coast: social clubs for amateurs and coupon-clippers. More
than any other innovation, tenure has produced the modern democratic university,
where faculty can be drawn from any social class.

I don't mean to say that there aren't problems with tenure.  Tenure is
difficult to obtain, but it's also difficult to lose, and faculties could
do a much better job at self-policing. If a professor isn't doing his job,
isn't keeping up with his subject, isn't make a good faith effort to make
a contribution to learning, then he should surrender his claim to lifetime
employment. There certainly is such a thing as "deadwood"-- though much less
of it than popular mythology would claim. But the deal is this:  lifetime
security for a lifetime of learning. Those who don't honor the agreement should
be speedily purged. No free rides for the lazy dogs.  But this caveat aside,
tenure is a fine, successful institution.

American universities have become and still remain the envy of the world; 
the tenureless university would be less innovative, less democratic, and less
distinguished.

Source: 2006/09/did_roz_chast_a

Title: Did Roz Chast Attend P. S. 217?
Date: September 21, 2006

Diligent readers of this blague (a "fit audience though few," as John Milton
said in a slightly different context) will remember that I've reported on the
language, the culture and the sexual politics of P. S. 217 and its neighborhood.

Newsflash!! It now appears that P. S. 217 contributed to the worldview of the
century's finest cartoonist, the New Yorker's Roz Chast.

I had long suspected that Roz Chast was a neighborhood girl -- where else but in
darkest Flatbush would a nine-year-old go to bed with "The Big Book of Horrible
Rare Diseases?" The most overt clues to her place of origin are found in the
'cartoon a clef' "Ultima Thule," in which a young girl imagines life in various
exotic non-Flatbush neighborhoods: "Red Hook, which was filled with drunken
sailors, loose women, and stevedores; Flatland, which stretched flatly and
unpopulated, into oblivion; and Sea Gate, with its maze of Venetian canals,
from which, once you entered, you'd never emerge." In the last panel of this
masterpiece, a girl in a green pleated skirt floats freely in outer space: "I
just wanted to see what was on the other side of McDonald Avenue."

McDonald Avenue, during my childhood, was the outer limit of homey Flatbush.
Every once in a while, when I was feeling particularly adventurous, I'd ride
my bicycle across McDonald, but I always hustled back. Two reasons: a) it was
different there -- different architecture, different kinds of stores, different
people, and b) the streets ran at a 45 degree angle to the norm. Very scary,
very 'here be dragons.'

I had a job on McDonald Avenue when I was in high school: I shelved books at the
Kensington Public Library (which was scarcely more than a storefront operation),
but the building was on our side -- the Flatbush side -- of the street. I don't
think that I ever crossed to the foreign side -- why would a sane person want to
do such a thing? So my intuition was that if Roz Chast grasped the mystical end-
of-the-earth aura of McDonald Avenue, she had to have grown up somewhere in the
vicinity of P. S. 217.

More evidence:  In the New Yorker for September 4, there's a Roz Chast
bildungscartoon called "What I Learned." After nursery school, where she was
informed that "if you swallow your gum, your guts get all stuck together, and
you die," our young heroine "went to grade school in [her] neighborhood." And
there's a full panel of a square featureless brick building labeled "P. S.
217."  The building doesn't resemble the P. S. 217 of my memory except for the
concrete schoolyard and the chain-link fences that surround it, but it must be
the real thing. The curriculum is ever-so-familiar: Vasco da Gama, "Our Friend,
Corn," chain-stitching. Although nothing about the compass and the protractor,
for some reason.

I had read that Roz Chast grew up in Brooklyn, and that her parents still lived
in the old neighborhood. Just for fun, I looked up the surname Chast in the
white pages. It's an uncommon name;  in fact, there's just one Chast in all
of richly-populated Brooklyn. Here's the relevant map. The Chast apartment on
Webster Avenue is a block or so from the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island
Avenue where P. S. 217 is located; even more startling -- it's no more than a
couple of hundred feet from East 9 Street, where I lived from age zero to age
17. Case closed.

Roz Chast's genius cannot be circumscribed.  She's the master of the
mock-heroic for which Flatbush is famed; she's to the cartoon what Woody Allen
is to movies -- someone who interprets the world through Brooklynish eyes. She's
the sly queen of kvetchitude. And she's a graduate of fabled P. S. 217. I'm so
proud.

Source: 2006/09/geographical_dy

Title: "Geographical Dyslexia," or "Directional Disability," or, People Who Lose Their Way
Date: September 23, 2006

[January 17, 2012.  There are at this moment three pages of comments appended to
this entry, which I wrote almost six years ago. The comments are most
interesting and revealing.  Don't miss 'em -- Vivian].

In The Accidental Tourist (New York [Knopf], 1991), Anne Tyler describes
a malady that, as far as I know had never before been acknowledged in
literature.  All four of her eccentric Leary siblings share "a total inability
to find their way around." Macon Leary, who writes travel books for a living and
is the novel's focal character, christens this trait "geographical dyslexia."

I'm not convinced that "geographical dyslexia" is a good name for the Learys'
condition. An alternative, "directional disability," is not much better.
Whatever the name, sufferers will know what is meant.  There's a class of
people (I'm one of them) who are chronically lost; who take a few steps in a
strange city and can't find their way back to the hotel; who don't know how to
exit the building they've just entered because they've strolled a corridor or
two; who are totally befuddled and even panicked when they drive into a familiar
intersection from an unaccustomed direction; who break into a cold sweat when
someone says, "you know how to get home -- just reverse the directions"; and
who, because they're frequently lost, are subject to ridicule and mockery from
their very own families and from their most intimate friends.

Macon Leary has a theory about his persistent dysgeographica. He thinks he's
disabled because all his life he's moved from house to house, and "people who'd
been moved around a great deal never acquired a fixed point of reference,
but wandered forever in a fog." I know of no evidence to support this wholly
improbable suggestion. Macon clutches at a straw because there's no data (and
there's no data, at least in part, because there's no accepted name for his
condition).

Every sufferer nurses his own unscientific, anecdotal theory. I was once
convinced that my dysgeographica was related to my total absence of rhythm --
as a child I could never learn to pump a swing or even to jump rope. My brother
thinks that it must be connected to his aversion to heights. My niece takes
the view that it's somehow related to her motion sickness and to her bouts of
dizziness. A friend thinks that the trouble stems from the fact that she was
naturally left-handed but was trained to be right-handed. In fact, no one knows
whether dysgeographica is connected to any other trait, or whether it's one of
a cluster of traits. In terms of hard science, the directionally disabled have
been allowed to languish in the dark ages.

I'm almost convinced that dysgeographica runs in families. My father was
monumentally disabled, and one of my brothers is so impaired that he's
occasionally looked to me for directional advice. Barking up the wrong tree, is
he!! (I have another brother who always knows exactly where he is -- perhaps
he's adopted.) In The Accidental Tourist,  Anne Tyler, who's a very sharp
observer of mankind, tellingly attributes dysgeographica to all four Leary
siblings.Tyler also notes that Macon has learned how to cope: he "kept a
stack of index cards giving detailed directions to the houses of his friends
-- even friends he'd known forever." Coping mechanisms are essential to the
dysgeographical. When I have to drive any distance without a navigator, I
write the directions with a thick pen in a notebook and keep it open on the
passenger seat. For some reason, I can't seem to retain more than one or two of
the approaching turns in my mind, so I must continually refer to the notebook.
Mapquest has proved to be a boon, especially if I remember to print out in very
large type.

In The Accidental Tourist, no one pokes fun at the Leary siblings. But in real
life, it's considered quite amusing to laugh at the chronically lost. People
don't understand that dysgeographica is a disability like colorblindness.
I can't say how many times I've been instructed to "concentrate," or "pay
attention' -- advice which is just as effective as commanding a color blind
person to make an effort to register shades of yellow or blue. Without a label
and without a support group, the dysgeographical will continue to be ridiculed.
It's time for us to unite. Unless we do so, we are not only doomed, like Macon
Leary, to be "adrift upon the planet, helpless, praying that by luck [we] might
stumble across [our] destination," but doomed to be humiliated as well.

(July 22, 2007.  I've written again on directional dyslexia.  If anyone is
interested, take a look here, here, and here.    And now one more.)  And
also.

Source: 2006/09/the_leader_thea

Title: The Leader Theater;  Our Leader
Date: September 24, 2006

I was not a committed moviegoer as a youth -- punchball, basketball, softball,
stickball in the street all having more appeal. But often enough, on a Saturday,
especially when the weather was bad, there were double-feature matinees at the
Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue.  =Admission for children was fourteen
cents when I first started attending; I think that by the time I reached high
school the price had risen to as much as a quarter. It was a harmless way
to spend a long afternoon. The theater was usually over-crowded with noisy
ragamuffins who threw popcorn at each other during the love scenes. There was an
impotent "matron" with a flashlight who had the frustrating job of maintaining a
modicum of order.

Musicals mystified me-- I remember waiting for the dance numbers to end so
that we could get on with the plot. I loved westerns and detective stories and
tolerated, though I was frightened by, the war movies.

In the cavalry-and-Indian movies (Stentorian voice :  "In the Years Following
the Civil War...") there was a recurring scene that made quite an impression
on me. Indians have attacked an "isolated farmhouse" or a wagon train. The
colonel who has just come from West Point to take command of Fort Apache or Fort
Bragg or Fort Collins summons the wizened scout who has spent his life on the
frontier. The fresh-faced colonel tells the experienced old buckaroo that he's
heard that there are Indians camped down by the bend of the river, and that he's
going to send a detachment of troops to teach them a lesson. The scout looks
at the arrow that the colonel shows him, and says, "But colonel, them Indians
down by the Brazos (or Snake or Powder or whatever river it happened to be that
particular Saturday matinee) are Comanche; this here's a Kiowa arrow."  But the
bull-headed, ignorant colonel won't listen. As far as he's concerned "they're
all injuns," so he orders an attack, and soon the whole frontier is in flames
and before the movie comes to an end, settlers are hatcheted and the Kiowas are
decimated.

Now I'm sure that George Bush went to see the same movies as I did. But he
couldn't have grasped their point; it was far too subtle for his intelligence.
He must have thought that the stubborn colonel analyzed the situation correctly
when he said that "injuns is injuns," because nowadays  we have a foreign
policy that says, if we're attacked by Al-Quaeda, let's just turn around and
revenge ourselves on the Iraqis. After all, Arabs is Arabs. The result: the
entire frontier is in flames.

There was a recurring scene in the war movies as well. An American soldier, or
a French resistance fighter, has been captured by the Germans. He refuses to
talk; won't spill any secrets.  The German colonel says to him: "ve haf ways of
making you talk. I'll haf to turn you ofer to him." And then the camera would
focus on an obvious sadist in an SS uniform, licking his lips. Next there was a
brief but terrifying shot of the captive sweating and screaming.

In dozens of films, the villainous Germans routinely employed torture. Americans
and their allies, on the other hand, were brave and upright and honorable and
played by the rules.

I can guarantee that at this moment there are movies being made all over the
world in which the colonel is American and the sadist is CIA. And these films
are going to be watched on Saturday afternoons by generations of children.

What has George Bush done to us?  What have we allowed him to do?

Source: 2006/09/in_which_the_au

Title: In Which the Author Confesses His Want of Imagination
Date: September 26, 2006

I was taught, and I have no reason not to believe, that there are three forms
of matter.  There are solids, there are liquids, and there are gases.  But
nowadays I'm expected to believe that there are at least two other forms of
matter.  No matter how I frazzle my brain trying to imagine what in the world
can exist that isn't a solid, a liquid or a gas, I make no headway.  But then
I think-- suppose I happened to live in a world in which there were only solids
and gases -- where all solids, when heated, immediately sublimed into gases? 
Suppose there was no ice made of water-- only substances such as dry ice which,
it will be remembered, turns directly into carbon dioxide when warmed.  In such
a world, it would have been beyond my conceptual ability to conceive of matter
other than the two forms with which I was familiar.  Liquids would have been
unimaginable.  I can only conclude that other forms of matter are definitely
possible;  it's just that I myself can't imagine them.

Similarly, there are the familiar colors of the visible spectrum:  red, orange
yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.  These are the only colors (well, except
for brown, and black, and white).  But it's well known that birds see colors
that humans (who apparently lost some color-sensitive cells during the course
of evolution) cannot detect.  There are infra-red and ultra-violet colors to
which birds respond but that humans are not equipped to perceive.  What do
these colors look like?  I can't possibly imagine, although I dearly wish that
I could. An analogy:  let's say that we humans were constructed in such a way
that we could see only the colors of the spectrum that lie between yellow and
blue;  there would be no way that we could imagine red or orange, even if we
knew that other creatures detected those portions of the spectrum.  We would
live in a world that had been drained of color.  But, in fact, compared to the
birds, we do live in a color-attenuated universe.  Moreover, there's no way
that we can imagine what it is that we're missing.

I wonder also about bats.  Bats are blind but they navigate very precisely by
echolocation, which is nothing more than very sophisticated radar.  They emit
high-pitched squeals, and they process the echoes of these emissions in a manner
that is so precise that they can catch mosquitoes on the wing.  But what is
in their minds?  Does the radar create a picture -- perhaps something like a
three- dimensional black-and-white movie?  Or more likely, is something created
in the bat brain that only a bat will ever know and that humans will never, ever
be able to imagine.  And what about whales, who are not blind as bats but both
see and also gather information by sonar.  What's it's like being a whale?

We're limited by the evolved architecture of our brains.  We can't imagine
what we can't imagine.  We can, however, know that there are phenomena that we
can't imagine -- which is something, I guess, but all-in-all a rather paltry
compensation.

(Plasma and the Einstein-Bose condensate, sometimes termed alternative forms
of matter, are not so much alternatives to solid, liquid, and gas as they are
states of the atoms themselves:  plasma amounts to, if I understand what I've
read, atoms stripped of their electrons, while the EBC is a bunch of atoms that
don't form themselves into a lattice as they would in solids.  They just lie
there, a frigid clump, each unrelated to the other except by proximity.)

Source: 2006/09/states_of_my_mi

Title: States of My Mind
Date: September 29, 2006

I once read the last 200 pages of Hardy's Jude the Obscure in a single hour. 
This extraordinary feat occurred in, I think, 1959 or 1960.

As a general rule, I'm not a speedy reader -- just about average, in fact.  But
for one splendid hour, I was able to read at four or five times my usual pace. 
I can't explain why except to say that I was so focused on Jude and Sue and
Arabella that the whole world outside of that book just disappeared.  Moreover,
it wasn't only that I read rapidly --I read with insight and with imagination. 
I felt that I was in touch not only with the novel but with the author himself
and that I could grasp and appreciate all of Hardy's contrivances and triumphs.

Thirty or so years later, I re-read Jude and I was astonished to find that my
recollection of the novel was superb -- much more detailed and more accurate
than of novels that I had recently read or re-read.  What a difference from
my usual plodding self!  What a joy it must be to be truly intelligent about
books!

It's obvious that my mind, and everyone's mind, must have much greater
capabilities than it ordinarily exhibits.  If only we knew how to access that
ability.

Three or four times in my life, at a concert or listening to music at home
I've felt myself jump to a higher level of understanding.  All of a sudden,
the form of the music -- even of complex music-- becomes crystal clear and the
inevitability of the next note becomes plain.  I seem to know what the composer
thought he was doing.  And then, after a few moments, I become self-conscious
and self-aware, the flood of insights wanes, and I decline to my usual, rather
pedestrian level of appreciation.

I also had one unique experience when I was between sleep and awake and a
tune was repeating itself in my head, and just like! that I started to create
interesting variations on the theme.  Composers sometimes say that they
transcribe music that they hear in their brains, and for a brief moment, it was
as though I myself was a composer.  But alack, after a few short moments, I
came to conscious realization of what was happening and I was roused from my
reverie;  creativity screeched to a halt.  I've never been able to revive
within me that particular symphony and song.

It's also happened that while I'm writing something, I enter what could be
called a trance state and the world seems to drop away.  It's then that I
can write four or five good pages in the same amount of time in which I would
usually grind out a hundred or so words.  It almost seems as though I engage a
part of my brain that's not ordinarily available.  Rimbaud once remarked that
"literature is my unconscious talking to your unconscious."  Maybe geniuses
are those who can achieve a level of concentration that allows them to delve
into inaccessible areas of the brain.  There's a story about Charles Dickens: 
it's said that he wrote the death scene of Little Nell in the midst of a crowded
party and that while he was plying his quill, tears were running down his face
and that he was totally oblivious to the noise around him.  He was there, in
the room, but in another sense, he wasn't there.

It happened to me two or three times that I was speaking to a group when all of
a sudden I became aware that I was constructing elegant and artistic paragraph-
length sentences -- that my vocabulary had enlarged and that my metaphors
were apt and expressive.  I can even remember admiring my sudden burst of
eloquence-- as though I was simultaneously both performer and observer.  But
then, after a few moments, the synaptic connections that transformed me into an
accomplished orator short-circuited and my supernova sentences reverted to mere
competence.  Wouldn't in be wonderful to be effortlessly eloquent!  One can
only lament.  But to look on the bright side -- I'm fortunate to have had a few
grand moments.  Even Kekule only dreamed his benzene rings into existence one
single time.

Source: 2006/10/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  My Antonia
Date: October 02, 2006

During the 1950s, I spent four long years treading water at Erasmus Hall, a
jam- packed public high school at the bepigeoned corner of Flatbush and Church
avenues.  Among the required books in our overcrowded 11th grade English class
was Willa Cather's prairie novel My Antonia.

I've just returned to My Antonia after an interval of fifty years.  It's an
excellent novel, though I confess with shame that I remembered very little
of it.  I managed to retain a bit of the Nebraska atmosphere and emotion
-- the empty, roadless steppe, the harsh winters, the sod houses, and the
spirit of the indomitable settlers.  I had absolutely zero recollection of the
novel's details and not so much as a glimmer of the story.  But then, there
isn't much in the way of plot -- simply the history of narrator Jim Burden's
socially confused and sexually troubled response to the "Bohemian" immigrant
Antonia Shimerda, a vibrant girl (and later a woman) two or three years older
than he.  I remembered Antonia herself -- wild, willful, determined, and
ultimately triumphant -- but I hadn't even a trace memory of Jim.  Perhaps it's
because Antonia remains in Nebraska where she tames her prairie acres and also
births and nurtures uncountable children, while Jim, burdened with advantages
and a middle-class education, leaves Black Hawk to become a lawyer for the
railroad (in effect, an antagonist of the smallholding farmer) and, if I've read
correctly, remains unmarried and childless, a rueful observer rather than an
actor in the great pioneer epic.

I'm also astonished that I had no recollection of buxom, eager Lena Lingard,
who teaches Jim about sex.  Was I so virginal and naive that I was unable to
construe Cather's circumlocutions?

I didn't remember, and surely didn't appreciate, that My Antonia is a lovely,
evocatively written book, extremely economical and at the same time rich in
telling detail.

When I read My Antonia for the first time, I hadn't encountered a plot of grass
larger than the outfield at Ebbets Field (297 feet down the right field foul
line), so "prairie" was a concept I had to take on faith. Now that I've been to
Willa Cather country many times -- not yet to Red Cloud itself but to Hastings,
where the author spent her adolescence  -- My Antonia no longer seems quite
so extra-terrestrial.  Still, I wonder why the Italians and Irish and Jews
and 'Negroes' who populated Erasmus Hall were supplied with such books-- My
Antonia along with O. E. Rolvaag's no-longer-read Giants in the Earth, which is
a desperately grim story of Norwegian immigrants in the Dakotas. I felt, and
I think I was encouraged to feel, that they were the heroic, admirable, hard-
working truly American immigrants, while we (shopkeepers, telephone linesman,
garbage collectors, school-teachers) had somehow snuck in the easy, city way. 
Why weren't we asked to read books about us?  Weren't we just as genuine?

Midway through the novel, Jim takes a few seconds to meditate on the relations
between old families like his own (his grandparents came from Virginia) and
the Czechs and Scandinavians whom they looked down upon.  Conventional wisdom
was that "all foreigners were ignorant people who couldn't speak English." 
"But today," says Jim, speaking as a surrogate Willa Cather herself, "the
best that a harassed Black Hawk merchant can hope for is to sell provisions
and farm machinery and automobiles to the rich farms where that first crop of
stalwart Bohemian and Scandinavian girls are now the mistresses."   It's an
observation that applies not only to the economics of Nebraska in the 1880s,
but is perpetual to the American experience.  Immigrants work hard.  Is it
possible that today's anti-immigration frenzy is driven by the fear that the
present crop of brown-skinned newcomers will work so furiously that they'll
leave in the lurch the neo-nativists who seem to have contented themselves with
a lazy respectability?

Source: 2006/10/radio_baseball

Title: Radio Baseball
Date: October 08, 2006

Yesterday the Yankees were drubbed, absolutely demolished, by the Detroit
Tigers. Sent home packing. Their loss joyed my vindictive, Yankee-hating heart.

When I was a boy hanging out at the P. S. 217 schoolyard and learning about
life, there was no question but that the pin-striped Yankees were privileged
bland tea-sipping Republicans, while the Brooklyn Dodgers were a bunch of
upstart and underachieving heroes to whom we neighborhood kids could relate;
 they were colorful, they were multicultural (before the letter), they were
Democrats, and they were ours.

I watched this week's games on the TV and savored not only the outcome, but all
the pealing bells and slick technological whistles that modern TV can offer: the
multiple replays, the ball-tracking systems that allow the viewer to inspect
both the pitcher's grip and his release and also the spin he puts on the ball. 
I could count the number of rotations on Kenny Rogers' lovely curve.

Although TV is amazingly informative, in my heart I prefer baseball on the radio
-- the radio of my youth, that is. In those days, baseball was radio and radio
was baseball. It's no wonder that baseball was the nation's game -- and it's
only game -- when radio was the dominant medium.

I love the perennial rhythms of radio baseball: "Steps to the plate... digs
in... closed stance... takes a few practice swings.... steps up on the rubber...
round comes the right arm...  slider low and outside....  checks the runner
on first...  looks down for the sign...  the pitch... high fly to left... 
settles under it... two gone in the third...."  It's an enduring, comforting
sound.

Radio baseball as I remember it transformed the players into larger-than-life
figures. It romanticized them. Radio baseball was a never-ending oral epic,
Homeric in dimension. TV, with all its wealth of detail, turns the players
into ordinary mortals; it makes them too familiar, too common. It plucks out
the heart of the mystery. It's impossible to believe that these young men
with their stringy beards and their horrid tattoos and their acneed faces are
reincarnations of the bronze-age superheroes of my childhood. If an announcer
were honestly recording what the TV sees, it would be, "steps up to the plate...
digs in...  adjusts his nuts...  steps out of the box... spits a huge goober
into the dirt...  now he's really excavating his left nostril."

Radio was reverent; television is intrusive.

Radio baseball was noble, and radio listeners were the better for listening to
it. Radio baseball brought us together. On East 9 Street, where I grew up, there
was very little in common among the Petrantos, the Burkes, the Bernsteins, the
Constantinos, the Pynns, the Rhodins, and the Meinekes who populated the block 
-- except that we could all talk about Cox, Reese, Snider, Robinson, Campanella.
I have a strong memory of riding my Ivor Johnson (later my Raleigh three-speed)
on a hot summer evening when there were so many people sitting on their porches,
or on their stoops, or on the fire escapes listening to Red Barber and Connie
Desmond that I could bike for many a mile and not miss a single pitch. Radio
baseball turned us into a community. Which is why we'll never, ever, forgive
that foul black-hearted traitor Walter O'Malley.

But I'm cheerful. It's autumn and the Republican Yankees have lost. It's a
favorable omen. Is it too much to hope that, inasmuch as the Yankees have lost
in October, the Democrats could win in November?

Source: 2006/10/another_variati

Title: Another Variation on the "Replacement Child" Theme
Date: October 12, 2006

In Charles Dickens' Dombey and Son (1848), which I've just re-read, Dombey's
treasured son Paul dies when his older sister, Florence, is about six years
old. Dombey has never liked his daughter Florence (he seems to blame her for
being a girl) and likes her less after he loses Paul. Dombey could transfer his
affection from his dead son to a possible "replacement," his living daughter.
But he shuns that very legitimate psychological option. Instead, Florence is
neglected, ignored, exiled, and eventually even struck by her hard-hearted
father. In real life, it's inevitable that Florence would become alienated,
bitter, and distorted. In Dickens' fairy-tale world her love for her father
endures and she remains cheerful and optimistic. Although she experiences a
truly horrible childhood, she suffers no permanent psychological deficit.
Eventually, she reconciles with her father, forgives him (sic!) and produces
two children (named Paul and Florence, of course).  Dombey, now chastened,
grandfathers these true replacement children.

It's a big, good novel, and Dickens makes us laugh and cry but sometimes
against our will and always in defiance of our knowledge of real--as opposed to
idealized--children. Dickens' optimism and his faith in the power of forgiveness
are wonderful but utterly otherworldly. Replacements, even quasi-replacements
such as Florence, rarely fare so well.

Source: 2006/10/every_american_

Title: Hosseini's The Kite Runner
Date: October 13, 2006

Every American should read Khaled Hosseini's The Kite Runner (Riverhead, 2003)
-- but for its political relevance, not its literary achievement. The novel is
set in Afghanistan, which is one of the few countries where recent American
foreign policy hasn't been entirely incompetent and disgraceful, so to read it
feels reassuring and even patriotic. Inasmuch as we're engaged in a never ending
war in Afghanistan, every one of our fellow citizens should have an idea why
we're there and what we're doing. It's not at all obvious -- Afghanistan doesn't
have a single drop of oil.  Americans should know how bad the Taliban was and
might become again, and also why we should remain vigilant against any rabid
fundamentalist theology--even ones that are near and more domestic than Islam.

In The Kite Runner, the conflict between Afghanistan's dominant Pashtuns and the
exploited Hazaras reminds us that there are countries that are far more absurdly
tribal than our own.

Even though I learned a great deal from this novel, I feel that as a work of
art, The Kite Runner is profoundly disappointing. It came highly recommended to
me and I set out to fall in love, couldn't.  It's an overpraised work. It's
advertised as written in "hard, spare prose" (I'm quoting from the back-cover
blurb), but in fact it's written in prose without any style at all -- and worse
still, every paragraph or so there's a sentence that must make a discriminating
reader cringe. The novel is very weak in characterization: aside from the
autobiographical narrator, there's only one figure of any dimension --Baba--
and all the rest are flat as pancakes. The novelist is particularly bad with
women, who are never more than wallpaper. The child Sohrab, in whom so much is
invested, speaks an idiom that no living child has ever spoken. Has the author
ever had a conversation with a real boy  The plot is filled with obvious
contrivances, artificial cliff-hangers, and (goodness gracious!) a climactic
fist-fight. And while I appreciate the author's love of his native country, it
doesn't seem at all honest to attribute Afghani problems to "Arabs, Chechens,
and Pakistanis." In this novel, the Taliban is represented by a character who
is half-German, a sociopathic admirer of Hitler, and (we eventually discover)
a pervert who preys on little boys. He's a grotesque villain who seems to have
wandered into an ostensibly serious novel from a James Bond melodrama. Why can't
the author face the fact that the the Taliban are home-grown Afghani fascists?
He would have given us a stronger novel if he had done so.

Source: 2006/10/an_east_9th_str

Title: An East 9th Street Memory
Date: October 15, 2006

It was an entirely different world -- East 9th Street in the old days. Sometimes
it seems so long gone that I find it hard to believe it even though I was there:
the last horse-drawn vegetable trucks and milk-wagons in America, an "old-
clothes man" shouting his cry in the street, an itinerant knife-sharpener with
his pushcart. On the street, a few, very few, rusting 1930s automobiles (it was
the war, and all the factories were turning out tanks). And me, in first grade,
wearing hand-me-down knickerbockers with long socks as if I were some turn-of-
the-century waif.

Next door to us was a two-family house. On the first floor, the very ancient
Mr. and Mrs. Pynn, who tended their gladioluses in the tiny backyard. He was
a retired merchant marine. (How did an old Cornish sailor come to live in our
neighborhood?)  On the second floor were the Pynn's tenants the Rhodins, Thor
and Pearl, who were at least a generation or so older than my parents and who
had three adult children (Thor Jr, Yammie [actually Hjalmar] and Peggy) none of
whom I ever met and whose existence I was aware only because Mrs. Rhodin would
boast of their exploits -- Thor Jr. was a physicist who, she said, worked on The
Bomb. The Rhodins were very quiet people. He, a tall, thin, aloof man who never
spoke, was either unemployed or retired;  he emerged from the house twice a day
to walk his poodle. Mrs. Rhodin "went to business," as the saying was in the
neighborhood.

One hot summer day, I was reading in the back bedroom. Windows (ours and the
Rhodins) were wide open. Across the narrow driveway, I heard Mrs. Rhodin launch
into a furious tirade. All the promises Mr. Rhodin had made to her. How little
he had accomplished. The kind of place they lived in. Stuck in Brooklyn. She
supported him while he lazed around at home. And other complaints that I
couldn't understand or don't remember -- but there could be no doubt about her
fury. Her litany of objections was loud and it seemed to go on for hours. A one-
way street, though; I never heard Mr. Rhodin's voice.  Stunned, I shamelessly
eavesdropped.

Was it days, or weeks, or months later that Mr. Rhodin was run over by a bus on
18th Avenue and instantly killed?

Was there a connection between the tirade and the accident? And was it an
accident?  Even in my childish naivete, I thought suicide. And because I knew
Pearl and Thor's secrets, I felt as though I were a bit of an accomplice.

Source: 2006/10/two_erotic_poem

Title: Two Erotic Poems
Date: October 20, 2006

Here are two excellent poems, of different eras and origins, that are at heart
surprisingly similar. The first, "Politics," written in the pre-World War 30s,
is by W. B. Yeats.

How can I, that girl standing there,

My attention fix

On Roman or on Russian

Or on Spanish politics?

Yet here's a traveled man that knows

What he talks about,

And there's a politician

That has read and thought.

And maybe what they say is true

Of war and war's alarms,

But O that I were young again

And held her in my arms!

This lovely verse restates a perennial literary theme: the conflict between
public and personal, or, between the life of duty and the life of pleasure. The
speaker of the poem, whoever he is, withdraws from a troubling weary political
conversation into a succinctly limned but very concrete and nostalgic sexual
fantasy. The anxieties heaped up in the first ten lines are overpowered by the
buoyancy of the concluding two. The hinge of the poem is the daring "But O" --
"O" being the most dangerous syllable in poetry, which, when wrongly used, can
be a sentimental disaster, but when discreetly employed, as here, condenses
into one moan an outburst of genuine feeling that overwhelms a stultifying
social ritual. For a pleasing moment, the speaker, powered by that great "O,"
withdraws from politics to enjoy, at least in his imagination, the pleasures and
consolations of sex.  I

Here's another poem -- a song, actually -- quoted first in sixteenth-century
manuscript version and then modernized.

Westron wynde when wyll thow blow

The smalle rayne down can rain

Cryst if my love were in my Armys

And I in my bed Agayne.

(And now the modernized version.)

Western wind, when wilt thou blow

The small rain down can rain?

Christ, that my love were in my arms

And I in my bed again.

In this anonymous quatrain, it's not politics but the cruel world itself that
is so discomforting. It's winter, and the singer waits for the western wind
that is the harbinger of spring. "Small rain" is not an idiom that is still in
use;  nowadays we say "light rain" -- the meaning is something like "April
showers."  In the traditional world that we have lost, "small rain" might even
have had just a touch of biblical resonance: "as the small rain upon the tender
herb, and as the showers upon the grass." The "small rain," when it will at last
come, will bring an end to harsh sterile winter and signal the start of fertile
spring. To paraphrase the first two lines: "when will the western wind bring in
the showers that will cause the earth once more to bloom?"  And then the hinge
expletive "Christ" (paralleling Yeats's 'O' but shockingly blasphemous) which
precipitates a potent sexual fantasy: in his warm, no longer wet wintry bed, the
speaker can shower sex upon his beloved.

Four exquisite, unmatchable lines of erotic poetry that are, miraculously, even
more spare and resonant than Yeats's.

Source: 2006/10/a_recurring_vio

Title: A Recurring, Violent Nightmare
Date: October 22, 2006

I wish I had pleasant dreams but I only have nightmares. Here's one of them.
Beginning with early adolescence and continuing to this day, I've had a
recurring dream in which I've murdered someone--I don't know whom. The victim is
always an unidentifiable male, and his death is always violent. Ordinarily, I
beat him to a bloody pulp with a shovel. I have problems disposing of the gory
body, but usually I bury it next to the neglected garage that lay behind our
house on East 9 Street in Flatbush where I lived my first seventeen years. It's
an anguishing dream not because I've killed someone, but because I've failed to
conceal the body properly and because I'm going to be arrested and punished.
It's amoral  -- I don't feel guilty that I'm a murderer -- just embarrassed
because I'm incompetent. It's a very realistic nightmare. A couple of times it's
been so vivid to me that even after I was wide-awake, it took me ten or fifteen
seconds to realize that I was not being hunted by the police and that I could
proceed normally with my life.

I don't know why I should be so oppressed with this fantasy. In the daylight
hours, I'm your run-of-the-mill peaceful person. Never killed anyone.

Imagine my surprise when I read (and studied the illustrations of) J. M.
DeMatteis's 100% autobiographical "graphic novel" Brooklyn Dreams (Paradox,
2003) and discovered that my nightmare is not entirely my own. DeMatteis suffers
from exactly the same recurring dream. "I remember the body -- buried out behind
my apartment building... or maybe stuffed in a trash can across the street.... 
Some poor, innocent schmuck I've either hacked up with a machete... or machine-
gunned with Cagney-like ferocity... or maybe just kicked down a flight of
stairs."  DeMatteis labors under the guilt that's provoked by this dream, and,
like me, he can't explain it except to speculate that his life is a nightmare
from which he's trying to awake.  But here's what's so fascinating to me:
DeMatteis is a product of the exact same Brooklyn neighborhood as I (see map). 
He grew up at the corner of Ocean and Foster, and he hung out at Newkirk Plaza,
a commercial island that would nowadays be called a shopping center, where I
endured painful haircuts, carried my mother's dry cleaning back and forth, and
entered and exited the BMT subway.  Was there something about Flatbush, or,
more particularly, something about "the Plaza" that made us killers in our
dreams. Yes, I rather think there was.

Is it significant that DeMatteis is a kind of replacement child? He is the
survivor of a pair of fraternal twins. His potential sibling was spontaneously
aborted -- although DeMatties speculates, that, prescient about life's
forthcoming difficulties, he might have "jumped." DeMatties' mother was about to
be "scraped" when the doctor had second thoughts. In Brooklyn Dreams, DeMatteis
describes his mother's and father's hysterical, debilitating and inconsistent
protectiveness -- traits often discovered in parents who haven't properly
grieved the loss of a child.

Is it possible that the person whom DeMatteis thinks he murdered is, on some
level, the unborn twin?

And so we have still another variation of the replacement child syndrome.

Source: 2006/10/our_local_newsp

Title: Death and Dying in Boulder, Colorado
Date: October 22, 2006

Our local newspaper, the Boulder Daily Camera, has announced a new policy. No
longer will obituaries be considered news. They've been turned over to the
classifieds and will be written by friends or relatives of the deceased and
placed by funeral homes. Bottom line: deaths are now an opportunity for revenue
enhancement.

I'd always taken it for granted that keeping track of who's born, who's married,
and especially who dies constitutes a considerable part of the mission of a
local paper. Such events are bread-and-butter matters -- part of the soul of the
community.

The Daily Camera is certainly not where we find out what's happening in the big
world -- it's woefully inadequate in that regard, although it does pick up and
truncate a few pieces off the wire. The Camera's sole reason for being is that
it covers local news, and by doing so allows Boulder's citizens to feel that
they have something in common.

But in fact the Camera only masquerades as a local paper. It's a holding of
the folksy-titled Prairie Mountain Publishing, which is a joint venture of E.
W. Scripps Co., the newspaper conglomerate, and the MediaNews Group (MediaNews
itself owns the Denver Post and four other Colorado papers;  Prairie Mountain
also owns the Colorado Daily). There's nothing local about the Camera and
there's no reason for its absentee owners to care two cents worth who lives
or dies in Newlands or South Boulder or Wonderland Hills. The Camera's job is
to extract as much money as possible from Boulder and to forward the cash to
Prairie Mountain Publishing.

The Prairie Mountain overlords have placed a new publisher, Al Manzi, at the
Camera; Manzi is a corporate lifer. I'm reliably informed that he came with
specific instructions to up the Camera's profits.

And so, obituaries are now on a pay-to-play basis.

How is it that there have been absolutely no complaints about the new policy? 
Boulder is a contentious, argumentative city.  It would be reasonable to expect
that the Camera's letters-to-the-editor columns would be saturated with protest,
but there's been nary a word. Why?  Because Manzi has instructed the editorial
staff not to publish any letters that protest the new policy. It's good to be
the publisher.

Here are some proposals for Al Manzi.  Why stop with obituaries?  Or with
wedding and anniversary announcements, which are obviously fair game. Letters
to the editor: why not?  Why should a newspaper give free space to community
opinion. Let those who can pay, pay. And editorials. Why should there be
editorials when there can be advertorials?

Here's a phrase to remember:  "revenue center."

In today's paper, there's an announcement that the Camera's editor, Sue Deans,
who has local roots, has resigned. Could it be that her departure is related to
Manzi's policy changes?  Would anyone be astonished to discover so?

Source: 2006/10/on_foley_and_hy

Title: On Foley, Rascal Beadles, and "Hypocrisy"
Date: October 23, 2006

It's the scandal of the month that Republican Representative Mark Foley
solicited sex from adolescent male congressional pages in the same years that
he headed the House Caucus on Missing and Exploited Children and made his
reputation for his work on legislation targeting sexual predators.

Foley has been universally condemned for his "hypocrisy," as well he should be.
It's especially piquant that his castigation of a much-reviled-by-moralists
former president has resurfaced to embarrass him and to amuse the rest of
us: "It's vile. It's more sad than anything else, to see someone with such
potential throw it all down the drain because of a sexual addiction." What kind
of rationalizing maneuvers were going in the Foley mind when the Congressman
uttered these words about Bill Clinton?

Foley's "hypocrisy" is anything but unique.  Shakespeare nailed the phenomenon
centuries ago. In one of his great wisdom-in-madness moments, King Lear sees
beneath the surface: "Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!/ Why dost thou
lash that whore? Strip thine own back;/ Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that
kind/ For which thou whipp'st her."

Every few weeks or so, it's discovered that one of our very own American beadles
is enthralled by the exact sin against which he inveighs. There's the anti-
pornography campaigner who has accumulated some unusual apparatus in his clammy
basement; the anti-vice TV preacher caught with a shady lady in a by-the-hour
motel on the Memphis strip;  the anti-gay state legislator photographed dancing
in a downtown bar that caters only to men; the radio talk-show host who wants
to send drug-users up the river for life but is himself addicted to hillbilly
heroin; the flabby propagandist for virtues who pulls all-nighters at Atlantic
City blackjack tables.  ll of them are hypocrites, I suppose, but in my view
"hypocrisy" is a label that has no explanatory value.

It's not as though people set out to become hypocrites. It's not an aspiration
or a chosen career path. There's no Hypocrisy 101.

I'm not an anti-vice campaigner or a psychologist and have no particular claim
to expertise in this area, but I don't believe that people like Foley are
cloven-footed sociopaths.

Nor do I hold to the theory that it's simply protective coloration: "if I scream
loud enough no one will suspect me." That shabby dodge has long since worn
through; who else do we suspect nowadays if not the loudest shouters?

I think the migration to hypocrisy must be very gradual. The Foleys of this
world are driven by the flesh. Their vice becomes their obsession. I believe
that they try to turn that obsession, that vice, in a positive direction. 
Let's say a person is fascinated by adolescent boys;  he can then take on the
cause of sexual exploitation and he can manage his compulsion in a socially
acceptable manner. He can study it, observe it, catalog it; he can stay in
close touch with the temptation but not succumb to it; he can in fact turn his
vice into virtue. It's an excellent game plan.  It's a healthy compensatory
reaction.

I'm sure that there are anti-vice campaigners who employ such tactics
successfully. But there are others who, in moments of weakness, do succumb.
Now they're in a tricky psychological pickle.  Who better to appreciate the
damage to adolescents than the person who has made a professional study of the
outcomes?  So now Foley and the others know in their hearts that they are
truly hateful. Perhaps they persuade themselves that their power makes them
invulnerable. Meanwhile, they redouble their efforts to help the exploited;
they pass legislation and start foundations.  And so the gulf between their
professed beliefs and their private practices becomes deeper and deeper. Good
deeds and evil deeds become inextricably entwined.

In the story, Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (a child-molester) inhabited the same body.

I think that what must happen next is that self-loathing kicks in, big time.
And as we all know, self-loathing and self-betrayal are twinborn. So the Foleys
among us cooperate in their detection.  They engage in riskier and riskier
behavior until they are exposed. Because, in fact, they want to be exposed. As
Lear says, they "strip [their] own back[s]."  Because once they're exposed
and the punishment commences, they can then set out on the path of redemption,
which, I'm absolutely convinced, they crave as much or more than they crave the
pleasure of their vice.

When La Rochefoucauld said that "hypocrisy is the tribute that vice pays to
virtue," he acknowledged that the term "hypocrisy" did not explain anything--
that it's an incidental by-product of human frailty.

Source: 2006/10/book_report_fic

Title: Book Report:  Fiction by Michael Chabon
Date: October 24, 2006

I liked the film Wonder Boys (2000) so very much that I set out to read all
of Michael Chabon's writing. Here's my interim report. I couldn't finish The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh (William Morrow, 1988). The book is reported to have
sold well and it has been widely praised, but, I'm sorry, I thought it was
precious juvenilia and should never have been published. I do, however, love
the title. A Model World (1991) and Werewolves in Their Youth (Random House,
1999) are collections of short stories. I found them both mighty insubstantial,
and I confess to wearying of the little boy whose father left the family (a
far-too- frequently-repeated motif). Wonder Boys (1995) is a fine, complicated,
clever, satisfying novel.  Grady Tripp, Terry Crabtree, and James Leer are all
memorable creations. The Passover service (omitted in the film) is top-flight
-- comic and moving at the same time. The story is fast, funny, and original --
even richer than the fine, little-known movie.

I respected more than I loved the pullet-surprise winning Amazing Adventures of
Kavalier and Clay (Random House, 2000). It's engaging but overcrowded. While
reading it, I was too conscious of the artifice and too aware of the novel's
debts: Nabokov, a pinch of Pynchon, Doctorow, etc. Chabon's a great storyteller
with a bright future. So far, he's doesn't have the heft of Bellow or the
fluency of Roth, but he's up there in the big leagues. I'm hoping Summerland and
The Final Solution are as good as the novels I've read so far. It's going to be
fun to follow Chabon's career. He's a talented guy.

October 25. Today I read the novella The Final Solution (Harper Collins, 2004).
It's a snazzy mystery. Chabon returns to his infatuation with mythic figures;
he also re-creates the hero-sidekick relationship that is an obsession of AAKC
-- this time its S. Holmes and Linus Steinman.  A very entertaining story,
although sometimes I worried that I was reading a filmscript-in potentia. 
Perhaps I'm too suspicious: not many directors are jumping to cast a parrot in
the lead role.

October 30.  I read forty or so pages of Summerland (Miramax, 2002). Two words:
"teen" and "fantasy." Not at all my cup of tea.  I hope that Chabon doesn't
continue to indulge himself with such trivialities. He's too good for this
stuff.

Michael: get back to work!  Get serious!

Source: 2006/10/occupations_not

Title: Occupations Not For Me
Date: October 30, 2006

Here are some career paths that it's just as well I didn't tread.

1.  Taxi driver in a large city (especially a city that's not on a grid, such as Boston or London. Even the DC-diagonals drive me nuts). I've earlier written about my incapacitating directional disability, but I neglected to mention that I tend to get into a bit of a panic when I'm lost --  I start driving much too fast and far too waywardly. So, dear friends, imagine me a befuddled cabbie, sweating super-profusely, while the fares in back scream bloody murder when I take the exact wrong turn for the fourth consecutive time. It would be a freakin' nightmare. Related occupations that won't work: tour guide, wilderness guide, tracker.

2.  Dog-groomer. I've hinted at my lack of affection for doggies before. I just don't think I'd do a good job blow-drying Fido or brushing Fifi's teeth. (Incidentally, I'm joined in my prejudice against curs by gentle Will himself, whose references to canines are uniformly unfriendly: the superbly wicked sisters in King Lear, for example, are "dog-hearted daughters.")

3.  Trapeze artist. I'm terrified of heights and I have absolutely no sense of rhythm. Imagine me launching myself at just the right moment to catch my partner by the ankles. Related opportunity for ignominious failure: dance instructor.

4.  Surgeon.  I'm far too squeamish to be poking around in someone's innards.  Even channel surfing has become a dangerous pastime since we accidentally acquired the live surgery channel.  Motto:  "all gore, all the time."  I have to keep clicking that remote lest I accidentally pause at an open-heart moment. The FCC should mandate a warning and a five-second delay:  "Caution:  palpitating inner organs on view shortly."

5.  Hostage.  Chained to a bed somewhere in the 'stans wouldn't work for me. I must have my oatmeal every morning at 7 a.m., and I need to move my bowels shortly afterward. Moreover, if I don't eat lunch right on time, I get wicked headaches. Not to mention that I don't function well in rooms that are either too hot or too cold or not well ventilated, and which are peopled with chain-smoking guards. On the whole, I'd be a mighty cranky hostage.

Source: 2006/11/shakespeare_and

Title: Shakespeare and Dogs
Date: November 01, 2006

In a recent post, I casually mentioned that William Shakespeare was not fond
of dogs and I offered as evidence the fact that the two villainous sisters in
King Lear are called "dog-hearted daughters." Not convincing, says one of my
readers. Is that so? Well, let me offer further evidence of dog-heartedness.
Shakespeare's first true villain, Richard of Gloucester, is metaphorically
speaking, a dog. According to the legend, which the character himself embraces
and flaunts, Richard was born with a full set of teeth "which plainly signified/
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog." Not a tractable or ingratiating
dog either, but one who is both treacherous and poisonous: "when he fawns, he
bites; and when he bites,/ His venom tooth will rankle to the death." At the
end of Richard III, when Richard is killed at the climactic battle of Bosworth
Field, his heroic Tudor successor Henry Richmond proclaims victory in these
words: "God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,/ The day is ours, the
bloody dog is dead."  So here's a pretty pack of hounds: Goneril, Regan, and
Richard of Gloucester. And yet one more villain -- Iago in Othello: "O damn'd
Iago. O inhuman dog."

In the Shakespearian universe, villains are regularly described as dogs, but
dogs are never, ever, characterized as loyal, or affectionate, or helpful.
They're anything but our newspaper-fetching friends.  On the contrary,
dogs are "base," "unmanner'd," "thievish," "mangy," "hellish," "whoreson,"
"coward," "rascal," and "bloody." Shakespeare often uses the dysphemism
"cur" for dog. Curs are "mongrel," "cruel-hearted," "o'erweening," "whoreson
indistinguishable," and "venom-mouth'd." Hounds, highly regarded by some
for their hunting ability, are "false" or "fell and cruel." Both Richard of
Gloucester and Macbeth are "hell-hounds." Shakespeare's dogs are regularly
associated with disorder, violence and evil;  everyone knows Mark Anthony's
"Cry 'havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war."

Shakespeare draws upon dogs when he wants to describe an uncivilized and wild
world. Henry IV fears what England will become when his undisciplined son
succeeds him: "For the fifth Harry from curb'd license plucks/ The muzzle of
restraint, and the wild dog/ Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent." Dogs
are untrustworthy, because they are "easily won to fawn on any man." "They
turn... As dogs upon their masters." When the conspirators murdered Caesar, they
"fawn'd like hounds,/  And bowed like bondsmen, kissing Caesar's feet;/ Whilst
damned Casca, like a cur, behind/ Struck Caesar on the neck." Dogs are not only
disloyal, they're disgusting as well. In The Second Part of King Henry the
Fourth, Archbishop Scroop complains that the common people are no more loyal to
Henry than they were to his predecessor Richard II. "So, thou (i.e. the people)
common dog, did'st thou disgorge/ Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard./ And
thou would'st eat thy dead vomit up,/ And howl'st to find it."

Shakespeare knew his dogs and had their names at his finger tips. Macbeth runs
through a catalog:  "hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs/ Shoughs,
water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept/ All by the name of dogs." Mad Edgar, in
Lear, makes a similar list: "Be thy mouth or black or white,/ Tooth that poisons
if it bite;/ Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim./ Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,/
Bobtail tyke or trundle tail." Shakespeare had a particular and peculiar dislike
of fawning dogs, whom (as was first noticed by Walter Whiter in 1794) he lumps
together with (strange as it seems) candy or sweets, and images of melting.
When Hotspur thinks back to an early encounter with the future King Henry IV,
he remembers "Why, what a candy deal of courtesy, this fawning greyhound then
did proffer me." In Anthony and Cleopatra, Anthony realizes that his followers
are abandoning him; he laments that "the hearts/ That spaniel'd me at heels,
to whom I gave/ Their wishes, do discandy, Melt their sweets/ On blossoming
Caesar; and this pine is bark'd/ That overtopp'd them all." Flattering dogs and
sweets are bound so closely in Shakespeare's subconscious that sometimes the dog
is implicit rather than explicit. Hamlet to Horatio: "Why should the poor be
flattered./ No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,/ And crook the pregnant
hinges of the knee,/ Where thrift  [i.e. advantage] may follow fawning." A
reader who is familiar with Shakespeare's imagination can detect the ghost of a
fawning spaniel behind that "candied tongue." The ghost of a ghost is there also
in King Lear, where Lear, in his madness, imagines that he surrounded by a pack
of hounds: "The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they
bark at me."

Did Shakespeare suffer some traumatic childhood event involving dogs and
candy? It has been so suspected?  Whether yea nor nay, it's more than clear
that Shakespeare's loathing of dogs was not of the surface; it was a deep and
elemental revulsion.

Source: 2006/11/what_we_heard_i

Title: What We Heard in the Fifties
Date: November 06, 2006

Regular readers (and even stray internet pilgrims) know that Dr. M. has composed
a series of entries called What We Read in the Fifties, in which he's revisited
books that were noteworthy or notorious during the days of his youth. It's been
a rewarding exercise, at least for him. Some of the books have been canonical
novels that were required reading in English class at Erasmus Hall High School,
some have been pop best-sellers which his more earnest teachers would have
scorned, and some have been cheap sensational paperbacks passed under the desk
from hand to grimy pubescent hand.

In the years that have passed since I first read these books, rivers have
changed course, glaciers have melted, and American society has altered almost
beyond recognition -- and yet the books have remained exactly the same. Reading
them has been an exercise in nostalgia and a test of memory, and also an
unwelcome insight into the incalculable callowness of adolescence. And yet, Dr.
Metablog has found readers -- or, at least, he thinks he has, for in May and
in December, when high school students all over America, yea, even across the
waters, write their assigned term papers on Lord of the Flies or The Catcher
in the Rye, blague-traffic spikes, and the dissenting views offered in these
essaylets are plagiarized and offered to a new generation of English teachers,
who reward them with grades of D or F.

I fear, however, that my readers might have gathered an erroneous impression of
1950s Flatbushian youth -- that they might have been literate or intellectual.
Let me clear my conscience and confess that for every hour that I spent reading
books that had actual bindings, I spent ten hours reading comic books and an
equal measure with my ear to the radio. It was the comics that taught me how to
read; I was well along in years before I came to realize that there were such
things as lower-case letters and that there could be sentences that didn't end
with exclamation points! In my neighborhood, super-heroes (Batman, the Flash,
Green Lantern, Wonder Woman) were as common as squirrels or starlings. But radio
-- radio serials-- affected us even more than the comics. Radio stimulated the
imagination, took us to worlds far way, presented us with alternative realities.
Members of my age-cohort will not forget the glories of radio:Jack Armstrong,
the All-American boy, who trotted the globe in support of native ideals and
Wheaties; Bobbie Benson, the youth who inherited the B-Bar-B ranch in the Big
Bend country, and who, along with Tex, Windy, and Harka, triumphed daily over
snakes, droughts, famines and outlaws; the Shadow, who had the power to "cloud
men's minds so they cannot see him," and who taught us, every day, that "the
weed of crime bears bitter fruit"; Sergeant Preston of the Northwest Mounted,
who fought crime and bad guys in the Yukon with horse and dog ("Well, King,
this case is closed"); and the Lone Ranger, who with the aid of Tonto and the
"thundering hoof beats of the great horse Silver" and with the marvelous voices
of exotic Detroit's Fred Foy and Brace Beemer, created an enduring mythology of
a spacious but vague and unlocatable west.

Radio gave scope to the listener's imagination. When television came along, and
these programs were translated into a visual form, they were all inevitably
diminished. It's no wonder that the great epics (Gilgamesh, the Odyssey and
Iliad, Beowulf, the Icelandic sagas) are oral creations. The spoken word can
cast spells that are beyond the capacity of visual forms. When it comes to
heroes, a single word is worth a thousand pictures.

Radio prepared me for Shakespeare. It's a fact that when Londoners crossed the
Thames to attend the Globe, they did not go to "see" a play; they went to "hear"
a play. There's a world of difference between seeing and hearing. When we "see"
a movie, 90% of the information comes to us through the eye. In a Shakespeare
play, it's exactly the opposite -- 90%, or more, of the information comes to
us by way of the ear -- which is why recordings of Shakespeare's plays can be
so entirely successful and so true to the original intent. And because the
plays are primarily oral, with their big speeches and complicated rhetorical
patterning and brilliant displays of verbal acuity, they can also be larger-
than-life -- and they can be heroic. Shakespeare's plays are closer to radio
than they are to any other modern literary form. Those of us who grew up with
radio bring to Shakespeare an intuitive understanding of oral forms that precede
television, film, and even precede the theater itself  -- especially decadent
modern theater with its compulsive and distracting visual distortions.

Source: 2006/11/flying_the_flag

Title: Flying the Flag
Date: November 09, 2006

Yesterday, we dug out our grand old American flag and flew it from the holder
that I had improvised after 9/11. We flew it to celebrate two great changes: a)
the Democratic triumph in Tuesday's election, which restored a bit of our faith
in representative government, and b) the end of the arrogant reign of Donald
Rumsfeld, the principal mover (except for the cowboy-in-chief himself) of this
foolish, disastrous adventurism in the Middle East. We're hoping for a return to
common sense in America, but we're not entirely optimistic  -- the guy who's
in charge doesn't read, can't admit he's ever made a mistake, and takes his
marching orders from a) Rove, b) his gut, and c) his narrow, parochial version
of the great signifier in the sky  -- in what order of priority no one knows.

Rumsfeld should have been out on his ass years ago. He had lost the respect of
the soldiers, certainly of the generals, the congress, and, as we now know from
the election results, of ordinary Americans everywhere. However, until yesterday
he could still patronize and mystify the journalists, and he could still issue
instructions to those beneath him in the chain of command.  And generals obey
even when they despise the person issuing the orders.

In 1606, Shakespeare described the psychological relations between the generals
and their civilian commander. Of Macbeth, Angus says that "Those he commands
move only in command,/ Nothing in love." That is, they do what they're told, but
they hate doing it. Here's the full transcript of Angus's remarks: "Now does
[Macbeth] feel/ His secret murders sticking on his hands;/ Now minutely revolts
upbraid his faith-breach;/ Those he commands move only in command,/ Nothing in
love: Now does he feel his title/ Hang loose upon him, like a giant's robe/ Upon
a dwarfish thief."

It's hopeless to expect that Rumsfeld would recognize that the mantle of
Secretary of Defense hung upon him as Angus describes Macbeth's (or, as does, a
fortiori, the presidential mantle upon its own wearer) -- there's not sufficient
insight or perspective or self-knowledge around the White House these days. But
we know exactly what Angus meant, and we know that some of our so-called leaders
are nothing more than dwarfish thiefs.

("Minutely" means "every minute";  "Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-
breach" means "every minute a revolt [by one of his former followers] pays
Macbeth back for his own breach of faith, i.e. assassinating Duncan.)

Source: 2006/11/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  All the King's Men
Date: November 13, 2006

I've now re-read Robert Penn Warren's All the King's Men (1946), a novel that I
hadn't looked at since the early 1950s. Once again memory has played its tricks.
My fifty-year-old afterimage does not correspond to reality. The book that I
thought I remembered focused on Willie Stark (Huey Long) -- his ascent to power,
his anti-establishment politics, his ruthlessness, and his assassination. 
Willie Stark does in fact appear in the book that I re-read, but he's not
the central figure -- not even close. It's a novel about Jack Burden, press-
secretary and chief blackmailer for Stark, and about the various spokes of
Burden's wheel: his semi-aristocratic mother, his lawyer-turned-religious-
fanatic father, the apparently upstanding judge who was his mother's lover,
his childhood sweetheart Anne Stanton and her doctor brother, and also Sadie
Burke, the Boss's secretary-girlfriend-political guru, and of course about Stark
himself.  Perhaps I misremembered because the Willie Stark parts of the novel
are so strong, or perhaps my memory was filtered through the 1949 Robert Rossen
film. Even half a century later, it's hard to read the book without seeing
Broderick Crawford and Mercedes McCambridge in the mind's eye. (The film is now
in the Netflix queue, so I'll revisit it shortly.)

It's a good book, well worth the prizes and the accolades. For my money, there
could have been more politics and more Louisiana and less young-man-searching-
for-his-identity. It's a big, as they say, "sprawling" novel; sometimes the
sprawl works, but at other times -- the long flashback in which adolescent Jack
woos adolescent Anne, for example -- an editor's scissors would have done the
novel a world of good. The prose is mannered and affected and derivative: hunks
of Thomas Wolfe, a dollop here and there of Faulkner, along with extra-large
helpings of Chandler or Hammett. But it's nevertheless strong writing.

Melodramatic?  Yes, indeed: murders and suicides, betrayals and reversals,
mysteries and exposures. But at the core, a genuine curiosity about America
and its southland. All the King's Men persuasively creates a culture in which
genuine goodness is mere namby-pamby and in which ruthlessness has become
reasonable. To succeed in such a world, Jack Burden and Willie Stark become as
corrupt as the world around them.

The Huey Long material is excellent groundwork for a novel. Warren dresses it
up with paragraph after paragraph of murky philosophizing. I confess that I
didn't make the effort to absorb the meditations -- they seemed to be the usual
southern stuff about religion and about the weight of history. I think that
readers are supposed to learn that "if you could not accept the past and its
burden there was no future, for without the one there cannot be the other, and
... if you could accept the past you might hope for the future, for only out of
the past can you make the future."  But if such a platitude is the best that
Warren can do, it's best to skip the tepid philosophy and stick with the rich
and abundant storytelling.

Source: 2006/11/mosquito_sex

Title: Mosquito Sex
Date: November 15, 2006

Sexnews from the mosquitosphere: "if larvae of Aedes stimulans are raised at
75F, about half become males and half become females. But if they are raised at
84F, only 9F higher, they all become almost complete females."  Almost complete
females?  What's the meaning of "almost complete?"  Either they're male, or
they're female.  Doesn't the good book say that "male and female created he
them?"

Here's the surprising scoop. "Larvae that would have become males lack the big
bushy antennae of the normal male and have mouth parts and external genitalia
that are indistinguishable from those of a "real" female. Furthermore,
"feminized" males have no testicles or other internal male organs of
reproduction, but they do have ovaries and other internal female organs of
reproduction. Some feminized males have even mated with normal males and been
inseminated, but they laid no eggs."

All this mosquito sex science comes from entomologist Gilbert Waldbauer, author
of A Walk Around the Pond (Cambridge [Harvard], 2006).

Professor Waldbauer claims to love his insects but he is unmoved by the plight
of the 84F feminized males. Can there be sadder words in Aedes households all
over the warming earth than "they laid no eggs?"  It's poignant, perhaps even
tragic.

How do the mosquitoes themselves feel about attenuated antennae and awkward
genitalia?  If Waldbauer had looked with a more compassionate eye, he would
have noticed that "normal" males of the 75F variety wave their big bushy
antennae and point and laugh at the feeble mini-antennae of the wannabe females.
He would also have noticed that wannabe females are stigmatized and often
depressed because they are so frequently picked on by "normal" males, who
regularly direct loud, scornful, threatening whines at the antennae-impaired.

There's a crisis of values in mosquitoland. Many "normal" males are
fundamentally convinced that the wannabes have made a conscious choice to mimic
females and that water temperature has absolutely nothing to do with it. Some
among the "normal" males -- the more enlightened -- propose that with the right
kind of counseling and prayer, the mimics can be reclaimed. But other "normal"
males hate, simply hate, the males who consort with the feminized wannabes. They
condemn as unnatural all intercourse between the normal and the feminized, and
they proclaim the actual act of insemination to be the work of the devil.

I myself wonder why the "normal" males get themselves into such a twist.  I'm
tempted to think that they protest too much -- that they themselves secretly
lust after the feminized males.

I'll ask the expert, Professor Waldbauer. If he doesn't know, I'll get a second
opinion. Perhaps the Rev. Ted Haggard would like to share his insights.

Source: 2006/11/and_speaking_of

Title: And Speaking of Mosquitoes...
Date: November 16, 2006

Once upon a time I had a foolproof system for clearing a bedroom of
mosquitoes.  Close the door, turn on a light, stick the left arm out of the
bedclothes, keep track of the mosquitoes by their whine, and then, as soon as
one lands on the exposed skin, smack it with the right hand.  After a few
minutes, turn out the light, sleep tight. Used to work wonders.

The system doesn't work any more?  Why?  Because my antiquated ears no longer
register high-pitched sounds. I can't hear mosquitoes until one of them pecks on
my eardrum.  I'm vulnerable to sneak attack.

It's bad: all mosquitoes are now stealth mosquitoes. It's good: I'll never again
be troubled by that nasty whine.

Source: 2006/11/our_strange_sla-1

Title: "A Strange Slavery to Beauty"
Date: November 22, 2006

On September 6, 1664, Sam Pepys purchased for his young wife a pair of gloves
trimmed with yellow ribbon. At 20 shillings, he knew that he overpaid but
he was not at all sorry, because Doll, the 'Change woman from whom he made
the purchase was "so pretty, that, God forgive me! I could not think it too
much -- which is a strange slavery that I stand in to beauty, that I value
nothing near it."  Pepys, God forgive him, was not only enthralled by handsome
women, but was attentive to beauty in all its manifestations.  He loved plays
and performances, paintings and prints and architecture, as well as music,
especially songs and ballads.  Pepys's life was ruled by his "strange slavery
to beauty."

But why should he have described his fascination as "strange?"  If there is a
single trait that distinguishes not just Pepys but human beings as a species,
it is an irrepressible love of things beautiful.  For every one of their
senses, humans have created an appropriate form of art. Hearing?  Music and
song.  Sight? drawing and painting and sculpture and film. Taste? elaborate
cookery. Motion?  the dance.  Speech and language?  literature from lyric
to epic to novel.  Moreover, there's scarcely a substance that human beings
have encountered in their time on the planet that they haven't transformed
into something harmonious and elegant.  At first, bone and stone and fur; and
then wood and metal and cloth and clay.  Occasionally, some anthropologist
will emerge from his laboratory with a theory that the fundamental human trait
is  -- you name it -- aggressiveness, or territoriality, or the ability to
play games, or an interest in the future, or the capacity for bonding into
societies.  Such theories have a bit of truth, but they overlook the obvious. 
The essence of humanity, in my view, is the drive to create and to appreciate
beauty.  Pepys' "strange slavery" is not a bit strange;  it's universal.

As for myself, I believe that I can remember the exact day, hour and minute when
I was first struck by beauty.  My moment of ascension occurred in a garden.  I
must have been twelve or thirteen years old (and therefore not fully human). 
One spring day I tagged along with a gang of schoolyard savages to the Zoo
to see if we could get ourselves into a little trouble.  So there we were,
running about, screaming and hiding and throwing stones at each other and clods
of dirt at the respectable zoo patrons. Someone must have called the cops,
because the next thing I knew we had all scattered and I was running as fast
as I could.  In those days I was small and spry and any fence that I couldn't
squeeze through I could certainly clamber over.  And what's a little barbed
wire to a frightened urchin?  Separated from my cohort, I became completely
lost.  Eventually, I found myself in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden which was then
as now adjacent to the zoo.  I climbed over one or two more fences and entered
(not by a gate, but surreptitiously) the famous, mature, refined Japanese Garden
-- one of the great artistic achievements in all of America.  I was dazzled in
all my senses-- it was a true epiphany.  I particularly remember the red cut
leaf maples and the wisteria.  Of course I was too ignorant to know that it was
wisteria;  I only knew that I was surrounded by magnificent cascades of blue
flowers in abundant bloom.

Here are some pictures of the garden.  Just take a look, and then try to
imagine an uncivilized pre-adolescent, a scared, sweaty, ragtag child, a product
of concrete schoolyards and filthy subways stumbling upon such a amenable place.

What good fortune it was to have vaulted that one last fence!

I think that I've spent the rest of my life trying to get back to that
garden -- or, more accurately, I've spent it trying to recreate and to re-live
the aesthetic explosion that I experienced at that epiphanic moment.  When
I travel. I make it a point to visit the world-famous gardens, and when I'm
at home I work on my own landscape.  But it's not just gardens -- the most
ephemeral of art forms --to which I stand in strange slavery.  I've found
the aesthetic shiver in other places.  Poetry, Shakespeare in particular,
is always at hand.  Is there a civilized soul who can read "Do not laugh at
me;/ For (as I am a man) I think this lady/ To be my child, Cordelia" without
dropping a pleasurable tear.  The Winter's Tale, which is the finest play in
the history of this or any other universe, is a fountain of delights, especially
Perdita's "I was not much afeard; for once or twice/ I was about to speak and
tell him plainly,/ The selfsame sun that shines upon his court/ Hides not his
visage from our cottage but/ Looks on alike" -- a sentiment which may be the
most genuinely democratic in thirty-eight otherwise monarchist dramas.  Visual
arts also are a constant source of pure delight;  in a gallery of Rembrandts
at the Metropolitan Museum I was once so ecstatic that my heart began to beat
uncontrollably.  And in Helsinki, I had a moment of pure architectural joy at
the Church of the Rock -- the most beautiful and holy of buildings.

But of all art forms, it's music that is most reliably transcendent.  My tastes
have evolved over the years:  Dvorak and Mahler are in the past but Beethoven's
great fugue still sets my spine on edge and so does the long harpsichord solo in
Bach's Fifth Brandenburg.  Recordings usually (but not always) work better than
live performances.  When I'm in the right mood, I play the shivery passages
again and again.  Nowadays the single most lovely piece of music is the great
chaconne from Bach's second violin partita.  Hilary Hahn's performance is my
favorite, but the chaconne is almost as exciting in Celadonio Romero's guitar
transcription and in the Brahms piano version (for virtuoso left hand only). 
The chaconne does all that music can do, and it does it in fifteen unaccompanied
minutes.

It's not just classical music.  I'm also strangely enslaved to what is now
called "golden era gospel" -- the singing of the "Heavenly Gospel Singers" and
the "Harmonizing Four" and Clara Ward and Brother Joe May and Dorothy Love
Coates and the "Swan Silvertones" and the "Five Blind Boys of Alabama." A
small sample of some of my many, many favorites:  Mahalia Jackson's long live
version of "How I Got Over"; the "Roberta Martin Singers"' "Standing on the
Promises"; Sister Rosetta Tharpe and Marie Knight singing "Beams of Heaven"; the
"Sensational Nightingales" "Brightly Beams";  perhaps the best of the best: 
Professor J. Earle Hines, "God Be With You."  In such great music resides the
aesthetic ecstasy, that, when we open ourselves to it, makes us most completely
human.

Source: 2006/11/november_22

Title: November 22
Date: November 23, 2006

On November 22, 1963, we were living in a small third-floor walkup on Irving
Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  It was in the afternoon.  Some high
schools students (Cambridge High and Latin was just around the corner) were
walking by.  One of them shouted to another, "Kennedy's been shot.  In
Dallas."   I immediately thought "this is bad.  That kid shouldn't know that
Kennedy's in Dallas."  So we turned on the radio.  And began to grieve.

I don't think that this country's ever regained its balance.  Jack, and then
Bobbie and Martin Luther King  -- the heroes of the left taken out, one by one,
by assassins.  Without the murders, we'd never have had Nixon and Reagan and
Cheney and Bush and Rumsfeld.

If we ever can get the United States on track again, then, only then, can we
cease to grieve.

Source: 2006/11/my_favorite_inv

Title: My Favorite Inventions
Date: November 27, 2006

Life has certainly changed since I was growing up in the 1940s and 1950s.  Here
are some of the key inventions that have made life better for me and for all
sentient Americans.

1)  the retractable vacuum cleaner cord. Truly one heck of an improvement. 
Just step on the little lever, and the cord comes flying back into the
machine.  It used to be, I'd waste minutes tying the thing up only to watch it
immediately unravel.

2)  fitted sheets.  Just snap them on and have done with it.  Perhaps the
greatest improvement in standard of living in my lifetime.  No more folding
under and then waking up in the middle of the night sleeping on the mattress
tufts.

3)  the bungee cord.  A stroke of true genius.  For packing the top of the
car, an unparalleled innovation.  And nowadays, I keep a pair of them strapped
to the lawn-tractor cart.  I use the bungee cords to double the load that I can
carry in one trip.

4)  luggage wheels.  Pull instead of carrying.  What a concept!!  Luggage,
marooned for centuries in the paleolithic, finally discovers the wheel (and just
in time to save my shoulders).

5) the mute button. Just a flick of the thumb and the commercial voice
disappears.  A godsend.

That's my top five.  Any other suggestions out there in the blogworld will be
sincerely appreciated.

November 30.  I'm so chagrined.  I've forgotten the most remarkable invention
of the last several decades:  duct tape.  In our household, duct tape holds
together more items than gravity.

Source: 2006/11/violence_in_my_

Title: Violence in My Life
Date: November 28, 2006

A few weeks ago, I wrote about my violent nightmares.  And now I shall unclasp
a secret book and write about real-life violence in my life -- to be exact,
about a murder and an attempted murder.

In the middle-1970s, I exchanged jobs, homes and automobiles with a faculty
member of a university in England.  I will call this person by the fabricated
name of Maurice Shaper.  Although I certainly profited from teaching in a new
setting, and I loved the city in southeastern England in which we lived, Mr.
Shaper himself was a disaster.  He missed half of his classes and was cruel to
my students when he did present himself.  He fled town early, leaving behind
stacks of unread papers, distressed students who had not received grades or
credit for the work, and a mess that took me a full year to resolve.  Moreover,
Mr. Shaper, who had a friend on the west coast and was commuting 1200 miles
bi- weekly, put 60,000 miles on my Dodge station wagon before smashing it into
another vehicle on a rainy California road.  Within an hour of our arrival
home, we were greeted with a summons and a lawsuit -- as owners of the car we
were liable -- from the occupants of the maimed vehicle. It was a lawsuit that
took a number of years to run its expensive course.  In short, I must admit
that I nursed more than a little antagonism to Mr. Shaper.  Anger, I'd say, but
something less than murderous rage.

Some five years later I returned to England.  The morning after I arrived,
I was standing on the steps of the British Museum in Bloomsbury waiting for
the building to open when an acquaintance came up to me with a newspaper. 
"Have you seen this?" he asked, and showed me an item in The Times. "University
Lecturer Murdered."   And sure enough, Mr. Maurice Shaper had been killed
in his own home -- the home in which I had lived for a year.  Although it
didn't say so in the newspaper, I was later informed that he had been in the
habit of picking up young men on the Dover Road and bringing them home.  He
must have misjudged his quarry, because he had been slashed in the neck with a
broken liquor bottle and had bled to death in his bathroom.  His Peugeot and
his camera and a few other items had been stolen and the presumed murderer had
disappeared.  What was so odd was that he had been killed just a few hours
after I arrived at Heathrow.

That's the murder;  now the attempted murder.

In my second year at college, I had a roommate (let us call him Peter Dickerman)
with whom I was in perpetual conflict.  I'm not generally short-tempered, but
once, I was so angry at him that I actually picked up a carving knife and waved
it in his direction.  Eventually we came to a truce of sorts;  although we
inhabited the same rooms, we didn't speak to each other for the last months of
the semester.  Mr. Dickerman then went his way and I went mine.

Thirty years later, I was in Washington DC for a couple of weeks doing some
reading at a specialized library when I read in the Washington Post that someone
had attempted to murder a northern Virginia psychologist.  The victim, Peter
Dickerman, had received a letter-bomb in the mail.  He had opened it, there
was an explosion, and he was burned over 60% of his body.  The story was a
sensation for a few days but gradually faded from view.  It's my understanding
that Dickerman did not die.  (I've now googled him under his real name and I
see that he's still practicing psychiatry in Virginia.)

So two times in my life, a person with whom I've been in serious conflict has
been violently attacked.  And both times, I've been close at hand.  A little
creepy, isn't it?

The man who murdered Maurice Shaper was arrested and convicted.  The identity
of the person who mailed the letter bomb to Peter Dickerman is unknown to me.

Source: 2006/12/among_the_strul

Title: Among the Struldbrugs
Date: December 02, 2006

In the little read Book III of Swift's Gulliver's Travels, Lemuel Gulliver finds
himself on the island of Luggnagg, where there is a group of people called
Struldbrugs who are "blessed" with eternal life.  On hearing of Struldbrugs,
Gulliver waxes ecstatic:  "happiest, beyond all comparison, are those excellent
STRULDBRUGS, who, being born exempt from that universal calamity of human
nature, have their minds free and disengaged, without the weight and depression
of spirits caused by the continual apprehensions of death!"  Gulliver is soon
disabused of his enthusiasm.  He learns that after an allotted number of years
have passed, the Struldbrugs are declared legally dead, but that they continue
to grow older, feebler, and more wretched.  It's hard to know whether Swift
points his satire at human optimism or whether he is simply repulsed by extreme
old age.

In any case, we've been spending much time at the nursing home lately,
visiting the Aged P (I'm using the euphemism adopted by John Wemmick in Great
Expectations).  Friends, you don't have to voyage to Luggnagg to learn that
it's possible to live far too long;  the evidence is close at hand.  Let's try
to remember to get the heck out of here while the going's good -- before we too
are metamorphosized into a bunch of Struldbrugs.

Source: 2006/12/some_stretchers

Title: Some Stretchers
Date: December 06, 2006

We're in Washington visiting our four-year-old granddaughter (and her parents,
of course).  This morning I walked the little girl to her Montessori
pre-school. As we passed some dormant rhododendrons, the grand-daughter told
me that she saw a "very large antelope" resting under the bushes.  I like her
style -- not a dog, or even a deer -- an antelope!  And a very large one to
boot.  I love her sincerity, and I love it that she's still young enough to
live in the imagination.  What a gift!

Here are some other "stretchers"  -- Huck Finn's word  -- that she's told me
during this visit.  That she once ate thirteen bananas in a row.  That her
mother and her grandmother had just gone to the Antarctic.  That she had six
brothers and eleven sisters.  That the cheese that she was eating was made
entirely of "green slimy boogers."  That she had just pooped on her cat.  That
she built the neighbor's new picket fence.  "You did?  How did you do it?" 
 "With power tools."   That she had eaten a whole meal of eyeballs.

Well, she'll have to live in the world of hard facts soon enough.  Everyone
must, even those of our leaders who would prefer to reject the "reality-based" 
universe.  I say, let her enjoy the fantasy just as long as she is able.

Source: 2006/12/the_p_s_217_ass

Title: The P. S. 217 "Assembly"
Date: December 08, 2006

During the 1940s and early 1950s, when I was a pupil at P. S. 217, the school
auditorium was given over to formal weekly "assemblies." Boys were required
to wear white shirts and green ties (girls had a specified outfit as well, but
in those days I was so unconscious of a) girls and b) their costumes that I'm
darned if I can remember what was worn by the young ladies). Before entering
the auditorium, classes lined up in "size places." P. S. 217 was particularly
strong on "size places" -- a point of particular humiliation for me, because I
was, as WS says about R of G, "so long a-growing, and so leisurely" that I was
by far the smallest child in every class from first grade to eighth. After we
found our assigned seats (boys in one row, girls in the next), our principal
Miss Bildersee, a formidable and incredibly ancient woman with nostrils so huge
and distended that an agile boy could go spelunking in them, would perform
the mandatory reading from the Bible. Blessings on her fond old heart, Miss
Bildersee regularly choose melodious passages from the book of Psalms. I was
particularly struck by the eloquence of "Blessed is the man that walketh not in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in
the seat of the scornful," with its abrupt counterbalancing antistrophe: "the
ungodly are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away." After
the Bible reading and some announcements, there was usually a performance of
some sort. Choral readings, the oddest of art forms, were far too frequent.
I remember that I was once a member of a sextet of quavering sopranos who
memorized and recited the patriotic World War I poem "In Flanders Fields." What
in the world was a second-grader supposed to make of "We are the Dead. Short
days ago/ We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,/Loved and were loved, and now we
lie/In Flanders fields./Take up our quarrel with the foe:/To you from failing
hands we throw/The torch; be yours to hold it high./If ye break faith with us
who die/ We shall not sleep, though poppies grow/ In Flanders fields." (Such
poppycock was received as true literary greatness. It would have been beyond
utopian imagination that our teachers would have known or introduced us to
the distinguished WWI poetry of Wilfred Owen or Isaac Rosenberg or Siegfried
Sassoon or Edward Thomas.) Then our music specialist Mrs. Georgia Keiselbach
would sit down at the piano and teach us songs, some of them also left over from
the first World War:  "Keep the home-fires burning,/ While your hearts are
yearning,/ Though your lads are far away/ They dream of home;/ There's a silver
lining/Through the dark cloud shining,/Turn the dark cloud inside out,/Till the
boys come home." And also: "Give me some men who are stout-hearted men/ Who
will fight for the right they adore... Shoulder to shoulder, and bolder and
bolder."  And: "Tramp, tramp, tramp along the highway/Tramp, tramp, tramp, the
road is free...  We're planters and Canucks/ Virginians and Kentucks/Captain
Dick's own Infantry/ Captain Dick's own Infantry," which I now know to have
come from Victor Herbert's Naughty Marietta (1910) and which provoked a great
deal of surreptitious tittering because it had the word "dick" in it. In
those unenlightened days we sang very many overtly religious songs: "White
Christmas" and "Silent Night" and "Easter Parade." I much admired the tune
of "The First Noel" but I had no idea what was meant by "born is the king of
Israel" -- the only Israel I knew of was a recently-founded democracy. I
loved the Thanksgiving hymn "We gather together to ask the Lord's blessing;/
He chastens and hastens His will to make known;/ The wicked oppressing now
cease from distressing,/ Sing praises to His name; He forgets not his own" and
many more stanzas, none of which I could parse or understand (still can't, in
fact!). Another Thanksgiving song: "Over the river and through the woods/
To grandmother's house we go/The horse knows the way/To carry the sleigh...,"
which I found to be curiously disorienting because my particular grandmother
lived in a tiny third-floor walkup on noisy and sweaty Coney Island Avenue. We
sang the immensely mysterious Lord's Prayer (in the Schubert setting, I later
discovered). Why did we so?  Were the heathens and Jews among us expected to
convert on the spot? I much preferred the patriotic songs, although even they
too were permeated with inexplicable theology. We were fervent jingos.   Not
one, but two full stanzas of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic": "In the beauty
of the lilies, Christ was born across the sea,/With a glory in His bosom, that
transfigures you and me/ As he died to make men holy, let us die to make men
free,/ For God is marching on." And two stanzas also of "The Star-Spangled
Banner": "Oh! thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand/ Between their loved
home and the war's desolation!/ Blessed with victory and peace, may the heav'n
rescued land/ Praise the Power that hath made and preserv'd us a nation./Then
conquer we must, when our cause it is just,/ And this be our motto: 'In God
is our trust.'" I preferred the rousing "O Columbia! the gem of the ocean,/
The home of the brave and the free,/ The shrine of each patriot's devotion,/ A
world offers homage to thee" and "God Bless America" as well as the jingoist
exceptionalism and cluttered syntax of "Our father's God, to thee/ Author of
liberty/ To thee we sing./  Long may our land be bright/ With freedom's holy
light;/ Protect us by thy might/ Great God our King."

Here's a song we were distinctly not taught and did not sing: "This land is your
land, this land is my land/ From California, to the New York Island./ From
the redwood forest, to the Gulf Stream waters/ This land was made for you and
me." We especially did not sing: "In the squares of the city  -- in the
shadow of the steeple/  Near the relief office -- I see my people/ And some
are grumblin' and some are wonderin' /If this land's still made for you and me."

December 17.  I now remember that we sang musical settings to two familiar
poems. The first, Emma Lazarus's inscription on the Statue of Liberty: "Give
me your tired, your poor/ Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free/ The
wretched refuse of your teeming shore." Hey, that's my grandparents you're
calling "wretched refuse." The second, Joyce Kilmer's horrid "Trees": "I think
that I shall never see/  A poem lovely as a tree...  A tree who's hungry mouth
is pressed/ Against the earth's sweet-flowing breast" etc.  This song was only
palatable because it allowed us to say the word "breast" out loud.

(Thanks to Steve and to Barry, graduates of P. S. 217, for jogging my memory; 
thanks also to David [P. S. 102].

Graduates of P. S. 217 who happen to stumble onto this site: feel free to add
comments or to forward this post to classmates with whom you might be in touch.)

Source: 2006/12/the_profoundly_

Title: Xmas Thoughts
Date: December 09, 2006

If the profoundly religious seventeenth-century founders of our country had a
single favorite Biblical moment, it might be where the Lord (speaking through
His prophet Amos) severely condemned the vanity of holidays. "I hate," said
the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies."  The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined against the attempt
to placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical concern in Amos'
time).  "Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not
accept them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts." 
Nor did He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but He went on to condemn
all musical tributes as well.  Nor more chants, glees or carols: "Take thou
away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy
viols."  Our Puritan forefathers interpreted these lines correctly; they
recognized that the Lord opposed not only ritual sacrifice and music but all
formal observance and rote piety. The Ancient of Days made it abundantly clear
that what moved him was not empty ceremony but genuine morality.  HIs solution:
"let justice run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream."  Taking
these uncompromising sentences as their guide, our founders dug in their heels
against the ostentatious celebration of of all holidays, especially Christmas.

Would they not have been reduced to angry and impotent sobs by the grotesque
consumerism -- the burnt offerings and squeaking timbrels  -- that in 2006
substitute for justice and righteousness?  Could there be anything more
loathsome either to Amos or to our devout ancestors than "Silent Night" at a
shopping mall?

Ah for a twenty-first century Amos!

Further observations on the "holiday season" can be found here.

Source: 2006/12/some_shops

Title: Some Shops
Date: December 16, 2006

We're just back from a week in Greenwich Village. Here are some of the stores
that were within two or three blocks of our temporary residence: "Beasty Feast
Pet Food Supplies"; "Cherry Boxx" (sex toys and outfits); "Golden Rule Wine and
Liquor"; "Henrietta Hudson Bar and Girl"; "Badlands Entertainment" (xxx videos);
"Condomania" -- all kinds of condoms and related gear; "Suds Cafe" (a laundromat
and espresso bar); a shop that specializes in "eyebrow threading"; the "Sports
Cap and Hat Store"; "Man + Plus" (which I read as Man plus plus); "Yuki's
Chinese Restaurant" (bad corporate name); "Birthday Suit" (bachelorette-fetish,
the sign clarified); the "Why Not Men's Spa"; "Pet Portraits"; "Doodle-Doos"
(a children's hair salon); "Kid's RX" (children's prescription drugs); and
"Cowgirl" -- I couldn't recognize anything in the cowgirl stock, certainly
nothing that would home on the range; also, an admirable piece of commercial
hyperbole: "Splendid Dry Cleaners." In addition, a truck bearing the name "Dr.
Playground" -- mobile playground repairs, I would suppose. All in all, quite a
remarkable display of capitalist initiative.

Source: 2006/12/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Ivanhoe
Date: December 19, 2006

For an entire lifetime I've had a ghastly relationship with Sir Walter Scott.
Ivanhoe was a mandatory book in the Erasmus Hall High School English curriculum
and I remember reading the novel with painful indifference. It's entirely
possible that I didn't persevere to the final pages but instead relied upon
the 1952 film. At various times I've made an effort to read novels by Sir
Walter, but time and again I've foundered. Twenty or so years ago, Old Mortality
and Redgauntlet were being trumpeted by academic critics, and I gave each
novel a fair trial, but, after a chapter or two, ran aground on the sandbar
of dullness. As part of my project of re-reading books that were popular or
required in the 1950s, I tackled Ivanhoe again, and I can report that this time
I read it to the very last drop -- but what a colossal effort! I never "got
into" it but read it in gobbets of five or six pages at a time before succumbing
to boredom or sleep. I deserve the 2006 Bulwer-Lytton Prize for Drudgery.

Why did our elders judge Ivanhoe to be suitable for 10th graders? The plot
plods, the characters are unidimensional cliches, and there's a total want of
suspense. The dialogue is ludicrous. It reminds me of what Jonson said about
Spenser--that "in affecting the ancients, he writ no language." But in point of
fact, Scott does write a language--he writes bad Blackadderese. "Fear not, my
lord. I must speak with you in private, before you mount your palfrey." "Have
patience, sir. I might retort your accusation, and blame the inconsiderate
levity which foiled my design."  "A truce with your raillery, sir knight." 
"If thou refusest my fair proffer, the provost of the lists shall cut thy bow-
string, break thy bow and arrows and expel thee from the presence as a faint-
hearted craven." And on and on for four hundred mucilaginous pages.

There's another roadblock to empathetic reading. Ivanhoe features a Jewish
money-lender named Isaac who's a walking inventory of stereotypes: he's
usurious, greedy, faint-hearted, fawning, and although he claims poverty, is
secretly rolling in shekels. He sums up all the worst aspects of both Shylock
and Fagin. But Scott thinks we should forgive Isaac even though he's such a
miserable human being, and by asking us to do so, he somehow manages to make
tolerance even more offensive than bigotry itself.In addition, Isaac has an
impossibly beauteous and virtuous daughter named Rebecca. Yes, it's a miracle,
says Scott, but there are Jews (or at least Jewesses) who are not money-grubbing
villains. Thanks a lot, Sir Walter.

Why was Ivanhoe high-school fare?  Beats the heck out of me. And it makes me
angry to think that this bad book was thrust down our throats. Let's put those
upstart immigrants in their place, is what they were saying. Was it malevolent
or merely unconscious? Difficult to ascertain, but after slogging through
Ivanhoe, I'm not in a forgiving mood.

January 7.  I've now watched the 1952 Ivanhoe with Elizabeth Taylor as Jessica,
an aging Robert Taylor as Ivanhoe, and an aging Joan Fontaine as Rowena. It's a
bit dated and it occasionally anticipates Monty Python and the Holy Grail, but
it's not half bad. The writer, who had the wonderful name of Aeneas McKenzie,
discarded the novel, started from scratch, and composed a screenplay that has
action and adventure and romance and every once in a while borrows an incident
from Sir Walter Scott. A good strategy, in my view.

Source: 2006/12/frost

Title: Frost
Date: December 22, 2006

When I lived in Cambridge in the first years of the 1960s, it was not unusual
to encounter, on a warm winter afternoon, the poet Robert Frost walking slowly
along Massachusetts Avenue. I'd watch him as he strolled over to Plympton Street
and to the Grolier -- which was then as now, I imagine, the only all-poetry
bookstore in America. One day I crept behind him to the shop and sat in a
secluded corner, studying him as he browsed the shelf of new arrivals. With his
leathery old skin and unruly iridescent white hair, he was an iconic figure --
famous not only among friends of poetry but among readers of Life and Collier's
and The Saturday Evening Post. When he "said" his poems at Sanders Theater
(in late 1961 or 1962), he filled every seat and every standpoint of a large
auditorium. He was an honest-to-goodness celebrity, a presence, a man who had
created a body of work and had earned a reputation that no poet or cultural
figure today can rival.

At JFK's inauguration in January of 1961, Frost commanded a national television
audience. He started to read the poem he had composed for the occasion, but his
87-year-old eyes were blinded by the bright sunlight and he couldn't continue.
There was a moment of embarrassment, and I remember cringing in sympathy with
his struggle. But then he gathered himself and recited from memory, in a
rejuvenated voice, "The Gift Outright." "She was our land more than a hundred
years/ Before we were her people." It's an almost mystical but grandly patriotic
poem about rude, unlettered colonials transforming themselves into a Nation.
"Such as we were we gave ourselves outright.../ To the land vaguely realizing
westward,/ But still unstoried, artless, unenhanced, / Such as she was, such as
she would become."

Frost died in January of 1963, just ten months before our young president
was shot. It's almost impossible now to reconstruct the effervescence of the
Kennedy years -- a brief exciting moment between the lukewarm bland Eisenhower
administration and the interminable nightmare of Vietnam. Frost's "Dedication,"
the poem that he couldn't read at the inaugural, is not his best work, but its
last lines catch the spirit of the time. The poet took his inspiration from the
Rome of Augustus and of Horace, Virgil, and Ovid. "It is no miracle the mood is
high," he wrote.  "It makes the prophet in us all presage/ The glory of the
next Augustan age/ Of a power leading from its strength and pride,/ Of young
ambition eager to be tried,/ Firm in our free beliefs without dismay,/ In any
game the nations want to play./ A golden age of poetry and power/ Of which this
noonday's the beginning hour." Frost proved to be a better poet than a prophet.
Instead of a golden age of poetry and power, we've had, after the three horrible
murders, a parade of fools: first the crook, then the senile puppet, then the
congressional fellatio hunters, and now the smirking, dangerous dunce.

Like the nation, I too am in steep decline. It used to be that I could memorize
short poems with ease. Nowadays, it's a titanic effort of will. To forestall
hardening of the mind, and in a desperate effort to keep my brain supple, I
decided to memorize Frost's "Birches." It's when you learn a poem by heart
that you truly appreciate it, and so I can now say with absolute confidence
and authority that "Birches" is a poem not just for the age, but for all time.
In point of fact, I've been bothering myself about how Frost will fare in
civilizations as far into the future as Virgil and Horace are in our past. Will
students of poetry be able to grasp the subtlety of "Birches?" The story, the
plot itself, will pose no problem. Frost knows that birches are bent to the
ground by ice-storms, but he would fancifully "prefer to have some boy bend
them/ As he went out and in to fetch the cows." For the "boy," tree-climbing is
a high art: "He always kept his poise/ To the top branches, climbing carefully/
With the same pains you use to fill a cup/ Up to the brim, and even above the
brim." Frost then shifts perspective, and the fantasy that birches are bent not
by ice-storms but by athletic youngsters transforms into a memory, a truth: "So
was I once myself a swinger of birches;/ And so I dream of going back to be." He
closes the poem with a vision in which he leaves the real world and starts life
anew: "I'd like to go by climbing a birch tree,/ And climb black branches up a
snow-white trunk/ Toward heaven, till the tree could bear no more,/ But dipped
its top and set me down again." Even though our descendants will read the poem
in an extinct language and in an edition encrusted with explanatory footnotes,
I'm sure that they'll understand its outline. (I imagine too that some future
scholar will make his career by explicating the line "A boy too far from town to
learn baseball.") But will anyone in 4006 A.D. be sufficiently conversant with
everyday twentieth-century American English to recognize the skill with which
Frost masks his deep insights into the relationship between the material and
the eternal with art-that-hides-art colloquialisms? Or appreciate to the full
the sly understatement of "one could do worse than be a swinger of birches?"
The beauty and the profundity of "Birches" tease us who share Frost's language.
What a challenge the poem will be eighty generations down the road! Moreover,
Is there even the remotest possibility that our successors will be equipped to
grasp how much of Roman poetry (Ovid especially) Frost distills into "I'd like
to get away from earth awhile/ And then come back to it and begin over./ May no
fate willfully misunderstand me/ And half grant what I wish and snatch me away/
Not to return." Frost possessed the genius to keep us in touch with our past and
to connect us to our future.

I wish that I had talked to Robert Frost that winter day when he was trudging
on. "How are you, Mr. Frost," I might have asked. Perhaps he would have smiled
or said "Nice day."

That would have been a good thing to recall.

Source: 2006/12/haircuts_a_hist

Title: Haircuts:  A History
Date: December 26, 2006

When I was a child, haircuts were perpetrated at Joe's Barber Shop on Coney
Island Avenue. It was a pleasant place: there were wall-to-wall mirrors on
either side of Joe Montuori's shop, and a boy sitting in the chair could lose
himself in the infinitely-regressing images. Joe always had a friend or two in
the shop with whom he spoke incomprehensible rapid-fire Italian. The haircutting
itself was an ordeal. Joe charged 75 cents a head, but my mother had driven a
bargain: three haircuts (myself and my two brothers) for $1.80. Joe revenged
himself on me by a) working the electric buzzer as rapidly as possible, and b)
frequently re-arranging the angle of my head with a blow from the heel of his
hand. Back home, my mother would sigh and say, "Turn around.  Let's see what he
did to you this time."

I've not big on personal adornment, and, perhaps because of my early hair
experiences, I've never been comfortable in the barber's seat. As soon as the
cloth is fastened around my neck I feel hogtied and hopeless. "What are they
going to do to me today?" Once, on the west side of Manhattan, in the late
1960s, when my hair was rather long (it seems absurd that you could signal
your opposition to the war in Vietnam by letting your hair grow, but such was
the case), I walked into a shop and asked the barber to "leave it long." He
immediately transformed me into a rabid supporter of carpet-bombing. Also in New
York: when I naively wandered into a shop with a specialized clientele, a hair
technician employing a razor and a variety of gels and lotions turned me into
someone whose hair was giving off signals with which the rest of his body was
not in accord. In Hanover, New Hampshire, in an upstairs 'salon,' the barber
suddenly stopped work, drew back, studied me for fifteen or twenty seconds, and
asked, "Are you Jewish." I mumbled something about not really wanting to discuss
my ethnicity with him, whereupon he launched into a disquisition of which I
understood not much and remember less, except that that it involved prophecy,
the Book of Isaiah, and The Hatching of the Egg. He hauled out his heavily
annotated King James Version and pointed me to various passages underlined
in coded colors. As it happens, I'm more conversant than most people with
scripture, and so I can assert with moderate authority that his reading of the
Bible was -- how shall I say -- original. It took me an hour to extricate myself
from his insistent and wayward scholarship: fifteen minutes of hair-cutting and
forty-five minutes of exegetical enthusiasm.

For a decade or so, when our finances were perilous, my wife cut my hair. There
were some benefits (a guy could cop a feel while being ministered to) but I
must admit that although my good woman was earnest and effective, she never
fully mastered tonsorial technique. She had the habit of yanking upwards on the
strands with the scissors, with the result that each snip produced a stab of
pain -- although nothing more intense than might have been alleviated by the
injection of a dozen or score shots of novocaine directly into the scalp. And
then there were the ear nicks.

After a while, I returned hair responsibility to the world of commerce. I had
success for many years with Liz of Chicago Hair across town. Liz was good at
her work and respected my multiple cowlicks. But then she started to raise her
prices. When she reached $20, I would just hand her the Visa and ask her not
to tell me what she charged. When she went to $30, I retaliated by spacing the
haircuts further and further apart in order to keep my annual cost constant.
But when she broached the $40 barrier, the puritan in me rebelled. I started to
patronize the cheap ($14) barbershop across the street from the college. There's
a rotating staff and it's hit-and-miss: sometimes the results are acceptable,
sometimes disastrous.

When I come home from the expedition, my wife says, "Let's see what they've done
to you today."

And then she sighs.

Source: 2006/12/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Arrowsmith
Date: December 27, 2006

Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith, published in 1924 and now hopelessly dated, was
a mere thirty years old when we read it in Erasmus Hall High School English
classes. I must confess, once again, that I recall almost nothing from my 1950s
reading -- just a vague sense that I'd been there before. Nevertheless, the
novel wasn't a bad book to present to young people. Dr. Martin Arrowsmith is
a dedicated, humorless, idealistic, workaholic scientist who eludes both the
snares of commerce and also of love and family in a single-minded pursuit of the
knowledge that will save lives. Sinclair Lewis's America is repressive, vulgar,
materialistic, and unredeemed. Why not let high schoolers read a book with such
a manic, satirical spirit?  It might have done them a world of good -- though I
can't vouch that it did anything for me.

Dr. Arrowsmith has no time anything so frivolous as aesthetics -- and it's just
as well, for neither does his creator. Arrowsmith is shapeless in form and
crude in style. It's a sledgehammer of a book, as unsubtle as America at its
worst.

Query: were we informed that Sinclair Lewis was famous for having said that
"when fascism comes to America, it will be wrapped in the flag and carrying a
cross?"

Source: 2006/12/weve_had_two_ma

Title: O My Papa
Date: December 31, 2006

We've had two major snowfalls in the last week and the road crews haven't yet
found their way to our street. It's a knee-deep icy mess out there. Yesterday
one of my neighbors spun himself into quite a hole. He needed a push, so I
went outside to help. Even with my professional-grade ice-chopper, I had to
bang around for a while and the task took a lot longer than I had expected. 
Eventually, I had to resort to the old towel trick to gain enough traction to
release the vehicle. My neighbor said, "I'm embarrassed. You shouldn't be doing
this."  Which took me aback, of course. I replied, quite spontaneously, "It's
exactly what I should be doing."

And then I recalled one of my father's maxims: "Never omit an opportunity to do
a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed to accept a favor."

The old guy did lots of favors. When someone on East 9 Street had a problem or
got into a little trouble, my father acted as consigliere; as far as I know, he
never took a nickel for his trouble--though occasionally someone would drop off
a compensatory lasagna. In his last years, when he lived alone and his arthritis
was very bad, someone mowed his lawn and someone took in his garbage cans and
someone raked his leaves.

My father was the least materialistic person that I've encountered in an entire
lifetime. He didn't seem to need possessions. No car, no clothes beyond the
absolute minimum, no items of personal adornment. He didn't "shop." I was with
him once when bought a new hat: "See this. I want another one just like it." We
were in and out of the store in two minutes.

Although he lived in a world of weasels (he was a real-estate lawyer), he was
uncontaminated by what went on around him. He'd often tell me stories about the
various chicaneries by which people cheated each other--and every time he would
express the same astonishment at the fallibility of human nature. He knew of
public officials who were on the take, but he preferred to talk about the state
legislator who had a large sign on his desk that said, "NO GIFTS."

In one of our very last conversations, I asked him if he himself had ever done
anything illegal. He thought for a long time. "I don't know if you'd call
this exactly illegal. Do you remember the B-----s?  Rose was a widow and she
was dying of cancer, but she didn't know it. She was a teacher with two young
children and she had a benefit coming to her from the city. She made a very
bad decision--a lump sum instead of an annuity for her children. I went to
her school and substituted a new form for the one that she had filed. It was
technically a violation and I could have gotten into a lot of trouble." And then
he surprised me by quoting some Wordsworth--the lines from Tintern Abbey about
the "best portion of a good man's life,/ His little, nameless, unremembered
acts/ Of kindness and of love."

It's hard to believe that he's been dead for twenty years now. But I remember
him when we come around to the winter solstice (he was born on December 22,
1904)--and he's especially real to me when a neighbor lets me help him extricate
his car from a snowbank.

Source: 2007/01/my_favorite_inv

Title: My Favorite Inventions - II
Date: January 01, 2007

A while ago, I reported on my very favorite innovations of the last half-
century  -- including such wonders as the retractable vacuum cleaner cord,
fitted sheets, duct tape, and the mute button.  I now realize that I was remiss
in not celebrating the most revolutionary invention of recent decades -- the
disposable diaper.

I was knuckle-deep in the diaper business from 1965 to about 1973. Cloth was
then the material of choice. In our family there were three infants and each
one had, roughly speaking, 900 days of diaperhood. Suppose that there were nine
changes of diaper a day (a conservative estimate) -- that's a total of 24,300
diaper-changes.  Let's say that I personally presided over one-third of those
off-with-the-foul-on-with-the-clean exchanges. We're talking more than 8000
excretory experiences. So, dear reader, I know whereof I speak.

Post-cloth diaper parents live in a world of decadent ease. Here's what they're
missing. A) cloth diapers had to be changed more frequently than the new ones --
they didn't wick away the liquid as the disposables do. Rashes and irritations
were all too common. b) gagworthy solid material had to be carefully flushed
away. c)  soiled diapers sat in a waste receptacle, where they generated an
ammonia-based chemical one whiff of which could revive a morgueful of corpses.
d) cloth diapers had to be washed, dried, and folded for next use. e) diapering
with cloth and safety pins was a fine art. Badly-applied diapers hung to the
ground to shame the diaperer; open pins and pin-sticks were a constant worry.

Nowadays, it's pop 'em off, throw it in the trash, pop on a new one. Piece of
cake. Perhaps disposable diapers are not ecologically sound  -- I don't know.
But frankly, I can't think of a better use for the vast Canadian forests.

But I shouldn't complain too much. We owned an automatic washer and dryer. My
mom had the same number of diapers, but she scrubbed them on a washboard in
the "laundry sink," put them through the wringer (first a hand-crank, later an
electric), and hung them outside to dry. She was a true heroine of diaper labor.
And I can't even bring myself to imagine the diaperworld of older generations.

Today's parents, wallowing in sybaritic luxury, cannot appreciate what it means
to be "put through the wringer." And just as well.

Source: 2007/01/more_about_sinc

Title: More on Sinclair Lewis
Date: January 02, 2007

This blague's readers know that I've been revisiting books that I first read
in the 1950s. Last week I reported on Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith, which was
required reading in junior-year English in Erasmus Hall High School. I re-read
Arrowsmith in the very convenient Library of America series, which includes
Elmer Gantry and Dodsworth (along with Arrowsmith) in one thick volume.  I felt
that I owed it to Lewis (after all, he did win a Nobel prize) to read another of
his novels. Elmer Gantry won the toss.

While Arrowsmith has not worn very well, Elmer G. is uncannily pertinent. It's
about an amoral fundamentalist preacher. He's a nasty opportunistic bastard
who crusades against vice but maintains a series of mistresses; he's out for
notoriety and money no matter what the cost to his parishioners or to American
society. He even becomes --and here Lewis is truly prescient -- the first
radio evangelist. It's a heavy-handed, sloppy, brutally satirical book, but
it's also right on target.  I kept waiting for Elmer to be exposed, but the
novel ends when he dodges another mistress and sets out on a route to more
and more power.  It's a very dark view of the penetration of politics by
religion. No wonder it was banned in Boston; even eighty years later, it's much
too hot for high school -- although I can't imagine a single book that would
be more medicinal for pious youth. And now I understand why Arrowsmith was
given us to read:  honor the Nobel laureate, but stay as far away as possible
from controversy. Dodsworth is about adultery; Main Street attacks American
provincialism; Elmer Gantry pillories religion. Arrowsmith is a greatly inferior
novel, but it was safer.

Source: 2007/01/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: King Solomon's Mines
Date: January 05, 2007

As an adolescent, I was a passionate enthusiast of novels by Sir Henry Rider
Haggard. I read everything that was in the collection of the McDonald Avenue
public library. Not only King Solomon's Mines and Allan Quatermain and She and
Allan's Wife and Ayesha, but also some of the non-"African" adventures as well.
I particularly recall Eric Brighteyes and Montezuma's Daughter.  Yesterday
I read King Solomon's Mines (1885) for the first time in fifty years and I
couldn't be more unhappy that I did so. It's a toxic mixture of imperialism,
brutality, racism, sexism, classism -- a compendium of ethnocentric Victoriana
gathered into a single atavistic novel.  I'm familiar with the academic
doctrine that to judge the past by contemporary liberal values is to commit the
fallacy of "presentism," but I'm sorry, friends, I'm mortified that I ever, even
as a youngster, could have fallen for this appalling mishmash.  How could I
have tolerated the paternalistic Englishmen and the child-like natives?

Here are two representative incidents from King Solomon's Mines. The first:
three Englishman are tramping through Africa. They come upon a herd of
elephants. They shoot and kill them. No explanation, no justification, no
reason. The second: one of the Englishmen takes a liking to a young woman named
Foulata. She dies, sacrificing herself, as is the custom in imperialist fiction,
to save English lives. Rider Haggard's  comment: "I consider her removal was a
fortunate occurrence, since, otherwise, complications would have been sure to
ensue. The poor creature was no ordinary native girl, but a person of great, I
had almost said stately, beauty, and of considerable refinement of mind.  But
no amount of beauty or refinement could have made an entanglement a desirable
occurrence; for, as she herself put it, 'Can the sun mate with the darkness, or
the white with the black?'"

I shouldn't have tampered with my fifty-year-old memories. But I've made a
resolution: I'm going to wait fifty more years before I read another novel by
Rider Haggard.

Source: 2007/01/thoughts_about_

Title: The Lord and the Shopaholic
Date: January 07, 2007

Thoughts about Elmer Gantry, Sinclair Lewis's fraud of a preacher, were still
reverberating in my brain when I read in The New York Times the outrageous
stranger-than-fiction story about the "nationally renowned evangelical
preacher," Darlene Bishop. Reverend Bishop, who pastors the 4000-member Solid
Rock Church in Monroe, Indiana, and has a famous-in-certain-circles TV program,
apparently convinced her wealthy songwriter brother that she could miraculously
cure his throat cancer. She failed to do so, he died a painful death, and now
the dead brother's children are suing to reclaim a share of the estate which
Darlene somehow contrived to inherit. It's a Gantryesque tale -- though one
that's more sordid than even Sinclair Lewis, who hated demagogic religiosity
with a rare passion, could possibly have invented.

I was sufficiently intrigued by The Times' story to visit Darlene Bishop's
website, where she's posted a spiritual autobiography of sorts.  Here's the
crucial paragraph:

Being that Darlene was raised so poor she began to try to fill the void inside
of her with shopping. She bought 2 Cadillacs and 18 fur coats in one year.
Finally, one day she came in from a shopping excursion and as she pulled out
all the dresses to show her eldest daughter, Jana pointed to one and stated,
"Mom you already have that dress." Sure of herself, she replied, "Oh, no I
don't." So Jana led her upstairs to her closet and dug the dress out from the
collection of many only for Darlene to find that she did already have one of the
dresses hanging there with the tags still attached. At this, she realized it was
not working. The big house, the diamonds, fur coats, collections of designer
clothes, none of it was filling the emptiness residing in her inner most being.
She threw herself on the floor sobbing and declared, "Lord, I want more of you!
I just want you. And I'm going to seek you until I find my true place in the
kingdom."  From then on, instead of going shopping Darlene would delve into the
Word of God.

I read Darlene's conversion narrative with conflicting feelings. On the one
hand, it exudes authenticity. It's so unapologetic and downright and un-literary
that it can't possible be contrived. On the other hand, it's appallingly trite.
Darlene doesn't experience the "dark night of the soul"; instead, she shops. She
doesn't go through a spiritual crisis; she discovers that she's bought the same
dress twice. Nor is she overwhelmed with the beauty and majesty of the Lord.
"Instead of going shopping Darlene would delve into the Word of God"; that is to
say, and I don't mean to be snide, she started to shop at a bigger and better
mall. In a way, her very triteness serves as a guarantee of her authenticity.

Darlene's story also reminded me, once again, that I'm just not on the same
wavelength as many of my fellow Americans. I don't think that either shopping
or delving can give meaning to life. And yet Darlene Bishop is a celebrity of
American religion, who, people believe, can perform miracles.

And what about Darlene's wonder-working power? In her books and on her website,
she claims that she cured her own breast cancer. Did she?  I'm skeptical.
According to The Times, when Darlene was on the stand testifying under penalty
of perjury, she confessed that "no doctor ever diagnosed the breast cancer."
Instead, "she thought that she had cancer in 1986 and that it was cured." Here's
a pretty howdy-do. Darlene imagined she had cancer and then imagined that it
disappeared -- and on such a basis she proclaims a miracle. In my book, that's
setting a mighty low threshold for divine intervention.

On the website, there's nary a word about her brother's death or about the
lawsuit, but there's some fine, excruciating detail about the miracle. Unlike
the account of her rampant shopoholia, this story is not one bit credible: it's
either delusion or fabrication -- and I think the latter.

I had been preaching on faith for six weeks, when one night while laying in the
bed the devil said to me, "If you don't stop preaching like this, I'll kill you"
and without hesitation, I replied, "You're not big enough, devil". He said,
"Feel your right breast". When I felt my breast, I felt a lump the size of a
silver dollar....  Soon the whole bottom half of my breast became a solid mass.
The pain would be so bad some nights that I could only sleep a few minutes at a
time. It was as if someone had put hot coals of fire in my breast.

Let's get this straight. Darlene experienced hot coal pain in her breast, and
didn't take herself to the emergency room. She's not only a fake;  she's
dangerous. What sort of example does she set to the Solid Rock congregants
(and to her readers and her TV-watchers)?  "Let's pause here for a Solid Rock
public service announcement: if you experience excruciating pain, under no
circumstances consult your physician."

What should you do for that burning coal feeling?  For pain medicine, I would
write down scriptures on little pieces of paper and place them in my bra.

Are we to believe that the medieval remedies are still practiced in twentieth-
century Indiana?  Egad.

This went on for nearly four months until eventually my breast began to
hemorrhage. I had to put nursing pads in my bra to prevent the blood from coming
through my clothes. Some nights I would bleed all night and wake up with my
gown and bed sheets covered in blood. Until one day, as I was hunched over the
sink, my tears splashing into the bloody water, I heard Him speak my name in an
audible voice. He said, "Darlene!"  I rose up and cried, "Yes Lord". He said,
"Because you've continued in my Word and not leaned on the arm of the flesh, as
of this day you're healed.  Go! Proclaim it!

David Hume, whose "On Miracles" is still the definitive analysis, says that
when we evaluate a supposed miracle, we discount the testimony of a person
"who has an interest in what he affirms." Darlene has built a megachurch and a
flourishing business and has inherited her brother's estate on the basis of this
supposed cure. Enough said.

But what about the Solid Rockers?  Can't they see through such palpable
nonsense?  Are they mesmerized or stepfordwived?  Is there any hope that they
-- and other victims of similar hocus-pocus -- will some day get their brains in
gear again?  Not bloody likely.

Source: 2007/01/more_on_king_so

Title: More on King Solomon's Mines
Date: January 09, 2007

I received the following note from Marion Morrison, who is an associate
professor of English at the University of Iowa. It was written in response to my
entry a few days ago concerning H. Rider Haggard's King Solomon's Mines. I'm
extremely grateful to Professor Morrison for taking the time to comment on my
observations.

"Dear Dr. Metablog:

I detect the subtextual presence of mutually imbricated and conterminous
forces in your multichronotopic problematizing of King Solomon's Minds. The
indigenous woman, Foulani, living in a no (wo)man's land where the colonialist
gaze dissects racialized gendering, foregrounds the elusive intersectionalities
present in the semiological narratology of deconstructive post-structuralism.
It is only by scrutinizing the poetics of diasporic displacement that we can
contest the epiphenomenological echo of (hetero)masculinist discourse from a
gendered perspective, which, if I understand your insufficiently theorized
analysis, you have vainly tried to do. Such (re)mapping of knowledge, even when
employing a single-axis feminist theory, unpacks syncretism and hybridity and
at the same time denaturalizes doxa rooted in phallocentric epistemologies.
But, you ask, what about the reproduction of alterity through a highly policed
matrix of conceptual checkpoints?  The answer is simple: any binarist
recontextualizing across multiple terrains adds a metadiscursive dimension
to the polysemic site and leads to aporias of nationalist cartographies of
knowledge, as is crystal clear in the case of Rider Haggard. Without otherizing
the conceptual spaces opened up by postcolonial hybridity, hermeneutical
nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality -- and you know what that
might lead to. A meta-analysis of King Solomon's Wives -- a textual situation
in which there are multiple hegominid discourses as well as the potential for
co-implicatedness -- could rupture various subaltern geographic positionalities
(but only in a translinguistic sense).

As I'm sure you understand, these comments are written under the sign of the
plural."

January 10.  Today I received another communication from Professor Morrison. 
It's a bit angry, so I won't quote it all, but here are the relevant sentences.

"Dear Dr. Metablog, or Vivian, or whatever you call yourself:

When you typed my comments into your blog, you clumsily erred. I certainly did
not write "hermeneutical nihilism would dismantle palimpsestic textuality"; it's
obvious that I wrote "hermeneutical nihilism would not dismantle palimpsestic
textuality."  Leaving out the "not" makes a mockery of my argument and renders
it virtually unintelligible. You owe me and your readers an apology."

Yours,

Marion Morrison, Ph. D."

Gosh, Professor Morrison. My bad. I don't know what I could have been thinking.

Source: 2007/01/a_remedy_for_un

Title: A Remedy for Unhappiness
Date: January 13, 2007

Intermittently throughout the decades, I've been afflicted with what has been
called, at various times in history, "the spleen," "vapors," "falling into a
brown study," "melancholy," "the blues," and currently, "depression." But now I
have devised a very effective remedy for this affliction.

With the help of the Ellis Island Foundation, I located the manifest of the
Rotterdam, the ship that arrived in New York on August 23, 1904 and which
brought my grandparents to the new world. I purchased and studied a copy of this
document. My grandfather, Joseph Uzilewsky, was 27 years old when he arrived
and is listed as a "chemist's (i.e. pharmacist's) assistant." My grandmother,
Sonia, was 20 and has no profession. Neither of them admitted to being either a
polygamist or an anarchist. There's a specific column on the manifest in which
each new arrival was required to say how much money he's bringing into the
country. Almost all of the immigrants have a few dollars, but Joseph and Sonia
have nothing at all. Nothing.

When I fall into periods of unhappiness, I think about my grandparents arriving
here without a nickel in their pockets and unable to speak the language. And
then I think of my own position in life. I had a job that allowed me -- no,
required me -- to read as much as possible, and occasionally to write something
about what I had read. My principal task was the pleasant and useful one of
learning the young 'uns how to read and write. Now I'm retired and someone puts
money in my bank account at the beginning of each month. It's not a lot of
money, but it's enough to allow me to do whatever I please.

I have no reason to think that I'm smarter or more talented than my
grandparents  -- in fact, everything that I know about genetics leads to the
conclusion that they were exactly as gifted as I. No question but that I've been
a heckuva lot luckier. I could have spent my entire lifetime rolling cigars in a
hot, airless back-room-behind-the-store, as my grandfather did.

I keep the Rotterdam manifest under the glass on my desk. When I start to feel
gloomy, I force myself to take another look. I don't dare allow myself to
succumb to depression. How justly would my grandparents have scorned the mopings
and the woe-is-mes of someone so privileged as I have been.

Source: 2007/01/too_many_fouls_

Title: Too Many Fouls, Too Many Timeouts
Date: January 14, 2007

Our local basketball team is in the Big 12. We're far from the best team in the
league, but the Big 12 is a major conference and as a consequence we have the
opportunity to see some well-played, exciting games and also a goodly number
of excellent young players. Great athletes appear regularly, mostly, I must
confess, on opposing teams, but we've sent a number of guys on to the NBA,
including Scott Wedman, Jay Humphries and Chauncey Billups. Last week the U of
Texas brought in a freshman named Kevin Durant. Remember the name -- he's going
to cut quite a swathe in the NBA. I'm a fan; I've gone to almost every home game
for twenty-five years or more. At its best, basketball is the most beautiful of
team sports. But I have some serious bones to pick about the way the colleges
play the game nowadays. Here are two of these many bones.

a) Time outs.  Every four minutes there's a "media timeout," so that the TV
stations, if there are any, can intrude their commercials. Media timeouts have
everything to do with money and nothing at all to do with the sport. Media
timeouts interrupt the flow. Team A is on a roll; the coach of Team B doesn't
have to use one of this allotted legal timeouts to change the dynamics of the
situation -- he just waits for the scheduled pause. Four extra timeouts in
a half, at a minimum of a minute and a half each, add twelve minutes to the
length of the game. And because each coach can hoard his legal timeouts, he has
them all available at crunch time, which means that the climax of the game is
far too frequently interrupted and the final moments become more the coaches'
responsibility than the players'.

b)  Fouls.  Too many ticky-tack fouls are called. The result -- teams are
regularly "in the bonus" nine or ten minutes into the half. And into the "double
bonus" four or five minutes later. All fouls -- offensive fouls, fouls away from
the ball, incidental contact -- become shooting fouls. The first ten minutes
of each half often have a pleasing rhythm, a bit of pace, but the second ten
minutes are always stop-and-go; rarely is there a full minute of uninterrupted
action. Boring?  You bet. Contests routinely turn into prolonged exhibitions of
foul-shooting. A gazelle of a game now hobbled and shackled.

Our own basketball stadium is at altitude -- a mile high, in fact. Our opponents
are almost always flatlanders. We should have an advantage because we're
better conditioned to play at 5280 feet. But because the games are so long and
punctuated by so many timeouts and fouls, our advantage is lost. No twenty-year-
old is going to run out of breath when a forty minute game takes two and a half
hours to complete.

Solution: a) no more "media timeouts." Oh yeah, I know, the teams need the
money. Well, maybe there would be some revenue from increased attendance if
the games were quicker and shorter and more exciting. b) better-trained and
better- instructed referees. No bonus shots. No free throws except for fouls in
the act of shooting. And teams should always be able to "decline the penalty,"
as they do in football, and take the ball out of bounds. Then there would be
no incentive to foul in order to stop the clock. Take back the game from the
coaches and from the referees. Let the young men play.

Common sense changes, in my carefully considered view, which, if adopted, would
make life richer and more satisfying and more aesthetic.

Source: 2007/01/my_predictions_

Title: My Predictions for 2007
Date: January 16, 2007

I've been staring into my crystal ball, sorting through chicken bones, tea
leaves and the Tarot cards, observing the flights of birds, inspecting the
entrails of sacrificed animals, and diddling with the Ouija board. Now I'm
ready. Here are my widely-anticipated predictions for the year 2007.

1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce; moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market, and, finally,

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

There it is right on the page in black and white. No taking it back now. Eight
major predictions. I know that I'm going way out on the proverbial limb,
but I feel confident -- not vain or proud, mind you -- of my abilities as a
forecaster. Let's all remember to check back at the end of the year and see
how well I've performed.  If I come through, I'll rank up there with the
true greats of the prognosticating game: John the Revelator, Nostradamus, the
National Enquirer, and Pat Robertson.

Source: 2007/01/marriage_advice

Title: Marriage Advice
Date: January 21, 2007

High on the list of The New York Times' "most e-mailed articles" is one with the
catchy title "What Shamu Taught Me About a Happy Marriage," by a writer named
Amy Sutherland. Apparently it's a well-regarded, influential essay. I think
it's misleading and wrong-headed, and I think that couples who heed its advice
will soon find themselves not in a happy marriage but in one that's sterile and
empty.

Amy's column is at this address, and will be available unless and until the
greedy Times decides to put it behind a paid wall. A summary: poor Amy is
perpetually annoyed by Scott, her husband of twelve years. He loses his keys
and asks her help finding them; he keeps her waiting at restaurants; he "hovers
around her in the kitchen asking if she has read this or that piece in the
New Yorker." She's tried nagging, but it doesn't work. As it happens, Amy is
writing a book on animal training and she's watched people "do the seemingly
impossible," such as 'teaching baboons to skateboard" and "hyenas to pirouette
on command." She decides to adopt the animal model and "train" her husband. "If
he threw one dirty shirt into the hamper, I'd thank him. If he threw in two, I'd
kiss him." She rewards "approximations." She uses "least reinforcing syndrome"
in which the trainer doesn't respond in any way when an animal does something
wrong -- just stands and stares. When Scott loses his keys, she ignores his
pleas for help, and eventually he finds them by himself. By the end of the
article, Scott has changed. "After two years of exotic animal training, my
marriage is far smoother, my husband much easier to love."

What's so awful about this advice? Let's take the shirts-on-the-floor crisis.Amy
can imagine only two methods to deal with this problem. There's nagging, which
she now rejects, and there's re-training. But there are other responses. The
first is for Amy to gain a bit of perspective. Marriage isn't about whether the
dirty shirts are in the hamper or on the floor. People have had long and happy
marriages without resolving such issues. Amy seems to assume that getting her
way about the shirts is crucial. But when she and Scott married, they agreed
to love, honor, and respect each other; they didn't agree that every shirt
would immediately find its way into a hamper. Perhaps Amy should re-think her
priorities and try to keep the larger picture in view. Secondly, Amy can't seem
to imagine any ground between nagging and animal training. But there is --
there's an enormous territory. There's discussion, negotiation, and compromise.
Amy:  "It bothers me that you expect me to pick up your shirts." Scott: "I'll
try not to drop them. I'll pick them up myself." Amy: "And I'll try not to make
such a big deal out of it."

When Scott comes into the kitchen and wants to read to her from a New Yorker
article, Amy could say, if she had any imagination, "Oh, good. Scott wants to
involve me in his intellectual life. He wants to talk to me." But she doesn't
see it that way; she wants him out of the room so she can "concentrate on the
simmering pans." But what's important about marriage, or about life?  Is it
the pans, or is it the conversation?  Once again, Amy has it all wrong. She
cares about her cooking, and getting the soup exactly right, more than she cares
about the marriage. It shouldn't be beyond her ability to stir and to listen
at the same time; it's been known to happen. Amy is, let's face it, a bit of a
narcissist. She wants to make Scott into an extension of herself; she wants to
subordinate the marriage to her own convenience.

Readers and friends, here's my opinion. If your spouse comes to you and says,
"I've lost my keys, I'm distressed," you should stop whatever you're doing and
you should start searching. When you do so, you're treating your spouse with
respect and you're taking your marriage seriously. And if you happen to misplace
your own keys, it's perfectly fair to ask your spouse to help find them. Because
sometimes finding keys is a team activity. I'll go even further: sometimes it's
less important to find the lost keys than it is to search for them together.

But you should engage yourself with the problem of the keys, or the shirts, only
if you want a relationship of equals. If you think that it's so important to
train your spouse to stay out of your damn kitchen, then go ahead and follow
Amy's advice. But you might wind up with not with a husband or wife, but with a
pirouetting hyena or a skateboarding baboon.

Amy and Scott: here's some valuable advice. It comes to you courtesy of Mr.
Hart, who lived a couple of houses down from us. He died at age 90, in the same
month as his equally aged wife. The Harts had been married for 60 or so years.
"What's the secret of a long, happy marriage," he was asked. He said, "find out
what your wife wants and make sure that it happens." Which is, if you think
about it for a moment, only a variation of the traditional golden rule and of
its even more practical cousin: "do unto others as they want to be done unto."

January 23.  Today I received an e-mail from my old friend Spike Schapiro.
Spike says, "How come Amy and Scott have been married for twelve years and don't
have any children. I'll tell you why. Because Amy doesn't want kids who would
leave their toys in her kitchen or leave their clothes in the bathroom. She's
quite a piece of work, isn't she?"

Source: 2007/01/its_will_be_ver

Title: Notes on Interspecies Sexuality
Date: January 24, 2007

Readers might be tempted to disbelieve the outrageous silliness that follows,
but here it is, exactly as it appeared in the newspaper.  If you don't believe
me, check for yourself.

DEAR ABBY: Am I a "sicko" because I step out of the shower naked in front of
our dog? My wife, Amy, thinks so. The trouble started when we got a female dog,
"Taffy," from the local animal shelter. Taffy sleeps in our bedroom and is there
in the morning when I take my shower. Amy insists that I cover up in front of
the dog and that Taffy is no different from a child. This has created a lot of
stress between us because, to me, a dog is a dog. Is it wrong to be naked in
front of a dog? -- SCOTT IN NEW JERSEY

How even to begin?  My immediate thought was to take the opportunity afforded
by ABBY and Scott and Amy to make some jokes. E.g., is it wrong to be naked in
front of a dog?  Depends on the dog's attitude toward sexuality and gender.
Depends on whether it's the kind of dog who likes to worry a bone. Depends on
whether it's a hairy or a hairless dog. And also: would it matter if the dog is
gay?  Or male?  How does Amy feel about Taffy eyeballing her?  Would Tuffy be
granted the same privilege?  Does Taffy spend extra time licking her genitalia
after getting a full frontal view of Scott? Etc. Lots of opportunities for
bad humor. In addition to the jokes, I thought that I might also write a few
serious sentences about sentimentality toward animals. And also about flagrant
anthropomorphism -- I'm deeply troubled when someone proclaims that a dog is "no
different from a child."

I wrote an e-mail to confidants asking for help, thinking that they might
provide me with some one-liners. One of the answers that I received came from
my old friend Spike Schapiro, who, diligent readers will remember, wrote to me
a couple of days ago on the subject of marriage and animals (see the entry for
January 21 titled "Marriage Advice). Spike got himself a little bent out of
shape by DEAR ABBY, but I must admit that he took the plight of Scott and Amy
much more seriously than I did.  Here's a excerpt from Spike's response:

"The trouble began when we got a female dog, Taffy." No, Scott, the trouble
didn't begin when you brought home the little bitch.The trouble began long
before that. It all started when Amy was a child and her neo-Victorian God-
fearing parents, who more than likely had sex once and only once, and then only
to fulfill a legal requirement, found their daughter frolicking clothesless and
with a hand "down there" and patiently and sensitively explained to her that
the great Jehovah would wither her finger if her naked skin ever saw the sun
again. Amy's been in a psychological twist ever since. And Scott  -- why the
heck do you bother writing to ABBY?  You must know the score. Your wife is a
total nutball. She's nuts about animals, nuts about nakedness, nuts about sex 
-- which, I guarantee, you're not getting a lot of. Think seriously whether you
want to stay in this relationship. Amy -- get a hold of yourself before it's
too late. If you want to save your marriage, which is now staggering to a nasty
conclusion, don't worry about the intimacy of Scott and Taffy. Throw Taffy and
your dancing hyena and the fool baboon out of the window. Worry about Scott and
Amy.  Exercise your buccinatory muscles. Learn how to make winky-winky. Unlearn
everything that you learned from your parents. Take off your clothes and look at
yourself in the mirror.  Grow up."

I guess I see Spike's point.  I think, though, that he's confused this Amy and
Scott with the Amy who wrote about training her husband Scott in the well-known
NYT article. Although, come to think of it, they could be the same couple.

In any case, I think that Spike could have made the same point a little more
gently. I've edited out some of his harsher adjectives.

Source: 2007/01/the_alljohnson_

Title: The All-Johnson Team
Date: January 26, 2007

Here's the eagerly-awaited all-Johnson NBA team:  Magic, Marques, Kevin,
Dennis, Gus.  Everyone knows the first four, but only those with a few years
on their backs will recall Gus Johnson, who averaged 17 points a game and 13
rebounds in nine season with Baltimore.  Johnsons in reserve:  Vinnie ("the
Microwave"), Larry, Joe, Avery.  There's not a last name that can compete
(there are 49 NBA Johnsons to choose from, including the three Eddies and the
three Georges).

I would lay odds that the Johnsons would easily defeat the Williamses (though
not in depth -- 54 Williamses played in the league).  The all-Williams team: 
Gus, Aaron, Buck, Walt, Deron, Jason, Herb.  All of them role players -- no
real stars in the group.  What about the 53 Smiths?  Could they compete with
the Johnsons.  I don't think so:  Elmore, Adrian, Joe, Kenny, and all three
Charleses (subsumed into one mega-Charles) could play, but they'd be better if
the rules allowed them to use Rik Smits at center.  Who else?  The Millers --
not much there beyond Reggie. The Joneses:  Caldwell, Bobby, Sam, K.C., Eddie,
Popeye -- good but not in the same league as the Johnsons.  It's Magic and the
guys by a landslide.  Anyone out there with other suggestions?  Search here
for the data.

Source: 2007/01/medical_waste

Title: Medical Waste
Date: January 30, 2007

The Aged Parent, who's ninety-four, received a curious letter from AARP
MedicalRX Plans. MedRX is the insurance company that we've chosen to use as
part of the Bush drug plan for the old folks. In point of fact, the benefit
hasn't been very significant, especially since we fell into the infamous "donut
hole."  We pay AARP MedRX monthly by means of deductions from the Aged P's
social security check.

The AARP letter to which I refer was neither cordial nor pleasant. It said this:
"Our records show that you owe $108.00 for your AARP MedicalRX Plan premium. 
This outstanding amount is for premiums due before you changed your payment
method to automatic deduction from your social security check."  The letter
also included a threat:  "Failure to pay this outstanding balance could result
in the cancellation of your coverage."

I immediately suspected that the AARP claim to a hundred bucks of the Aged P's
money was absolutely false.  We initiated payment the very first month that the
plan came into effect and we always paid by deduction. There was no possibility
that the Aged P was in arrears. So I called AARP MedicalRX Plans to find out
the real story. First there was the usual song-and-dance: "If you are calling
about... Press 1.  If you are calling about... Press 2."  I pressed all the
correct numbers and was put on hold for ten or so minutes. I listened to some
crappy elevator music.  At last, a cheery voice.  "This is Anastasia. How
can I help you this morning?"   I explained the problem. "May I put you on
hold?"  "Sure." More crappy music, interrupted by, "Please continue to hold.
Your call is very important to us."  My call was so important that I was
told it was important every twenty seconds for another ten minutes. At last,
Anastasia returned.  "Do you remember that last summer you received a letter
saying that Social Security had sent you $108.08 in error?  Me:  "Yes, I do.
I had several letters from Social Security to that effect."  Anastasia. 
"Well, the money that Social Security sent to you was supposed to have been
sent to us at AARP Rx.  It was accidentally mailed to you." "I remember.  But
then I wrote a check to Social Security. I returned the $108.08 to them as they
requested."  Anastasia:  "Well, what happened is that Social Security never
sent the money to us." Me:  "So then your quarrel isn't with me. It's with
Social Security." Anastasia:  "Exactly right. We're trying to get the money
from Social Security. It's been a major confusion. We've been working on it for
months."  Me:  "So then I don't owe you any money at all."  Anastasia: "No,
you don't.  Just ignore the letter."  Me:  "Ignore the letter?  Why would
you send a letter to me that you expect me to ignore?  Why am I wasting my
time trying to figure out what your threatening letter is supposed to mean?" 
Anastasia:  "Well, you're not alone. We've sent out over a million of these
letters."  Me (somewhat exasperated now):  "You've sent a million letters that
you know are erroneous and misleading.  You've threatened a million old people
with loss of insurance coverage. Why?"  Anastasia:  "It's because the computer
is programmed to automatically send out letters when there's a premium that
hasn't been paid."  Me: "Why can't you reprogram the computer. How hard can it
be?  I'm sure it would be a lot cheaper than sending out a million letters.
And then you wouldn't have to deal with hundreds of thousands of telephone
complaints." Anastasia (testily):  "Sir, I'm not in charge of the computers." 
Me:  "Tell me, what do you do about the old people who don't understand your
letter but figure they'd better pay you or they'll lose their coverage? 
Do you return their checks?"  Anastasia.  "I don't know.  That's not my
department."  Me:  "Thank you very much.  It's been a gigantic pleasure
talking with you."  Anastasia.  "Is there anything else we can help you with
today."  Me:  "Can't think of thing."  Anastasia:  "Have a nice day."

February 2. Later, I tried to decide whether AARP Medical RX is incompetent
or corrupt. It's a tough call. On the side of corruption: if they sent out
a million letters and received $100 from 10% of the recipients, they would
have $10,000,000 as, in effect, an interest free loan. But in theory they'd
have to return the money eventually.  While there would be administrative
costs, it would still be a profitable gamble. On the side of incompetence:  It
probably costs a dollar to print and mail a letter, so AARP has already wasted
one million dollars and will squander more on time spent trying to repair the
damage. That's a lot of misspent effort.  So I lean toward incompetence. 
However, if in the end AARP retains the money from the old folks and also keeps
the money from social security, then there would be no question but that it's
conscienceless malfeasance.

Source: 2007/02/where_a_day_is_

Title: Where a Day is Longer than a Year
Date: February 02, 2007

A Venusian day, strange to say, is longer than a Venusian year. How can such
an apparent paradox be allowed?  It's easy: Venus rotates on its axis once
every 243 earth-days, but it revolves around the sun in 225 earth-days. How
appallingly counter-intuitive!  If I had any gift at all for thinking in the
abstract, I'm sure that I wouldn't find the idea that a day can be longer than
a year so disorienting. But I do;  for me, the word "day" has a metaphorical
as well as a scientific dimension: "days" are short, "years" are long.  I'm
consoled by thinking that my counterpart, a philosophically-handicapped Venusian
visiting the earth, would find our speedy days and our disproportionately long
year quite incredible. On Venus, the lazy old sun takes 116 days to rise in the
west and set in the east (Venus, ever the contrarian, rotates, so to speak,
"backwards").  So much for Ovid's swift horses; on Venus, they're all glue and
molasses, their forward progress barely perceptible.  There's a mythological
corollary that might please the poets. Randy Jupiter would be happy on Venus:
the venereal night is truly a megala nux.

I suppose that the example of Venus teaches us that days and years are not
things but concepts. For me, this is a hard lesson. I recognize that it's
earthocentric to measure the long Venusian day in terms of earth-days, but I
can't seem to reason my way around doing so -- the only day that I've ever
experienced is 24 hours long and the only year with which I'm familiar has 365
and a bit days. It's alarming to realize how short-sighted it is to assume
that a day, a month, a year, tied in, as they are, to astronomical reality are
natural, when, in fact, they're only artifacts of our earthly orbit.

Other measurements of time are less "natural" and therefore even more
troublesome.  How entirely arbitrary to divide the day into 24 parts!  Since
everything else is going metric, why shouldn't we divide the day into ten or
a hundred parts -- decidays or centidays?  And minutes and seconds -- why
sixty of them, when decihours and centihours makes so much more sense?  (The
ancients, incidentally, struggled mightily with hours -- read all about it
here.)  And the week?  No natural reason at all for the week. The Romans, as
is well known, were weekless.

Venus, having no moons, has no months. Mars has two moons -- would a Martian
calendar, if there were such a thing, have had months, or demi-months, or
monthettes, or what?

When I was a boy, I was a diligent if uncritical reader of science fiction.  In
those days, it was not uncommon for entire fanciful Venusian civilizations to
rise, peak, and fall and the course of a novel. But in the 1950s, almost no data
was available to us about the mysterious planet. Now, I'm afraid, the glamour
is long gone. The surface temperature of Venus averages 869F, the atmospheric
pressure is 90 times that of the earth, the atmosphere is 97 per cent carbon
dioxide and contains no oxygen, and the pretty swirling clouds are entirely
composed of hot, concentrated sulfuric acid. It's hardly a place in which an
advanced culture would be likely to thrive nor a place from which we would
expect much in the way of sophisticated calendrical theory.

Source: 2007/02/my_favorite_cri

Title: My Favorite Criminal Athletes
Date: February 11, 2007

Here are some that come immediately to mind:

Riddick Bowe. Heavyweight boxing champion who served 18 months for kidnapping.

Tonya Harding. The first American woman figure skater to land a triple axel
in competition, she is most famous for arranging to have her competitor Nancy
Kerrigan smacked on the knee. She later dabbled in pornography, boxing, and
boyfriend-beating.

Denny McLain. Baseball's last 30-game winner and an inveterate gambler, McLain
was imprisoned for drug trafficking, embezzlement, racketeering.

Jack Molinas. Columbia and NBA forward famous for fixing college and NBA games.
Banned from basketball, Molinas spent five years in jail for bookmaking. After
his release, he took up a new career in pornography. His murder in 1975 was
probably mob-related.

Gerry Priddy. 1940s-1950s American League Infielder, convicted and jailed for
extortion (he claimed to have left a bomb on a ship).

O.J. Simpson. Nicole Brown Simpson, Ronald Goldman, r.i.p.

Darryl Strawberry. Numerous counts of wife and girlfriend-beating; tax evasion,
DUI's.

Mike Tyson. Rape, earbiting, various drug and DUI charges.

Jayson Williams. New Jersey Nets star rebounder acquitted of murder, but when
the jury deadlocked on manslaughter, settled with the family of the dead man for
$2.5 million.

March 30, 2007.  Bulletin:  "Former Major League pitcher Ugueth Urbina
yesterday was sentenced to 14 years in prison in Venezuela for the attempted
murder of five workers on his family's ranch."

Source: 2007/02/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  "I, the Jury" and "The Kid from Tompkinsville"
Date: February 12, 2007

Mickey Spillane's I, the Jury (1947) is a loathsome novel. It makes me gag to
remember that it was wildly popular in the P.S. 217 schoolyard -- passed from
hand to hand in lurid 25-cent paperback editions. Spillane's hero, the crudely-
monikered private investigator Mike Hammer, lives in a world in which guns are
"rods," bullets are "slugs," cars are "heaps," a policeman is a "flatfoot,"
gays are "queers" and "pansies," and people of any color other than white are
"jigs," "bogies," or "darkies." His is a horrible, amoral universe of bigotry
and violence. Mike Hammer, nominally an officer of the law, makes no effort
to bring criminals to justice -- he prefers to kill them. "I'm going to enjoy
putting a bullet into that crazy son of a bitch more than I enjoy eating. I'd
sooner work him over with a knife first." He's a sadistic vigilante who beats up
suspects and bystanders indifferently: "my fist went in up to the wrist in his
stomach."

Charlotte Manning, the beautiful uptown "dame" whom he thinks he loves, tells
him what he wants to hear (and what the novel endorses) -- that he's a "a real
man -- no inhibitions." Of course, he doesn't go to bed with Charlotte Manning
-- he only traffics with women who are those he derides as "nymphos." At the
climax of the novel, Hammer discovers -- a surprise to no one but himself! --
that the killer for whom he's searching is Charlotte herself. As he fingers
his .45 caliber pistol, she slowly disrobes. When she's entirely naked, Hammer
shoots her in the stomach. "'H-how could you,' she gasps. Hammer: "It was easy."
Was it difficult, even in 1953, to understand such perverse, misogynistic
symbolism?

Mickey Spillane left his native Brooklyn to go to serve as a soldier; what a
shame that he returned as a fascist.

For all I know, I might have read I, the Jury during the same week that I read
John R. Tunis's The Kid from Tompkinsville. As degraded as is the one novel, so
the other is otherworldly and pure. The "kid" is Roy Tucker, a simple country
boy who tries out for the Brooklyn Dodgers, wins a place on the team, and is
pitching shutout after shutout when he trips in the shower and injures his
throwing arm.  A few weeks later, mirabile dictu, he returns as an outfielder
and leads his team to a pennant with his hitting. It's a heckuva lot of drama
for one short season, but Tunis makes it credible  -- well, at least, it seemed
credible to youthful me back in 1953.

Tunis takes his baseball seriously and he never patronizes his young readership.
Like most of Tunis's novels (The Kid Comes Back, Young Razzle, Iron Duke), all
of which I swallowed in single gulps, The Kid from Tompkinsville extols the
virtues of integrity, effort, and teamwork. Was I astute enough to notice that
there was no drinking, no staying out late, and not a hint of desire for women
in Roy Tucker's life? I don't believe I was.

While nasty old Mike Hammer asked us to wallow in a swinish world, upstanding
Roy Tucker lifted us from the mire. There could hardly be a better illustration
of Shakespeare's observation that "the web of our life is of a mingled yarn,
good and ill together." I'd like to believe that Tunis was a greater influence
on me (as he was certainly a greater source of pleasure) than Spillane -- even
though, as I recently discovered, Mickey Spillane (Frank Morrison Spillane) was
a fellow graduate of "good-and-ill-together" Erasmus Hall High School.

Source: 2007/02/what_a_relief_t

Title: Sub-Nadir Brainlessness
Date: February 15, 2007

It took three long weeks, but the four ministers who were appointed to counsel
the disgraced former New Life minister report that Haggard is now "completely
heterosexual."

How do they know? Did he pass a test? Did they make him look at pictures of a)
muscular male prostitutes, and b) fancy ladies -- and then check his arousal
rate?  Did the Reverend Ted buy a new gun rack for his truck? Has he started
watching NASCAR? Is Gayle pregnant again? What gives?

The Reverend Tim Ralph, one of the gang of four, produced the following
thoroughly incoherent analysis. "It was the acting-out situations where things
took place. It wasn't a constant thing." I construe "things took place" to refer
to whatever Ted did with the brawny masseur. I construe Reverend Tim's sentences
to mean: "Things took place when they took place. At other times, they didn't
take place." Very insightful, very reassuring. But since Reverend Tim and his
friends have succeeded so well and so rapidly with Haggard, don't they owe
something to all the other struggling-against-their-own-gayness evangelicals
(and Roman Catholic priests) out there. Shouldn't they franchise this cure?
There's a huge market.

Some questions. A) Do the four ministers truly believe that Haggard is
"completely heterosexual?" If they do, their knowledge of human life is shallow
beyond belief. If they don't, they're frauds of a high order of fraudulence. B)
Do the ministers think that we regular walking-round non-evangelicals swallow
their stories? Do they care?  C) Do they think that New Life congregants
believe them?  D) Are New Life congregants completely brainwashed?

A skeptical note. It's reported that the Reverend Ted settled with the New
Life Church for a sum of money. By the terms of the agreement, neither he nor
the church are allowed to say exactly how much treasure is involved. Moreover,
Reverend Ted has agreed to leave Colorado Springs. Cynical old me thinks that
it's nothing more than an old-fashioned payoff: you get out of town and never
darken our doorstep again, and here's a bunch of cash. Stick around and we can
do nothing for you. Dollars to donuts there's a no-litigation-on-either-side
agreement as well. It's all so very uplifting, so very spiritual.

February 17.  I received this jaundiced e-mail from my friend and correspondent
Spike S. "You're entirely too easy on these clowns. Ted's clearly bi-sexual,
and he'll always be. But here's the deal they made: the ministers said, we'll
declare that you're heterosexual, but only if you get out of Colorado. Their
only agenda is to make sure that the mega-million dollar New Life church stays
solvent, and they can't manage it if Ted's around. They'll pay for Reverend
Ted's master's in psychology -- no doubt from some off-brand bible college --
and he'll take up a new career re-programming and therefore screwing up young
gay fundamentalists. And what about the Reverend's drug problem?  Wasn't he a
member of, what do they call it, the First Methedrine Church, or is he a Crystal
Methodist? How long, anyone want to guess, before Ted falls off either or both
of these wagons? I'll give him a year and a half, max."

Source: 2007/02/a_moral_tale

Title: Friend Indeed or Nosey Parker?
Date: February 20, 2007

At a community meeting a few days ago, the question of alcohol consumption
came up (as it frequently does in our adjacent-to-a-university neighborhood).
One young man complained that when local bars (where over-serving is -- in
theory -- proscribed) shut down, the students then take their drinking to
"house parties" where there is no adult present to oversee how much can be
consumed. "They just go and get themselves totally wasted," said the student.
Our local police sergeant challenged him. "What do you do," she asked, "when
your friends make plans to get drunk? Do you try to stop them?" Her question
took the student aback. I don't think that the idea that someone his age could
or should intervene had occurred to him until that moment.

I was surprised that the sergeant asked the young man to look after his friends.
It was as though she asked him to become that dreaded folk-figure, the busybody.

What are the rules in such cases? Isn't the notion that each person is
responsible for only his own welfare a contemporary American dogma? "You can't
help people; they have to help themselves."

Some score or so years ago, I had a friend (I'll call him Vincent) who was
a two-(or three) pack-a-day smoker. He was an intimate enough friend that I
crossed the invisible busybody barrier. I'd argue with him about the health
risks of using tobacco; I'd send him articles to read. He was not impressed or
persuaded, but he was often irritated. Once he said, scornfully, "you are trying
to be your brother's keeper." Vincent was angry when I asked him not to smoke
when he visited my house. His conviction was that when you have a friend, you
don't try to change him or to regulate his habits; you accept him with all his
foibles. Perhaps he was right, but nevertheless, for several years I didn't
invite him home, which was a great loss, because he was smart and informed and
charming and sociable.

Then came the lung cancer, the surgery, the chemo, the false remissions, the
swings between hope and despair, and eventually, the premature death. In an
interview in the local newspaper a few weeks before he died, Vincent said, "I
have simply lost twenty years of my life to smoking." To me he said, once, very
quietly, "you were right."  Did he mean, "you were right that smoking was
dangerous," or did he mean, "you were right to try to change me?" I don't know.

I may have been right, but what good did I do? I alienated a friend and I didn't
add a day to his life.

When I look back now after so many years have passed, my regret is not that I
intervened but that intervened so ineffectively. It haunts me that I didn't I do
a better job.

In our neighborhood, we lose a local student to alcohol poisoning each and every
year. Can there be a sadder or more useless death?  Mom and dad nurture a child
for eighteen years, send him or her off to college, and a week later receive a
phone call that their child has choked to death on his own vomit.

Who is the responsible party?  Friends, teachers, police, family, liquor-
purveyors? Or only the individual?

Source: 2007/02/the_damnation_o

Title: The Damnation of Theron Ware
Date: February 25, 2007

A few of us were in a coffee shop talking about Ted Haggard, Darlene Bishop
and other right-wing Christianistas. One of the guys thought that I could gain
some perspective and also stoke my outrage by reading Harold Frederic's 1896
novel The Damnation of Theron Ware. I recognized the title -- it had appeared
on reading lists when I was a student in the 1950s and 1960s  -- but I'd never
turned a single page. Well, better late than never; Theron Ware is a truly
splendid book.

Here's a sample of its satirical spirit. Youthful, ignorant Theron Ware meets
the governing elders when he arrives to take up his ministry at the Octavius
Methodist Church:

"We are a plain sort o'folks up in these parts," said Brother Pierce....  We
walk here... in a meek and humble spirit, in the straight an' narrow way which
leadeth unto life. We ain't gone traipsin' after strange gods, like some people
that call themselves Methodists in other places. We stick by the Discipline an'
the ways of our fathers in Israel. No new-fangled notions can go down here. 
Your wife'd better take them flowers out of her bunnit afore next Sunday."

It's a wonderful speech, especially that last oppressive sentence, set without
pause or punctuation against flimsy pretenses to meekness. Harold Frederic
leaves us in no doubt that Brother Pierce and his Methodist co-religionists
worship only at the altars of joylessness and petty tyranny. Theron Ware would
like to rebel against these sour Puritanisms, but he's devoid of the necessary
intellectual resources. He's backwoods ignorant. He does after a while acquire
and read Renan's Life of Jesus and for a few chapters it seems as though he's
going to tread the familiar nineteenth-century path from narrow sectarianism
toward a less restrictive spirituality. But the author has many surprises in
store. Ware encounters Father Forbes, an intelligent, informed and (gasp!) Roman
Catholic priest and he also develops a painful crush on a dashing rich free-
spirited young and (horrors!) Irish-American beauty named Celia Madden. Ware is
unable to grasp that these two sophisticates treat him not as an equal, but as a
kind of mascot puppy. Wonderful and embarrassing complications ensue.

Frederic creates some full and rich and modern characters. Father Forbes is a
1890s decadent with roots in Pater and perhaps even in Huysmans, while Sister
Soulsby is a practical, energetic no-nonsense entrepreneur whose trade just
happens to be promoting Methodism. Most interesting of all is Celia Madden, who
plays Chopin and admires George Sand, and who is as up-to-the-moment as anyone
in The Woman Who Did (and who would have been perfectly at home discussing
aesthetics in Bloomsbury). Theron Ware's encounters with her are painfully
amusing. It's as if Frank Merriwell had somehow blundered into Madam Merle's
drawing-room.

The town of Octavius is modeled on Utica, New York, where Harold Frederic was
born and spent his young manhood. Utica is a place I know very well, but I don't
believe I've ever come across a Frederic monument or a "Harold Frederic lived
here" plaque. Perhaps the city fathers aren't eager to remind us that Utica is
portrayed as gossipy, narrow, ignorant, and exceedingly philistine.

Source: 2007/03/its_rumored_tha

Title: Seventy-two Virgins
Date: March 05, 2007

It appears to be the case that martyrs of a certain persuasion will be rewarded
in the afterlife with the ministrations of seventy-two virgins. It would take
a theologian of extraordinary skill to explain why acts of violence should be
rewarded with sexual indulgence. I raise a far less knotty question: if the
aim is bliss, then why virgins?  Why not women of experience and expertise?
Benjamin Franklin, the most practical of our Founding Fathers, was dogmatic on
this nice point: shun the callow in favor of women who've been around the block,
because "every Knack... by Practice [is] capable of improvement."  I think that
B-Frank would agree that there is something about the virgins-for-martyrs deal
that's kind of, how shall I say, impractical or counter-intuitive or even, dare
I say, kinky.

Here's a second theological conundrum. What is the reward when the martyr is
herself female? I must presume that she will be blessed with seventy-two male
virgins -- if not, there's a very serious afterlife asymmetry. Not to reward
females who give themselves to the cause would be a statement that the culture
of religious martyrdom does not support sexual equality, which I can hardly
bring myself to believe. But in the case of female martyrs, the matter of sexual
expertise is further exacerbated. Specifically, of what conceivable value are
seventy-two knackless male virgins? If we postulate that each male virgin is
good for between ten and fifteen seconds of actual intercourse, it follows that
they will be consumed at the rate of four to six every minute, which means that
on average a martyress, however patient, would enjoy a sum of only twelve or
so minutes of pleasure (setting aside time for re-mounting and repositioning),
which is surely insufficient exercise to produce a meaningful let alone heavenly
experience.

Nor will it be all that great for the male virgin at the end of the queue who
has to settle for sloppy seventy-seconds.

Source: 2007/03/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Amboy Dukes
Date: March 08, 2007

During my Erasmus Hall High School years, the hottest of all "hot" books was
Irving Shulman's The Amboy Dukes. It was official doctrine that a single oblique
glance at the inflammatory cover of this paperback could transform a well-
behaved kid into a murderous, reefer-crazed, oversexed hooligan. Simply to read
about the "juvenile delinquents" who populate The Amboy Dukes was to wander into
a criminal twilight. A guy definitely did not want his mommy to know that he had
heard of this book, let alone possessed a sticky contraband copy.

What was all the fuss about?  Why was the book condemned all over America and
even banned (for a while) in Canada?

Here's a paragraph that was much brooded upon in the local schoolyard. (I've
since learned that some 1950s moralists condemned it as pornographic -- and
perhaps they were right.)

They pushed onto the bus, and Frank watched Black Kenny and Mike get a nice-
looking broad between them and give her a rub. Mike and Kenny hemmed the girl
between them, skillfully pocketing her to prevent her escape. In her eyes
there was loathing and fear of the two hoodlums, who did not look at her but
nevertheless pressed against her lasciviously, pinioning her against their rigid
hot bodies. Mike pushed against the girl's buttocks, thighs, and legs, while
Kenny pressed against her stomach and breasts. The girl wanted to scream, to cry
out, but she was afraid....

Ugly to be sure, abusive, sexist, nasty, but still rather tame by later
standards. It's an effort of will to remember that during the Eisenhower years,
words such as "breasts" and "buttocks" were not uttered casually and that their
appearance on the printed page was rare and incendiary. But I don't think it
was the language alone, or even the stark portrayal of adolescents in heat that
rattled polite society. It was the intrusion of viciousness in the tame 1950s
father-knows-best twin-bed universe that provoked the reaction. That "nice-
looking broad" whom Mike and Black Kenny molest was, or was imagined to be, some
respectable family's sister or daughter. Just as the two hoods thrust themselves
against the young woman, so The Amboy Dukes flaunted itself in the face of
respectability. The proper middle class went to great lengths not to acknowledge
that brutes such as Black Kenny and Mike were their next-door neighbors. The
Eisenhower era lived in denial; there were some things that everyone knew but of
which no one spoke. In The Amboy Dukes, Shulman spilled the beans.

That's why The Amboy Dukes fascinated the guys who hung around the P. S. 217
schoolyard. Unlike our parents, we couldn't choose to deny the existence
of psychopaths such as Black Kenny and Crazy Shak (the novel's rapist and
murderer). Guys like that smoked and spit on every street corner and disrupted
many of our classrooms. We had to negotiate with violence or with the threat of
violence every day. To read The Amboy Dukes was oddly refreshing; it validated
the daily reality of teen-agers who weren't gang members.

Moreover, the novel had a strong vicarious appeal. While my friends were trying
to manage their hormones, keep up with their schoolwork and occasionally get
in a good game of basketball or stickball, the Dukes were cutting class,
punching out their teachers, smoking dope, and getting laid. Reading the
novel let us share in some of that other-side-of-the-track forbidden fruit.
But it allowed us to participate safely. The Amboy Dukes, like so many such
scandalous publications, is at heart a cautionary novel. Frank Abbot, the
central character, is a bad guy but he's appealing and not irredeemable; he goes
too far, gets in over his head, and winds up dead -- a warning to all of us. The
Amboy Dukes allowed "normal" kids to enjoy the novel's transgressive moments and
still return safely to the nest.

Although The Amboy Dukes sold millions of copies, I couldn't find it in any
of the libraries that I use. Through the miracle of the internet, I was able
to buy a tattered, yellowed-pages-unglued 35-cent 1949 Avon paperback. The
object itself is a piece of history. On the cover, a woman with flaming red hair
resists the embraces of a dark and handsome young man. Their facial expressions
(he: lustful; she: fearful) are highly melodramatic, but the pair are dressed
conservatively, as though they've just returned from a day of yachting. Also on
the cover are a couple of claims to literary merit: "The one book that tells the
inside story of juvenile delinquency no other novel has told before." And an
appeal to the moralists: "This book is emphatically a reading 'must'" --Edwin
J. Lukas, Executive Director, Society for the Prevention of Crime." Finally,
in almost unreadable tiny print, "This book is specially revised and edited
for Avon Books" -- an admission that leads me to guess that the paperback mass
edition expurgated some words or events that were deemed too strong for the kids
who bought the cheap edition and concealed it inside their official three-ring
binders.

Source: 2007/03/in_the_1950s_wh

Title: Writing: a Personal History
Date: March 13, 2007

My first writing instrument was the "straight pen," which was more durable but
not different in conception from the goose quill -- simply a metal nib set into
a wooden dowel. It was quite a trick for a six-year-old to carry a small drop of
ink from the inkwell and draw a line or circle without blotting -- especially
since there was a wartime shortage of quality paper and the the stuff that was
substituted was coarse and maximally absorbent. At P. S. 217, in the 1940s, each
classroom had an "ink monitor," whose job was to mix a dry powder with water in
a tall jug and fill all the inkwells. Every desk had an inch-in-diameter hole
in the upper right corner -- southpaws were expected to conform -- with a brass
fitting into which a small glass removable "well" was inserted. I got myself
into serious trouble for dunking the end of one of Josephine Casalino's long
black braids into my inkwell-- though I believe that I was neither the first nor
only boy who succumbed to so obvious a temptation. From the perspective of 2007,
it's hard to believe that dexterity with the straight pen was still part of the
curriculum -- it was as though we were being prepared to clerk in some gloomy
Dickensian counting-house.

I think that ballpoint pens arrived in the early 50s, but they were flighty
at first and regularly leaked onto the page or in the pocket. I remember that
my right thigh was dyed a perpetual blue. In 1956, setting off for college,
I invested $20 in a second-hand self-styled "portable" but nevertheless very
heavy Smith-Corona. I would not have plunked down so much cash if I hadn't
thought that I was making the purchase of a lifetime. After all, the typewriter
had represented the state of the writing art for eighty years -- ever since
Remington had taken Christopher Latham Scholes' invention into the mass market
-- and I had no suspicion that it would ever be superseded. Nevertheless, the
mechanical typewriter was obsolete by the 1960s, when I composed a document of
several hundred pages on a borrowed IBM Selectric. Not only did the electric
typewriter produce a more handsome page, but it made acceptable carbon copies.
(Carbon paper is unknown to younger generations and is now only found in
archaeological digs; it's shocking that internet-era folks have no clue that
"cc" abbreviated "carbon copy".) The heyday of the electric typewriter was brief
--twenty years or so. Sometime in the early 1980s, I was introduced to word
processing -- at first on an Apple 2+. Its dot-matrix printer was nasty (no
true extenders) and the hazardous program took perverse pleasure in displaying
ominous messages, such as "Fatal Error # 45."  After a while, I moved to
Wordstar, then to WordPerfect, and now, to whatever Typepad provides for this
essaylet. Could my straight-pen self have possibly imagined that I would someday
amuse myself with a self-published, self-edited internet blogazine?  Meanwhile,
my once-magnificent writer's bump has atrophied. It's gone the way of carbon
paper and white-out.

Information-gathering has been equally transformed. In the 1950s, data had to be
painfully copied by hand onto index cards, which were easy to misplace, misfile,
and misread. Sometime in the late 1960s I first started to make copies of book
and journal pages -- at first using a very smelly, expensive process, the name
of which I can't recall, which could only make crude and blurry negatives, but
was still far more efficient than copying by hand. It wasn't long before Xerox
rendered all previous copy systems obsolete.  Then came the internet which made
things easier still -- although for any depth of knowledge --let's not fool
ourselves -- books are still the only way.

At a library that I patronize, someone has taken fifty or so old wooden card
files and assembled them into a sculpture of sorts. It's titled Top Drawer
Society. For a donation -- I haven't inquired how large -- you can have your
name inscribed on a drawer's brass plate. I couldn't begin to estimate how
much time I spent searching through card catalogs in my lifetime: thousands of
hours, I'd guess. I never anticipated that so useful an item as a tray of cards
would be transformed into mere ornament and into a gesture to an antiquated
technology.

There's no question that innovations in writing and researching in my lifetime
are greater than anything that's happened since Gutenberg. I now know that
change will continue, but I have no more insight into the future than I did when
I plied my straight pen in first grade. What could possibly be out there beyond
the wordprocessing horizon?

Source: 2007/03/more_on_ninetee

Title: More on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Conveyances
Date: March 17, 2007

A year or so ago, I confessed that when I read novels that take place in
pre- internal combustion days, I don't clearly distinguish among various
horsedrawn conveyances -- they're all coaches to me. I have no mental image of
"fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet," "sulky," "surrey,"
"curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler," or "spring-van."  The
pictorial or social resonance of these colorful names is something to which I'm
pretty much tone-deaf.

I was therefore amused when just yesterday I happened upon the following
passage in Flaubert's Sentimental Education (completed in 1869 but set in the
1840s).  Frederic and Rosanette attend the horse races in a "berlin."  Stuck
in traffic, they find themselves surrounded by a crestomathy of carriages:
"barouches, britchkas, wurts, tandems, tilburies, dog-carts, covered wagonnettes
with leather curtains full of singing workmen out on the spree, and go-carts
carefully driven by fathers of families.  There were crowded victorias in which
some young man would be sitting on the feet of other passengers, with his legs
dangling over the side. Big broughams with cloth-covered seats carried dozing
dowagers; and occasionally a magnificent high-stepper went by, drawing a post-
chaise as simple and smart as a dandy's tail-coat."

I'm positive that Flaubert chose his words carefully and I'm equally sure that
he had no premonition that his vocabulary would be obsolescent in just fifty
years and incomprehensible in a hundred.

Every contemporary novelist knows that it matters whether his hero arrives in
a Jeep or a Jaguar or a jalopy. If his book will be read in a later century,
extinct and quaint words such as "pickup," "step-van," "SUV," "Buick,"
"station wagon," "jeep," "hummer," "flat-bed," and "Subaru" will be annotated
with copious scholarly footnotes. And the words to songs as well. How much
scholarship and how many sentences will it take to fully explicate "We'll have
fun, fun, fun/ Until Daddy takes the T-bird away?"

Source: 2007/03/an_imperfect_mu

Title: An Imperfect Murder
Date: March 19, 2007

From the get-go, our internationally-renowned neighborhood scandal, the JonBenet
Ramsey murder, had TV movie written all over it.  It had upper-class sheen,
infant-beauty-pageant perversity, and tantalizing whodunnitness.  Our latest
local murder lacks all such glamor.  The characters are sad, dumb, and pathetic
and, to make matters worse, everyone already knows whodidit.  Fodder for what
sort of film?  The answer should be screamingly obvious to movie aficionados.

Here are the facts as they have been extensively reported locally.  Tess Damm
(note transparent symbolism of name), an in-and-out-of-trouble somewhat trashy
15-year-old, persuades her boyfriend, Bryan Grove, to kill her alcoholic and
abusive mother Linda.  Bryan obediently does the deed by stabbing Mom Damm in
the "throat and mouth."  The kids, however, don't have a clue how to dispose of
the body, so they stow it in the back seat of the Subaru.  While it festers,
the young 'uns cavort.  Neighbors tell reporters that that "the teens were
seen coming and going at all hours of the night, 'car-surfing' through the
neighborhood and blaring loud music."  After a raucous month of celebration
in which they spend the $4000 in Mom's bank account, the murderers come to
the realization that it might be good idea to dispose of the evidence.  They
solicit the aid of third young malefactor.  (Possible dialog:  Bryan:  "Hey
dude, want to, like, help us get rid of a, like, corpse." Jared:  "Cool.") They
head out to the Erie landfill, but the car gets stuck in the mud and so they
return home.  The next night, they try again: they drive to a local cemetery (a
stroke of pure cinematic genius!) but because the ground is frozen, they can dig
only one or two feet into the ground.  The bury the body, but, panicked that
the shallow grave will be noticed, they return the next night, exhume Mom and
return her to the Subaru.  At this point, just as the story is becoming weirder
than weird, an "anonymous tipster" notifies the police and thereby cries "cut"
to the youthful criminals.

It's probably too morbid and half-baked for a broadcast TV movie, but can anyone
deny that the story is made to order for Joel and Ethan Coen?  Some typical
Coen Brothers elements:  truly sleazy characters; rampant brainlessness; 
the inability of the participants to look even a few moments into the future;
gruesome details;  gratuitous blood and gore;  very, very, black humor; 
and, finally, the opportunity to satirize American mores.  What could be more
perfect?   It's a Coen Brothers world after all.  Can the argument be taken
a step further?  The adventures of Tess and Bryan and Linda couldn't possibly
have occurred until Joel and Ethan had made and exhibited Blood Simple and
Fargo.  The murder -- and the macabre and superbly noir series of actions that
follow -- would not have been possible without a literary precedent.  Once
gain, Life can do no better than slavishly tread in the Footsteps of Art.

Source: 2007/03/recommended_rea

Title: Recommended Reading
Date: March 22, 2007

The most glorious fictions that I've read in many years are late writings by two
nineteenth-century masters. The first is Leo Tolstoy's Hadji Murad; the second,
Gustave Flaubert's A Simple Heart. Hadji Murad (published posthumously in 1912)
is a novella on the subject of war and its follies. A Simple Heart (1877) is a
short story about an exploited servant woman who finds a bit of beauty in an
ugly world. They're both absolutely transcendent stories -- "beyond beyond," as
Shakespeare says.

April 2.  Additional recommendations. I've now read three "detective" novels
by Leonardo Sciascia. They are all superior creations, although their open-
endedness might be disappointing to people who expect that mysteries must be
resolved and that criminals should be brought to justice. They're not genre
fiction; they're writings that cleverly expand and question the crime genre.
The novels:  he Day of the Owl  (1961), To Each His Own (1966), Equal Danger
(1971), -- all reprinted in attractive, reader-friendly editions by New York
Review Books. I'll be looking for more Sciascia on the library shelves. Also,
You Know Me All, by Ring Lardner, an excellent baseball novel first published in
1916. It holds up well, although the humor leans heavily on "country bumpkin"
stereotypes.

Source: 2007/03/authorship-1

Title: Another Folly: the "Shakespeare Authorship Question."
Date: March 26, 2007

This guest entry was contributed by Pauline Harlem, the internationally-
acclaimed author of The Wonderful World of Anagrams (New York, 2006).

"Just last week, the Washington Post published a pair of articles on "who wrote
Shakespeare's plays." The one claimed that Shakespeare's plays were written
by Edward de Vere, the seventeenth Earl of Oxford; the other re-asserted the
traditional view that William Shakespeare wrote William Shakespeare's plays. By
juxtaposing the two articles -- one for, one against -- the Post is guilty of
outrageous anti-intellectualism.The authorship of the Shakespeare plays is not
an open question. It's as if the Post were to offer its readers two articles,
one in support of evolution and the other in favor of new-earth creationism.
Just as the matter of evolution is a settled question, so the authorship of the
plays is not -- and never has been -- in any sort of doubt. The true believers
who keep stirring the pot are faith-based cranks, fanatics, and conspiracy
theorists who ignore the usual rules of evidence and reason.  Shame on the Post
for giving them a voice!

The nay-sayers discard the historical record and ask this question: is it
likely that Shakespeare, with his small-town background and (it's claimed)
limited education, could have written plays that demonstrate a sophisticated
knowledge of the law, the court, geography, seamanship, etc?  As to the matter
of likelihood, who could possibly disagree?  Of course it isn't likely that
these extraordinary plays would have been written by anyone -- but it happened
nevertheless. It's also unlikely that the theory of relativity would have been
developed by a civil servant in a Swiss Patent Office; it's extremely unlikely
that the most transcendent music ever written would have been composed by a
man who was totally deaf; it's beyond belief that an autodidact living in
intellectual isolation in Madras could single-handedly recreate a big hunk of
modern mathematics; it's more than incredible that a hermit-like lens-grinder
living in self-imposed intellectual exile would be one of the western world's
most innovative and progressive philosophers. What is "likely" and what actually
happens are two entirely different kettles of fish -- especially when genius
is concerned. Despite the unlikeliness, Shakespeare existed and he wrote
plays and poems.  His name is on thirty-six of the plays and his friends and
colleagues and contemporary admirers testify not only to his existence but
to his accomplishments. Among the thousands of books and the corridors of
unpublished manuscripts and records that survive from his time, there's not a
scrap of information to hint that the plays weren't his. Not a scrap, not a jot,
not an inkling, not a tittle.  Nothing.

The fallacious claims of the Oxfordians, Baconians, Elizabethians, Rutlandians,
et. al. have been refuted time and time again. Here's a representative sample of
the quality of the argument  -- it's from the recent Washington Post article.
"[It's unlikely that Shakespeare wrote the plays because he] never left England
-- but sixteen of the plays are set in Italy or the Mediterranean." Persuasive?
In what universe must authors travel the world in order to set their plays
outside of England?  Certainly not in the world of Shakespeare and his fellow
playwrights. Did Christopher Marlowe travel to Malta in order to compose The
Jew of Malta or to the Asian steppe to astonish the world with the Scythian
shepherd or to Wittenberg to trouble the orthodox with Doctor Faustus?  Thomas
Kyd never left England, but managed to startle theater-goers with The Spanish
Tragedy.  Ben Jonson never made his way to Italy, but he had no trouble putting
Volpone in Venice. John Ford, no traveler, set 'Tis Pity She's a Whore in Parma.
John Webster's two great plays The Duchess of Malfi and The White Devil are
set in Italy, a country on which Webster never set eyes. Thomas Middleton's
masterpiece, The Changeling takes place Alicante, in Spain -- but Middleton
was a Londoner who never went abroad.  And so on and on, endlessly. Like his
friends and competitors, Shakespeare wrote out of books. He, and they, pillaged
the literature for promising stories. If the story happened to have originated
in Italy, that's exactly where it remained. The playwrights were not geographers
or social historians and they created not real but literary places.  Marlowe's
Germany and Middleton's Spain and Webster's Italy are no more German or Spanish
or Italian than Shakespeare's Belmont is Belmontian or for that matter, W. S.
Gilbert's Mikado is Japanese.  Did Shakespeare need to travel to Denmark to
write Hamlet or to Vienna to write Measure for Measure?  It's nonsensical to
think so.  It's an argument without a scrap of merit. It's not honest.

But is it even a fact that that sixteen of Shakespeare's plays are set in
"Italy or the Mediterranean." Only by a stretch. Do the sixteen plays include
Othello, the Moor of Venice -- four acts of which occur in Cyprus?  And is the
argument that Shakespeare or some other author had to travel to off-the-beaten-
Elizabethan-track Cyprus in order to write it?  Do the sixteen include A
Midsummer Night's Dream, nominally set in Athens but in fact stuffed with
English tradesman and English fairies?  Or The Comedy of Errors, which takes
place, in part, in ancient Ephesus in Asia Minor. Or Pericles in Antioch? The
Tempest occurs on an enchanted island which is called Bermuda but seems to be
somewhere between Naples and Libya. Would a playwright need to traverse the
Mediterranean in order to bring Ariel and Caliban to life?  Is it any sort of
argument that plays set in the great age of Rome (Julius Caesar, Antony and
Cleopatra, Titus Andronicus, Coriolanus) required a playwright to abandon his
careful reading of North's Plutarch for a time-travel trip to ancient Italy? 
Shakespeare no more had to cross the Alps to write his sixteen plays than he
had to board a time machine to dark age Scotland to write Macbeth or teleport
himself to ancient Britain in order to write King Lear or Cymbeline.

The author of the Post article knows these facts. He knows that the travel
argument, and the other tissue-thin assertions that he advances, have been
refuted over and over again.  But like all faith-based controversialists, he
does not withdraw or concede or counter. He merely repeats and repeats and
repeats, because his personal conviction is prior to and more important than
either evidence or reason.  He's not conducting a legitimate search for truth;
instead, he is in thrall to an irrational and deeply-held conviction. Facts will
be bent to support his extra-logical hypothesis. His intellectual processes
mimic the creationists, the holocaust-deniers, the flat-earthers. Such minds
are not reachable -- but there's not the slightest reason for a respectable
newspaper to give them space."

Thanks, Pauline. I couldn't have said it any better myself.  V.

Source: 2007/03/peony_survival

Title: Peony Survival
Date: March 27, 2007

Last October, I decided that one of my herbaceous peonies -- a Prairie Moon, to
be precise -- needed to be separated and re-planted. I did the deed, but a few
days ago, while cleaning the garden, I found a small, overlooked fragment of a
tuber -- six inches in length and no more than half the diameter of a finger --
lying on the ground entirely exposed to the elements. I missed it last autumn, I
guess.  But the good news: while there was no sign of rooting, there was a bud
-- and the bud was swelling with new life.  (It had been a wicked winter, with
temperatures down to 10F.)

Peony-growers know that it's important not to plant the roots too deep in the
soil. The experts say two inches at the most. My experience is that in our
Colorado clay, two inches can be too much, and that peonies so planted may come
up spindly and flowerless. But now I know that it's safe to err on the shallow
side.  Herbaceous peonies are tougher than I imagined -- pretty much impervious
to cold.  Or at least such is the case with this particular variety.

Friends, I can't tell you how much I admire that tenacious little cylinder of
life.  It's toughness is inspiring.  I've prepared a burrow for it -- the best
in the way of soil and situation that I can offer. Let's see what it makes of
its new opportunity. It's spring;  I'm optimistic.

Source: 2007/03/just_when_you_t

Title: American Journalism Hits a New Low
Date: March 30, 2007

Just when it appears that our corporately-owned pseudo-local newspaper (the
Daily Camera) has hit rock-bottom-nadirhood, it plummets to still another new
low. It's a bottomless cistern.

We're suffering through a horrid local murder. The Camera is covering the story
with rare enthusiasm -- trying to elevate it to JonBenet Ramsey celebrity
status.  (It's the Linda Damm murder. You can look it up here.)

Some days there's no news.  But that doesn't stop Al Manzi and his troops.
Let's try to guess at the four-column headline on the front page of the edition
of March 28. Hint: It wasn't the Iranian capture of British sailors, which
might lead to a wider war in the Levant;  it wasn't AG Gonzalez kayaking the
disinformation rapids;  it wasn't the Senate repudiating the Smirker by setting
a deadline on Iraq. Nope. Here it is, folks. It's (drums and trumpets): FINDING
A NEW HOME:  LINDA DAMM'S DOG ADOPTED BY LONG-LOST FRIEND. Linda Damm's dog! 
Excuse me, but this "news" is not the truth that is going to set us free. This
is poverty-stricken intellectually vacant journalism.

The story itself is heart-rending. One human life has been lost and several
others are ruined. And our newspaper can do no better than run a report on
Linda Damm's dog!  Have the publisher and his reporters no dignity, no sense
of proportion, no shame?  No ethics. I'm embarrassed to be a reader of this
newspaper;  I'm embarrassed to be a fellow-citizen of its publisher.

Is it true that crude, yellow, lachrymose sensationalism still sells
newspapers?  I guess so.

March 31.  I received the following from Spike Schapiro, a friend of my
youth.  As usual, Spike is unhappy with what I've written.  "Viv, you've lost
your bearings.  You've been living in wussy Boulder so long that your brain
has turned to tofu. I'd heard that everyone out there was a fey vegan, but I
didn't believe it until I read the Damm dog story in your local rag. Let's get
this straight. Dogs are not placed in "foster homes" -- they're sent to kennels;
they're not "adopted", they're bought and sold; and they don't have "guardians"
-- they have owners.  Have you people lost the ability to make distinctions? Do
you treat all animals as if they were human infants?  The Camera reporter can't
tell the difference, that's for sure. I have ten bucks that says that she's
twenty-two years old, graduated with a degree in communication from some off-
brand college (probably Bible U.), and prides herself on her "spiritualism" --
by which she means "spirituality."  Plus she volunteers with Squirrel Rescue.

Viv, my friend, get back to your roots! The Camera's story isn't just egregious
journalism -- it's immoral trash. Try to recall the intersection of Newkirk
and Coney Island, where there wasn't the luxury for such foolish, fatuous
sentimentality."

Source: 2007/03/some_parallels

Title: Some Parallels
Date: March 30, 2007

Leonardo Sciascia's laconic and precise "metaphysical mystery" The Day of the
Owl (Il Giorno della Civetta, 1961) is set in unwholesome, Mafia-dominated
Sicily.  Captain Bellodi and Sgt. Major Ferlisi, dedicated and intelligent
police officers, investigate a series of horrific crimes. Their trail leads to
the local boss, Don Mariano Arena, but further searching opens the possibility
that an "honorable deputy" and a cabinet minister also may be implicated.
We'll never know the whole story -- Bellodi is recalled to Bologna and Ferlisi
transferred to Ancona, and the investigation languishes.

In Bush's America, Congressman Duke Cunningham is convicted of accepting bribes;
further investigation appears to implicate "Dusty" Foggo, third in the hierarchy
at the CIA. It's also possible that senior White House officials might be
involved  -- but Carol Lam, the efficient U. S. attorney in charge of the case,
is suddenly relieved of her position. The investigation languishes.

And also: Jack Abramoff is sent to jail for perjury. The trail of corruption
once again appears to lead to the White House -- but the prosecutor, Noel
Hillman, is offered a federal judgeship and the investigation grinds to a halt.

At the end of The Day of the Owl, Captain Bellodi, though exhausted and
disillusioned, resolves to return to Sicily. He will, it seems, try again.
Sciascia's unhappy novel offers a small ray of hope. It seems to say that it is
wrong to succumb to hopelessness and despair in the face of political abuse. A
useful moral, I think.

Source: 2007/04/cheney_suicide

Title: Cheney + Suicide
Date: April 06, 2007

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain?  It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good. What could possibly stand in his way?  Once he
sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some piece of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that while he was a black-hearted knave, at
least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade us
that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart."  But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself.  Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the
entire Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster.
"Full of scorpions [should be] his brain."  At this moment of writing, Cheney
is guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count
-- who can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even
the most rudimentary of consciences, on it lays the heavy burden of 60,000 to
100,000 Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has lived
in such dishonor/ That the gods detest [his] baseness."  But Antony took the
proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman fashion,"
let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating himself and
the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter. I know that
you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the internet,
perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your purpose. Dick
-- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in history. At this
point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest end."  You'll
immediately feel better.  It's a no-brainer.  Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation to
suicide and also Otis Brown's Comment (see below).  You are, as usual, falsely
optimistic, but OJB is right on target.  Cheney can't off himself because a)
he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-knowledge and
d) he can't point a shotgun. You cite the precedents of Othello and Anthony but
they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant.  Cheney is a slug."

Source: 2007/04/headline_dr_m_p

Title: Headline:  Dr. M. Patronized by Five-Year-Old Grandson
Date: April 07, 2007

We take the small aluminum bat and the "safety" baseball to the concrete
schoolyard and I try to pitch the ball at the exact level where the grandson
swings.  Every time he makes contact, the ball rolls a hundred or so feet until
gravity and friction kick in (I have no fielders behind me). Grandpa retrieves
the ball. The grandson says, "Grandpa, why don't you run after the ball?"

Even without running, Grandpa manages to pull a muscle in his side and
experience some interesting numbness in his left leg.

We play a board-game called Narnia. It has three separate kinds of dice; it has
"sword cards" and "event cards," "wolves" and "white witches."  Grandpa doesn't
seem to grasp the game's subtleties.  The grandson says, "Grandpa, why don't we
play something less complicated."

We play chess. Grandpa manages to lose the first game, but despite his best
efforts, takes a lead in the second match (perhaps because he's fully mastered
the way the knight moves). Grandpa makes a gracious offer: "why don't we just
say it was a draw?" The grandson responds by flying his queen over the ranks and
files and knocking Grandpa's king off the board. The grandson says, "Why don't
we just say I won?"

Source: 2007/04/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  A Death in the Family
Date: April 10, 2007

I remember exactly when I first heard of James Agee's A Death in the Family. It
was in Ithaca in 1958. The late Edward Ruhe, who was then a young instructor in
English, stopped me on the street and asked if I had read it. He said I must,
and, obedient lad that I was, I immediately purchased a copy. I can't remember
much from my fifty-years-ago reading, except that I was put off by the novel's
long italicized flashbacks and by what I regarded as its excessively intimate
tone, which I then judged to be sentimental and false. But I've now re-read the
novel. It's authentic, it's emotional, and it's so very American. I'm very glad
to have had a chance to revise my earlier opinion. Perhaps I was too young. It's
curious that I didn't connect Agee to the autobiographical poets that I was then
reading, for the ground that Agee covers was then being explored by Lowell and
Snodgrass and Roethke and of course by Sylvia Plath.

It's a novel not only about death (it's told through the observing eyes of
Rufus Follet, the six-year-old whose father dies in an automobile accident) but
about the details of American life. There's very little in the way of plot, but
Knoxville in 1915 is wonderfully evoked, mostly through concrete images. It's
very much a novel of things. Perhaps I'm especially conscious of this technique
because I've been re-reading Flaubert. But in Flaubert's novels, almost every
object is laden with satirical significance (which is also the case -- to choose
an American parallel -- in the novels of Mark Twain). Agee, however, loves the
objects that he describes. Although there's puzzlement and mystery, there's not
an ounce of satire or cynicism anywhere in A Death in the Family. Rufus Follet
and Huck Finn -- it's not as unlikely a pairing as it might at first seem.

The facilitator of Agee's achievement is James Joyce. A Death in the Family
could not have been written without the precedent of A Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man. But it's an American not an Irish portrait -- not as complex
or as original, but fully as real as Joyce's. If an extraterrestrial visiting
our lovely green planet wanted to understand the difference between Europe and
America, he couldn't do better than read Portrait and A Death in the Family side
by side.

Source: 2007/04/book_report_tim

Title: Book Report:  Tim O'Brien's In the Lake of the Woods
Date: April 13, 2007

In The Lake of the Woods sold well and was much adulated in 1994. It's been
on my reading list for a long time, and I've finally gotten around to it.
In plot, it's uncannily reminiscent of Sloan Wilson's The Man in the Grey
Flannel Suit (on which I reported some months ago). Wilson's novel is post-WWII;
O'Brien's is post-Vietnam. In each novel, the semi-autobiographical ex-soldier
protagonist has committed unspeakable acts that he conceals from his loving
wife; his silence embitters the marriage. In both books, the central figure
embarks an ambitious career, but he is haunted by his past. Eventually, by force
of circumstance, closeted history re-emerges and a crisis is precipitated.
Deliberate and willed amnesia is the common theme of both books -- in fact,
neither the characters nor their creators can bring themselves to confront the
past except obliquely.

I've come to In The Lake of the Woods thirteen years too late. I'm sure that it
had immediacy and power when it was fresh and new, but now it seems contrived
and obvious. The machinery of the novel  -- multiple interlocking flashbacks,
third-person commentary, authorial interjections, etc. -- may have worked in
1994, but is now marvelously self-conscious and ostentatiously "literary."
I know that Vietnam was a trauma for all concerned and I respect O'Brien's
sincerity and pain. I just wish In the Lake of the Woods weren't so thin and
pseudo-mysterious and evasive.

Is there a great novel of Americans in Vietnam or is it still waiting to be
written?  It was a particularly ugly war and it was the watershed experience
for people of my particular generation. Do we have a War and Peace?

Question:  How many masterpieces would it take to compensate for the
disaster?  Answer:  There isn't enough paper.

Source: 2007/04/regular_readers

Title: Sex and the Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Conveyance
Date: April 18, 2007

Regular readers of this blague are well aware that I have repeatedly indulged
my bemusement at the names of extinct or obsolescent horsedrawn conveyances.
My point is that modern readers, who know precisely what is signified  --
in design, in metal, rubber and plastic, and especially in social value --
by such words as Jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, and jalopy, know just about zip about
"fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet," "sulky," "surrey,"
"curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler," "spring-van," "berlin,"
"barouche," "britchka," "troika," "wurt," "tandem," "caleche," "tilbury," "dog-
cart," "wagonette," "go-cart," "victoria," "brougham," "diligence," "clarence"
or "post-chaise."  If we notice these words at all, we tend to savor them as
archaic Victorian music rather than to identify and evaluate them as specific
forms of transportation.

Return with us now to the unthrilling 1950s, before pre-marital cohabitation
became ordinary. In those days, automobiles reeked of sex. Indeed, I can
remember that one sociologist described them as "portable bedrooms" -- a
witticism that produced profound envy in those of us who came from automobile-
less families.  While I knew that Nashes and Studebakers and big ol' DeSotos
could serve as mobile boudoirs, I must confess that I had never suspected that
horsedrawn vehicles could perform the same function. The eye-opener came by
way of some sly and wicked goings-on in Flaubert's Madame Bovary.  Here's the
situation: Emma has been wooed for a hundred or so pages by her young admirer,
Leon. They are both eager to consummate their affair, but there's no convenient
venue. Taking fate into his hands, Leon "pushes" Emma into a cab. "'Where to,
Monsieur?' asked the cab driver. 'Wherever you'd like,' said Leon."  And then
Flaubert describes the route around Rouen taken by coachman, cab, and lovers.
He give us a page and a half of paragraphs like this one:  "The coach promptly
began to move again, passing through Saint-Sever, along the Quai des Corandiers
and the Quai aux Meules, over the bridge once more, through the Place du
Champ- de-Mars and behind the gardens of the Home for the Elderly, where, in
the sunshine, old men clad in black jackets stroll up and down a terrace green
with ivy. It climbed up the Boulevard Bouvreuil, traveled along the Boulevard
Cauchoise, then right over Mont-Riboudet as far as the hill at Deville." 
At discreet intervals, Flaubert interrupts the narrative: "'Keep going,"
cried a voice from inside...."  "'Keep going!' shouted the voice, even more
furiously...."  "The coachman could not understand what rage for locomotion
could be compelling this pair never to stop." Eventually, the cab "drew up in an
alley near the Beauvoisine district, and a woman stepped out, walking off with
her veil lowered, never looking back."

Nineteenth-century writers were not allowed to be explicit about sexual events,
so they had to adopt various circumlocutions and codes. They lacked the freedom
of both earlier (Fielding, said Thackeray, "was the last of our writers who
drew a man") and later (post-Joyce) novelists. To write frankly about the act
of intercourse was absolutely taboo.  Despite the obstacles, Flaubert does a
excellent job of suggesting both the duration, the energy and the jouissance
that Emma and Leon experience while their coach was "tossing about like a ship."

I suspect that Flaubert's readers had little trouble comprehending what is meant
by the passengers' sudden "rage for locomotion."

Source: 2007/04/an_informal_sur

Title: An Informal Survey
Date: April 23, 2007

OK, it's time to get going. Could we put the house lights on, please. Here's
the first question. Raise your hand if you think that the loss of 5.000,000
e-mails by the White House was simply an accident. That it was unintended.
Anyone?  Yes, I see a couple of hands in the back, and there's someone here on
the left. I guess most of you think it was 'accidentally-on-purpose.' Fine. OK
now, here's another question. The White House claims that Karl Rove didn't use
the Republican National Committee e-mail address to bypass the records act, but
just simply to keep politics and government business separate. If you believe
that, please raise your hand. I'm not seeing any hands at all -- oh yes, there's
someone, and there's someone else near the center aisle. There's two hands --
no, I'm sorry, three.  Ready for another question?  The President is willing
to let his advisers talk to congressional investigators, but not under oath,
not publicly, and with no transcript. If you believe that he's not trying to
hide something, raise your hands, please. Did I make that question clear? Let
me say it again. If the president's argument is persuasive to you, raise your
hand. If you think he's just protecting himself and his advisers, keep your
hand down. Hands? I see two on the left, and one there in the back. Same person
as before, I think. OK now, -- next question. Karl Rove's lawyer admits that
Rove systematically erased his e-mails, but only because he thought that they
were preserved elsewhere. Anyone believe that one?  Please raise your hand.
Nobody?  OK, there's someone down here. Sorry, I almost missed you, ma'am. So
we have only one person who believes that story. Ready for another question? 
Attorney- General Gonzalez says that he would never fire anyone for political
reasons or to interfere with an investigation in progress. Do I have any hands
on that one? No, none at all?  Interesting?  I'll wait. Still nobody? Let
me try another question. Anyone here believe that Gonzalez is a tool of Rove
and that he does exactly what Rove tells him to do?  OK, now we're finally
getting some response. I thought no one was paying attention. Looks like about
two-thirds, maybe three- quarters of you. Maybe more. We only have time for
one last question.  Anyone here convinced that Karl Rove is a vicious liar
who deserves to hang by his thumbs in a Gitmo prison, please raise your hand.
Whoa, almost everyone. Please, I can't keep count if you raise both hands. Just
one hand, please. Look, shouting isn't necessary  -- I just need to count the
hands. What's that you say?  I can't hear you -- there's so much noise. Oh, you
think he should hang by his nuts. Very good. OK, thanks a lot, everybody. Thanks
for your cooperation. That was very helpful.

Source: 2007/04/what_we_read_in_1

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Scaramouche
Date: April 25, 2007

For the life of me, I cannot remember whether I read Scaramouche because I
was entranced by the movie, or whether it was the other way around, and I
surrendered my 16 cents to the Leader Theater because I had already fallen
in love with Rafael Sabatini's historical romances. I know that I gorged
myself on huge helpings of Sabatini -- not only Scaramouche and Captain Blood,
but everything else in the rich collection of the McDonald Avenue library.
Scaramouche, first published in 1921, enjoyed a second burst of popularity
when the Mel Ferrer-Stewart Granger Technicolor swashbuckler hit the screens
in 1952. I've now re-read the novel, and while it lacks the magic that it had
for my 13-year-old self, and, moreover, is awkwardly plotted, and stilted, and
thin, and obvious, it's nevertheless an engaging adventure story. The central
figure is the dashing and resilient Andre-Louis Moreau, who survives crisis
after crisis with a witty, devil-may-care sprezzatura. The novel itself overlays
elements of picaresque (on-the-lam Moreau becomes an itinerant actor, then a
fencing master, and finally a politician) onto a traditional romance plot (in
the novel's final pages, our bastard hero discovers that he's an aristocrat by
birth). At heart it's yet another version of the secret-sharer, doppelganger,
Jekyll-Hyde plot so common a hundred or so years ago. Moreau is haunted by his
wicked double, the Marquis Gervais de la Tour D'Azyr, with whom he competes for
not one but two different women  -- one fallen and one pure, as was the custom
in those days. D'Azyr claims that Moreau has been "the evil genius of his life,"
but he's got it backwards: he's Moreau's evil twin. In the thrilling climax, so-
called, Moreau wins Aline de Kercadiou -- the upper-class paragon whom both he
and his double desire. The novel is set during the French Revolution, but the
historical context is dimly realized  -- a much paler embodiment than The Tale
of Two Cities, which, like Scaramouche, is also a novel of doubles (remember
Charles Darnay and his dissipated friend Sidney Carton!).  A dyspeptic reader
might assert that the novel is nothing but dilute Dumas; it would be hard to
challenge such an opinion.

The film, which I remembered fondly, was a bitter disappointment. It's
appallingly, embarrassingly bad. There's some good theatrical dueling, but
the plot is a mess, the dialog is ghastly, the humor infantile, and the
acting vaudevillian. Eleanor Parker is hopeless as a cliche "spitfire" who
alternately kisses and smacks around her admirers; however, a young and rondelet
Janet Leigh, swathed in whole hectares of taffeta, manages to redeem the
part of Aline. All the characters, even Aline, wear their hair in the oddest
configuration: highly artificial, upswept white wigs. They look like well-
groomed sheep. I suppose it's too late to shoot the hairdresser.

The Sesquipedalian Sibilance Society would like to extend its appreciation to
Mr. Sabatini for popularizing the word "spadassinicide," which is much-used in
the novel. It's from Fr. spadassin, "assassin," and from the Latin verb meaning,
"to kill."  Etymologically speaking, spadassinicide ought to denote a person
who murders murderers, but the author uses it to mean a person who kills by
taking advantage of the etiquette of the duel. It's a handsome old neologism,
although not easy to work into everyday conversation.

Source: 2007/04/novelists_must_

Title: A Bad Case of Irony Overload (IO)
Date: April 30, 2007

O m' god. I'm having a serious attack of Irony Overload. This is no joke. In the
last few days, the news has been saturated with extreme instances of Natural
Irony. It's dangerous stuff. Left unchecked, you know, IO can progress to Morbid
Cynicism (MC), which is terminal. The cases to which I refer are not your run-
of-the-mill family-values preacher caught pants-down with a male prostitute.
These are more colorful, more exotic performances.

Paul Wolfowitz, World Bank prexy and ferocious campaigner against corruption and
nepotism, "directed" that his very own girlfriend or house mate or whatever she
might be called, be hired at a handsome tax-free salary at a State Department
agency where she's to be guaranteed superior evaluations and inordinately large
salary increases. It's a variety of cronyism that we can call "nepotistical
irony."

Another: Robert E. Coughlin, deputy chief of the criminal division of our very
own US of A Department of Justice, which is overseeing the investigation of Jack
Abramoff, suddenly needs to spend more time with his family when investigators
scrutinize his financial relationship to Kevin Ring, an Abramoff stooge. What
are the odds? The investigator supervising his own investigation! There's
enough irony in this story to fill a barrel with monkeys or, alternatively, an
industrial size hen house with packs of famished foxes. And there's more to the
story. Last year, the very same Robert E. Coughlin received, at the hands of
Alberto Gonzalez himself, the highly coveted Attorney-General Award for Fraud
Prevention.

And just yesterday, when I thought that my IO index couldn't rise any higher,
Global AIDS Ambassador and Deputy Secretary of State Randy (actual name!!)
Tobias, a big abstinence guy and the overseer of a program designed to help
men in poor countries "develop healthy relationships with women" resigned "for
personal reasons" when it was revealed that he had been regularly dialing up an
"escort service" that sent shady ladies to his home.  Asked "if he knew any of
the alleged call girls," Randy replied that in "he didn’t remember them at
all. He said it was like ordering pizza." Women are like pizza?  To a man whose
mission is "to help men in poor countries develop... etc., etc."  In the face
of such a revelation, how's an ordinary guy supposed to keep Morbid Cynicism at
bay.

By the way, Randy T. has chosen to go with the Ted Haggard defense. Yes, he
frequented prostitutes, but not for sex, only for massage.

So here we go again, dear readers. Pop quiz, multiple choice. Your back is
hurting and you need a massage. Whom do you call?  Two choices:  a) massage
therapist, or b) a notorious madam.

If you answered A, you win a lifetime membership in the Committee to Stamp
out Morbid Cynicism.  If you answered B., you receive a lucrative patronage
appointment in the Department of Justice plus a secret e-mail account with the
Republican National Committee.

Source: 2007/05/book_report_pet

Title: Book Report:  Peter Pouncey, Rules for Old Men Waiting
Date: May 03, 2007

Rules for Old Men Waiting (Random House, 2005) is both a good and bad novel.
Some of the time it's rather wonderful, but there are long stretches that are
maximally pedestrian. It's distinctly odd that the story-within-a story -- a
WWI morality about good and evil in the face of combat-- is gritty and real and
exciting, while the frame is flaccid and unconvincing and also offers some of
the woodenest dialog I've read in the new millennium. Rules for Old Men Waiting
is a first novel by a sexagenarian that recounts the story of an old man who's
decided to devote his last days to writing fiction. It's less involuted than it
sounds but still a little too self-consciously theatrical. Pouncey must have had
tons of trouble bringing the novel to a close, because in the last few pages he
invents a new character to help him staple on an ending. Nevertheless, the novel
is an honest, respectable effort -- and extremely effective when Pouncey sticks
with his strengths.

My geezer group is going to read Rules for Old Men Waiting later this month, so
stay tuned for a fuller report.

Source: 2007/05/the_answer_is_n

Title: "The Answer" is not the Answer
Date: May 03, 2007

I never, ever, thought that the Denver Nuggets' acquisition of Allen Iverson
was a good idea. He has skill, he has speed, and he's the most resilient guy in
the world. He can do everything on a basketball court except win games. These
last four losses against San Antonio prove the point. It's not just that last
night he was 6 for 22;  it's that when the Nuggets come down the floor, whether
Iverson eventually shoots or not, he clings to the ball and dribbles around
while the rest of the team stands and watches. Iverson turns his teammates into
spectators. Last night, Carmelo had three points in the fourth quarter; he
barely touched the ball.  Nene, who can score off almost everyone down in the
post, might as well have sat for the last twelve minutes.

Of course it's clear that the Nuggets can't advance in the playoffs until they
find themselves a reliable three-point shooter.

It's just as obvious that Iverson isn't going to become a team player; he's
31 years old and he's averaged 23 shots a game with a .422 percentage for an
entire career. He's not going to alter his game, but he's definitely going to
deteriorate. I'm afraid that we're stuck with him. Meanwhile, Philadelphia
has done better with Andre Miller than with The Answer. In addition, we gave
Philly two first-round draft picks to help them fill in their gaps. I like
Philadelphia's chances;  I don't like ours.

Source: 2007/05/loyal_bushies_t

Title: "Loyal Bushies":  Two Archetypes
Date: May 07, 2007

Here are two types of "civil" "servants" prominent in the Bush era.

A.  The Moronotron. Just under 30 years old, he/she (let's say she) comes from
a large family of home-schooled children, five of whom are still active in the
LifeForce Harvest Church of Milan, Ohio, pastored by the Reverend Mike. Family
trauma (one of her brothers committed suicide; another had to be disowned when
he moved to San Francisco with his friend Gabe; that her mother recently entered
alcohol rehab has only strengthened her faith. She graduated from Brethren
College, where students and faculty bask in an "authentic relationship with the
Lord," with an honors degree in Christian Communication. After Brethren, she
attended law school at Regent University, where she chaired the debate team and
counseled pregnant teens. She was making fundraising calls for the Santorum
campaign in 2004 when she was offered the position of assistant undersecretary
for policy in HHS -- her roommate's cousin was a fraternity brother of a 'prayer
partner' of Lynne Cheney's aunt Sylvia's husband. As White House liaison, she
"relayed" information from the President's "closest advisers" to the Secretary.
Now undersecretary of HHS, she oversees 160,000 employees and a budget of 800
gajillion dollars. She is unmarried and doesn't date, enjoys Fruit Loops, and
someday, when her life is less busy, hopes to travel to third-world countries to
bring good news to the unenlightened.

B. The Henchdoofus. He is now close to 60, a graduate of the Chadron State
College in Chadron, Nebraska, with a degree in marketing. At Chadron, he
captained the cheerleading squad and made a complete recovery from the illnesses
(depression, fatigue, etc.) that made it impossible to for him serve in the
military during the Vietnam era. He joined Exxon Mobil right out of college.
He had worked his way up to a moderate-sized cubicle when he left to head up
Patriotic Americans For Clean Energy (wholly funded by Exxon). PACE lobbied
for a "balanced approach to offshore oil drilling." In 2000, President Bush
appointed him chair of the Advisory Council of the Food Safety and Inspection
Service. In 2001, he founded a K Street lobbying firm called ACS Associates
which had as its principal client the American Melamine Council. ACS (from
which his wife Christine continues to draw a $30,000 monthly stipend) is often
credited with the resurgence of profits of both the melamine and the pet-food
industries. He was recently appointed Undersecretary for Nutrition Policy in
the Department of Agriculture. He's a dedicated environmentalist and hunter,
and enjoys the wilderness in his SUV, his ATV, and especially in his Arctic Cat
Panther 360 snowmobile equipped with an ATN 24x75LU peak performance titanium
night vision telescope mounted on a Remington X-40 high-powered assault rifle.

Source: 2007/05/in_the_previous

Title: Another "Loyal Bushie."
Date: May 10, 2007

In the previous post, I recorded two archetypes of "Loyal Bushies" -- the
Moronotron and the Henchdoofus. Here's another one.

The Spoiled Rich Prick. Typically, the SRP attended boarding school at
Phillips something-or-other or at St. Somebodies in New Hampshire. Although he
learned nary a thing, and his SATs were under 1000, he was admitted to Yale
(which his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather attended) and in his
senior year was tapped for membership by Numskull and Boners. The SRP went
on to study at the Harvard Business School, where he graduated dead last in
his class. Although eligible for the draft, through his father's influence
he was able to secure a place in the National Guard, from which he was
frequently absent-without-leave.  For a decade or so after Harvard, the SRP
was distinguished for booze, cocaine and drabbing. Friends of the family set
him up in a business, which failed, and then bought him out for many millions.
Then the SRP's father decided that he was too incompetent to enter the family
business, so he had him elected governor. He still holds high political office
and is famous for his laziness, rhetorical incompetence, anti-intellectualism,
partisanship, ignorance, truculent stubbornness, petulance and bonehead errors
in matters of national consequence.

Spike Schapiro comments:  "Thanks for this portrait. I guess you had Dan Quayle
in mind."

Source: 2007/05/my_favorite_cog

Title: Favorite Royal Cognomina and Sobriquets
Date: May 13, 2007

Reading an introductory history of Spain (I'm appallingly ignorant about the
Iberian peninsula), I learned of the dark age king with the excellent name of
Wifred the Hairy. Wifred stimulated me to recall other monarchs with colorful
sobriquets: Vlad the Impaler, Ethelred the Unready, Ivan the Terrible, Charles
the Fat, Edward the Confessor, Pippin the Short, Eric the Red, William the
Conqueror, Richard the Lion-Hearted, Joanna the Mad, Suleiman the Magnificent.
When my learning and memory failed, wikipedia rode to the rescue: Sviatopolk
the Accursed, Ismail the Bloodthirsty, Ivailo the Cabbage, Alfonso the Chaste,
Louis the Indolent, Denis the Farmer, Piero the Gouty, Fulk the Ill-tempered,
Edgar the Outlaw, Louis the Pious, Eric the Priest-hater, William the Silent,
Olaf the Stout, Bayezid the Thunderbolt, Garcia the Tremulous, and Alfonso the
Wise. Then I thought, how sad that in this formal age of first and last names we
no longer make use of such picturesque appellations. Let's return to the earlier
tradition. I propose, as a start, Mel the Bigot, Mike the Ear-biter, Rush the
Blowhard, George the Truculent (or George the Decider), Alberto the Forgetful,
and Dick the Dick. Suggestions are very welcome. The world is all before us,
where to seek.

May 15.  Pauline Harlem, acclaimed author of The Joy of Anagrams, suggests
these two: Woody the Perplexed and Warren the Promiscuous.

May 16. Spike Schapiro comments:  "Who in the living heckola is 'Ivailo the
Cabbage.'  Did you make that up, Vivian?  Do the rules of your game allow me
to invent vegetable sobriquets?  Suppose I said, 'Ivana the Beet' or 'Penelope
the Melon'?  Would that be amusing or pertinent?  What's the deal here?

Vivian replies:  Spike -- Ivailo the Cabbage, King of Bulgaria, was also known
as "Ivailo the Lettuce" and "Ivailo the Radish."  Why would I try to deceive
you?  Besides, I'm not nearly so inventive.  For more info, click  here.

Source: 2007/05/what_we_read_in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Bridge of San Luis Rey
Date: May 14, 2007

The Bridge of San Luis Rey, although published in 1927, was still widely read
in the 1950s both by the  general public and by students in classrooms all
over America. It's a fine novel but it's unfortunate that Thornton Wilder's
philosophical premise is so naive and lame. In 1714 a rope bridge over a gorge
in Peru breaks and five people perish. Brother Juniper investigates the lives
of the fallen, assuming that the good lord wouldn't have allowed them to die
without a reason. Eventually, the well-meaning priest learns that the five
victims were no worse and no better than any other quintet of ordinary mortals.
His conclusion is displeasing to officialdom and both he and his compilation of
facts are burnt by the Inquisition.

By the oddest of odd coincidences, I had recently read an essay on the rope
bridges of the Incas, in which I learned that, though brilliantly designed,
these bridges required annual renewal. My reading of The Bridge of San Luis
Rey was therefore colored by questions not of theology but of engineering.
Why didn't they repair the damn bridge?  Why did they think that a fiber
bridge wouldn't rot?  Why doesn't Brother Juniper investigate the bridge
maintenance department? The conclusions to which the novel seems to come --
that a) sometimes good people die for no good reason, b) that god is either
indifferent or not there at all, and c) the Spanish inquisition was unpleasant
-- don't seem particularly challenging. Is it possible that the novel's theses
were daring in the 50s classroom?  They seem mighty tame today.

Though the frame of The Bridge of San Luis Rey is bland, the accounts of
the five people who die are sharp and colorful and imaginative and rather
beautifully written. There are moments, in fact, when Wilder's storytelling
seemed almost post-modern. Here's part of a paragraph about the twins Manuel and
Estaban. To me, it sounds like an extract from The Hundred Years of Solitude.

Because they had no family, because they were twins, and because they were
brought up by women, they were silent. There was in them a curious shame in
regard to their resemblance. They had to live in a world where it was the
subject of continual comment and joking. It was never funny to them and they
suffered the eternal pleasantries with stolid patience. From the years when they
first learned to speak they invented a secret language for themselves, one that
was scarcely dependent on Spanish for its vocabulary, or even for its syntax.
They resorted to it only where they were alone, or at great intervals in moments
of stress whispered it in the presence of others. The Archbishop of Lima was
something of a philologist; he dabbled in dialects; he had even evolved quite
a brilliant table for the vowel and consonant changes from Latin into Spanish
and from Spanish into Indian-Spanish. He was storing up notebooks of quaint
lore against an amusing old age he planned to offer himself back on his estates
outside Segovia. So when he heard one day about the secret language of the twin
brothers, he trimmed some quills and sent for them. The boys stood humiliated
upon the rich carpets of his study while he tried to extract from them their
bread and tree and I see and I saw. They did not know why the experience was so
horrible to them. They bled....

I think if this extract were presented to ten literate readers, nine of them
would immediately guess "Marquez." Of course, its Marquezness would be even more
obvious if Manuel and Estaban would fly up to the ceiling or be transformed into
a thousand glorious butterflies. I don't know whether Marquez ever read The
Bridge of San Luis Rey, but I certainly wouldn't be surprised to discover that
he had done so.

Incidentally, Manuel dies and his twin Estaban wrestles with "the guilt of the
survivor." Is it relevant that Thornton Wilder's own twin died at birth? 
And does it follow that Wilder, despite the fact that he came from a large
and accomplished family, might well be thought of as some curious sort of
replacement child?

Source: 2007/05/a_violent_liter

Title: A Violent Literary Dream
Date: May 16, 2007

Last night I dreamed that I was in conversation with two English professors
(both male and middle-aged) from a college in New Orleans (query -- why New
Orleans?). One of them said, "Rex is a very good baseball player. Thanks for
recommending him." I said, "Yes, he's good, even though he has two prosthetic
shoulders. But I didn't recommend him to you as a baseball player. I recommended
him as a novelist. He writes detective stories."  One of the professors
said, "I like his stories, but he doesn't transcend the genre"  ("transcend
the genre" is an actual verbatim quote from the dream. I don't invent the
dialogue; I only report the facts.)  And then I said, and I think I remember
this accurately, "if you want to read someone who 'transcends the genre,' you
should read novels by Leonardo Sciascia." Once those words were out of my
mouth, I started to feel foolish -- did I mention the name Sciascia because I
was genuinely trying to add to the conversation, or was I just showing off? 
(I often bother myself with such questions in 'real life'.)  While I was
cross-examining myself, a young woman appeared on the "set."  She was no one
I recognized, but I can report that she was wearing a white blouse and a long,
dark skirt. She held a gift-wrapped package and she opened it, pulling out a
book. She said, "here's something that will transcend the genre." And then she
shouted, "Transcend the Genre."  "Transcend the Genre."  Just at that moment
I heard shooting and realized that a sniper was firing at at her. She took a
bullet to the stomach and another to the head, and lay there at my feet, dead
and bloody. It seemed like a good time to wake up, and I did so.

May 18. Marion Morrison, associate professor of English at the University of
Iowa, who has contributed to this blague in the past, writes:  "Dr. Metablog,
or Vivian, or whatever you're calling yourself today, I'm embarrassed for you.
That's the most mysognynistic dream I could imagine. As soon as true creativity
arrives on the scene of your dream, in the form of a young, attractive and
obviously creative woman, your unconscious killed her with a shot to the heart.
Your dream admits no other interpretation."

May 19.  Spike Schapiro writes:  "Marion, that's a crock of you know what.
The dream is not a bit 'mysogynistic' -- I presume you mean 'misogynistic'.
It's about pretentiousness. The woman who shouts "transcend the genre" is an
pretentious intellectual bully. She deserves to be obliterated -- incidentally,
not with a bullet in the heart, as you claim, but in the head and stomach. You
can't even get the facts right. But what can you expect from someone who thinks
that Rider Haggard wrote a novel called King Solomon's Minds, which is what
you called it in your pretentious little slice of literary you know what. Hey
everyone, click on "in the past" in the preceding paragraph and check out what
I'm saying. Marion, go back to the classroom where you can poison the brains of
another generation of vulnerable children."

Source: 2007/05/an_overheard_an

Title: An Overheard Anecdote
Date: May 20, 2007

We were flying Frontier from DC back to Colorado. Two old guys (old, but younger
than I) were swapping stories. Here's one. "Rosie and I were at a hotel in
Vegas, in bed.  About one in the morning, we hear a hooker knock on the door
across the hall.  'Anyone want a little action.' No answer. Then, sure enough,
she knocks on our door. 'Want some action?'  Rosie says, 'Move on, honey, I'm
working this room.'"

Good dialogue.

I assume that Rosie is the wife.  But the story, at least to my tired old ears,
has a slightly different valance if she's a date, a business associate, or a
mistress.

Source: 2007/05/my_new_career

Title: My New Career
Date: May 21, 2007

Ever since I retired a few years ago, friends and relations have been asking
what I intend to do with the rest of my life. It's time to start on a new
career, and after much deliberation, I've decided to fulfill a lifelong dream.
I've always had the soul of a power forward;  now I'm going to make it happen.
With this blague entry, I declare my eligibility for the NBA draft.

Let me confess:  I don't expect to be a lottery pick. There's too much college
talent and too many 7-foot Lithuanian teenagers. High second round is what I
aspire too.  I might even have to play a year or two in a European league to
sharpen my game -- no problem.

I figure that to play in the NBA, a guy needs three things: the game, which I
have; the attitude, which I certainly have; and the body, which I am working on.

Let me point out that at 5' 10 1/4"  (formerly 5' 10 3/4") I am a full five
inches taller than Earl Boykins. Plus I can get into the air higher than Yao
Ming; I'm a better three point-shooter than Shaquille O'Neal; and I'm a more
consistent at the charity stripe than Ben Wallace. Those are some big names
there. Not only that, I'm a better interview than anyone in the league past or
present--even better than Sir Charles himself. I'm a team player. I don't need
to play 48 minutes;  I don't need to take the game-winning shot. On defense,
there's not a player in the league whose flopping will be more authentic.

Because I've lived a more-or-less bookish life, my body is still in tiptop
shape. No gimpy knees or repaired Achilles tendons or fused vertebrae. True,
the A-fib could be a problem down the road, but I don't imagine that the apical
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, of which I have the merest tad, will hold me back
in the slightest.

To the club owners and general managers who are reading this blague entry -- let
me point out that I appeal to an entirely different demographic than players
now in the league. Until now, there was no one to be a "spokesman" for Beltone
hearing aids or Avodart or AARP. Untold, untapped commercial opportunities
waiting to be seized!!

I've been running this idea by my friends and family for the last few weeks, and
I'm sorry to say that there's a lot of ageism and size-ism and negativity out
there.  Let's leave that skepticism behind us! I'm ready to roll! I just have
to decide on the appropriate tats.

(For an update on this subject, read more here.)

Source: 2007/05/boustrophedonia

Title: Boustrophedoniana
Date: May 23, 2007

I'm fond of a passage in Gulliver's Travels where Jonathan Swift describes
Lilliputian script. In a single sentence, Swift manages to attack and nail two
of his favorite targets: "ladies" and "England." The Lilliputians "manner of
writing is quite peculiar being neither from the left to the right, like the
Europeans;  nor from the right to the left, like the Arabians; nor from up to
down, like the Chinese, nor from down to up, like the Cascagians, but aslant
from one Corner of the Paper to another, like Ladies in England.

In good satirical fashion, Dr. S. supplements truth with fancy: the
"Cascagians," who write from bottom to top, may sound like the Carpathians or
Sarmatians or some other trans-Caucasus people, but they don't exist. It appears
that Swift invented them in order to complete his survey of the directions in
which writing might flow.

Yet even including the fantastical Cascagians, Swift's list is not
comprehensive. There are other possibilities for writing beside up and down,
right and left or aslant.

In boustrophedon (a lovely Greekish word that signifies "turn like an ox
plowing"), alternate lines move in opposite directions. Lines one, three, five
and seven and so on proceed from left to right; lines two, four, six, and
eight from right to left. Ancient languages such as Safaitic were written in
boustrophedon; some Etruscan inscriptions, still undeciphered, seem to follow
the same pattern. Boustrophedon is not unreasonable, but it's certainly awkward
for those who have made a fetish of left to right.

Here's how Shakespeare transforms boustrophedonically.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,—

!srats etsahc uoy, uoy ot ti eman ton em teL

It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood;

,wons naht sreh fo niks retihw taht racs roN

And smooth as monumental alabaster.

.nem erom yarteb ll'ehs esle, eid tsum ehs teY.

Survival of the fittest, applying even to scripts, no doubt led to the
extinction of boustrophedon.

Query: would our brains be more supple and more imaginative if we had retained
this style of writing? Or would we simply be more perplexed? Or dizzy? And would
we, as a civilization, prize as the peak of wit and award the laurel to the
palindrome?

Incidentally, Rongorongo, the indigenous language of Easter Island, was
apparently written in reverse boustrophedon, i.e. bottom to top -- a
compositional practice that any satirist, even Swift, would have been delighted
to invent.

May 26.  Marion Morrison, Ph.D., an associate professor of English at the
University of Iowa, writes: "I'm confused about 'reverse boustrophedon.' Is it
real, or is it another Dr. Metablog 'invention'?  Is Rongorongo a metablogian
Cascagian?  I'm skeptical. And how does it work?  Can you favor us with a few
lines in so-called 'reverse boustrophedon?'

Vivian replies:

Devoutly to be wish'd....

noitammusnoc a siT' .ot rieh si hself tahT

The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks dne ew yas ot peels a yb dna
;emor oN

And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-

,selbuort fo aes a tsniaga smra ekat ot  rO

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune

reffus ot dnim eht ni relbon sit' rehtehW

To be, or not to be- that is the question:

Source: 2007/05/fiction_by_jhum

Title: Fiction by Jhumpa Lahiri;  Anthroponomastics
Date: May 30, 2007

Last week I read and was much impressed by Jhumpa Lahiri's collection of short
fiction called Interpreter of Maladies (1999), especially the first story "A
Temporary Matter," which shouldn't leave a dry eye in the house. I've now read
Lahiri's only published novel, The Namesake(2003). It's a fine book. I didn't
know, although I should have, that a film of The Namesake, directed by the great
Mira Nair, is now in release. I'll try to see it.

Lahiri writes about Bengali immigrants in America. Acculturation is not a
new subject in our fiction. Like other groups, the Bengalis bring their own
flavor to the American gallimaufry. In The Namesake, the first generation keeps
the customs and the food and largely self-segregates; members of the second
generation go to good colleges and become engineers and doctors, understand
but don't write Bengali, eat pizza and Chinese takeout, and aren't keen about
arranged marriages.

In Bengali society, individuals apparently have two names: an official public
name, and what Lahiri calls a pet name, but which anthropologists call a
hypocoristic. The central character in The Namesake was supposed to be called
Nikhil, but through a bureaucratic error, his pet name, Gogol, became his school
name. So he goes through the first years of his life as Gogol Gangulia. The name
inhibits and embarrasses him. Before he matriculates at Yale, he changes his
name back to Nikhil, yet he's always caught between the two identities signified
by these rival appellations.

Jhumpa Lahiri is a pseudonym for Nilanjana Sudeshna. She's married to Alberto
Vourvoulias-Bush. I can't imagine what's on her passport or what's she's named
her two children, but it's a sure thing that she's thought more than a little
about nomenclature  -- as must anyone who feels that his name doesn't properly
fit his character. I myself am ambivalent about my own name.  Vivian de St.
Vrain isn't exactly "me," if the truth by told. It's French, and I don't always
feel French. My teachers couldn't always pronounce my given name properly, and I
had to correct them, which was embarrassing for a shy youth. And Vivian -- it's
so ambisexual. I would have preferred to have been named something decisive and
less ethnic. I should have had Gogol's courage. Or Nilanjana Sudeshna's.

Source: 2007/06/a_mental_prosth

Title: A Mental Prosthesis
Date: June 01, 2007

Regular readers of this blague will remember that Dr. M. has long ago confessed
that he suffers from a serious case of "directional disability," or as some call
it, "geographical dyslexia" -- which means that he regularly loses his way, is
subject to travel-based panic attacks, and is consequently abused by friends and
family who refuse to recognize that he's not stupid, just utterly lost.

Advanced technology rides to my rescue. I now own a mobile navigator. It
affixes to the windshield of the car, and, using signals bounced off three
or four satellites, instructs me how to get from point A to point B. I've
fallen profoundly in love with the disembodied female British voice who
doesn't criticize me when I make a wrong turn: she just says, very politely,
"recalculating."  Then she says, "drive point five miles and turn left." 
What a boon to the chronically lost! I now drive as accurately as a migrating
bird. My only reservation: I think that my friend should congratulate me when
I get to where I'm going. She should show a little enthusiasm. But all she
says is "arriving at destination, on left." What would it hurt her to offer
congratulations?  I'm not asking for a commitment or for flowers.

The navigator has now moved into first place among my prostheses, supplanting
the incisor.

Source: 2007/06/antepenultimate

Title: "Penultimate"
Date: June 04, 2007

At our local farmer's market last Saturday, an enthusiastic young man was
bragging to his out-of-town guests about the various vegetable and food stands.
"Here's where you buy the best bread in town," I heard him say. "It's the
penultimate bakery." "Penultimate?" There's no doubt in my mind that the young
feller meant to say that this particular bakery -- a very excellent one, in fact
-- was the best of the best. Not just the "ultimate," but more than ultimate.
In his mind, "ultimate" means best, and the prefix "pen" signifies "more than"
or "extremely."  I'd never heard "penultimate" used in such a way, but I
googled the word and found a number of such uses, including a Penultimate Wine
Bar in St. Louis and a quotation from the speaker of the Massachusetts House
of Delegates, who, arguing in support of a proposed constitutional amendment
banning gay marriage, specified that "voters must be given the chance to speak.
They have the penultimate constitutional authority, not four judges."

Of course, according to every dictionary on the planet, "penultimate" is not a
superlative of "ultimate." It means, as it has always meant, "next to last."
It's from the common Latin word "paene" -- nearly or almost, and from "ultima"
-- last. Penultimate is almost the last in the same way that penumbra is almost
a shadow.

One of the reasons that I'm taken aback by this novel use is that for me,
penultimate isn't at all an unfamiliar or exotic word. It entered my life in
high school Latin, in the early 1950s, and therefore dates back to my earliest
adventures in literacy. In Miss Beulah Withee's classes, we spent many hours
learning to scan Virgil and Ovid. (I don't really know why we did so; you don't
need to master metrics in order to appreciate the poetry. I imagine that the
practice dates back many centuries to a time when gentlemen were expected to
compose Latin verses.)  We students of first-year Latin were taught that the
last syllable of a line was the ultima, the next-to-last the penult, and third
from last the antepenult. Thanks to Miss Withee, "penultimate" has never posed
any mystery for me. But let me hazard a guess that neither the bread enthusiast,
nor the owner of the St. Louis watering hole, nor the Massachusetts speaker were
ever required to scan Latin hexameters.

Although penultimate in the sense of "the very best" is, so to speak, "wrong,"
I can feel it gaining fast.  It's breathing down my neck. And if it's used
often enough in the new signification, "very best" will soon supplant "next to
last."  Let me predict that in fifty years of so, "penultimate," which even as
I write these words yearns to mean "better than best," will be only used in its
original Latinate sense by a handful of old fogies who will cling to the antique
meaning with all the feeble strength in their ancient bony fingers. I can even
imagine a time when the prefix "pen" will become detached from "penultimate"
and will be used to create a whole series of imaginative new "cranwiches":
"penexcellent," for example, or "penpenurious."

I'm of two minds about such changes. I'm well aware that language is
inherently unstable and, intellectually speaking, I'm a descriptivist, not a
prescriptivist. I try to be tolerant of new words; in fact, I'm proud of the
handful that I've invented myself.   don't want to turn into some kind of
mossbackosaurus convinced that any innovation in usage signals the demise of
western civilization as we've known it. Nevertheless, I can't deny that the
phrase "penultimate bakery" grates very harshly on my sensitive ears.

Moreover, I'd feel mighty squishy if I had to suppress my instinctive desire to
rail against contemporary linguistic collapse.

Source: 2007/06/king_lear_vi

Title: King Lear, V.i
Date: June 06, 2007

Today's contribution is the work of resident Shakespearean Pauline Harlem, the
internationally-acclaimed author of Anagrams for Fun and Profit (2005) and The
Naked Anagrammatist (2007).

William Shakespeare, culture hero and playwright, is so often idolized for the
great iconic moments and the big megaphonic speeches that quieter but equally
luminous effects may go unnoticed. A good example of such an oversight is the
extremely brief scene that graces the end of the History of King Lear -- eleven
lines in total that have never been granted the praise they deserve.

As King Lear winds to a close, readers (or playgoers) are exhausted. Not only
are their emotions wrung, but their capacities have been taxed just trying to
track the crowded details of the plot. Even the author had trouble keeping
King Lear's entangled stories in mind -- perhaps because he revised the play
several times. Yet although Shakespeare may have slipped on a detail or two, he
never lost sight of the main lines of the parallel plots. In the one, Cordelia
marshals her army against that of Lear's enemies, which is led by her wicked
sisters Goneril and Regan; in the other plot, old Gloucester, cruelly blinded,
is carried to Dover by his faithful son Edgar. Gloucester intends to put an
end to his own life. Edgar has a different agenda; it's his plan to rescue his
father from suicidal despair and by doing so save the old Earl's soul.

In the third-from-last scene of the play, Cordelia tenderly and reverently
reveals herself to her father. The tragedy's very last scene is long and
complex, encompassing a formal duel between Edgar and his half-brother Edmund in
which Edmund is mortally wounded, plus the suicides of the wicked sisters and
the murder of the good one, and finally the deathbed speeches of Lear himself.
Between the weighty matters of the last and of the antepenultimate scenes,
Shakespeare tucks in a brief enactment that can easily be overlooked -- but
which shouldn't be. It's one of the pinnacles of playwriting, as splendid a
piece of art as the world will see between the last big bang and the next -- or
until all molecular motion ceases -- and even afterward.

Shakespeare carefully sets off the scene from its surroundings. It both begins
and ends with a child taking a father by the hand and attempting to draw him to
safety -- an image of care and concern with deep roots in both "real life" and
the western literary tradition. First Cordelia wordlessly leads her maddened
father across the stage. Just as the pair exit, Edgar stumbles on stage with
his own father in tow. The brief exchange between father and son pauses while
Edgar secludes Gloucester. Then comes the conflict between good and evil figured
in the offstage roar of battle. Edgar returns, exchanges another couple of
sentences with his father, and then takes his hand and leads him on. It's an
unobtrusive scene, brief and understated -- and for Shakespeare, relatively
languageless. But every single word tells.

Here is the scene exactly as it appeared in the quarto of 1605. For you internet
wanderers who have accidentally found your way to this blague and who've never
been offered the opportunity to look at Shakespeare in the raw, unedited and
unmodernized, this passage offers some good examples of the playwright's quirky
spelling and of his characteristically minimalist punctuation. (The medial u's
-- standard in Elizabethan printing -- should be read as v's; i.e. "thrive" for
"thriue.")

Alarum.  Enter the powers of France over the stage, Cordelia with her father in
her hand.  Enter Edgar and Gloster.

Edg.  Here father, take the shadow of this bush

For your good hoast, pray that the right may thriue

If euer I returne to you again ile bring you comfort.  Exit.

Glost. Grace goe with you sir.  Alarum and retreat.

Edg.  Away old man, giue me thy hand, away,

King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter taine,

Give me thy hand, come on.

Glost. No farther sir, a man may rot euen here.

Edg.  What in ill thoughts againe men must indure,

Their going hence, euen as their coming hither,

Ripeness is all come on.

Let me provide just a bit of historical context. Before Shakespeare tackled the
story of King Lear, it had been told many times on stage, in poetry, and in
mythic history. In every previous versions, the armies that are led by Cordelia
triumph in the battle that comes to pass in this scene. Because the story is
nowadays so familiar, it's hard for us to imagine exactly how surprised and
shocked early audiences would have been at the battle's outcome. Doubtless
they would be entirely confident that Lear will succeed. Even today, anyone
reading or hearing the scene's first lines would reasonably assume that the
armies of justice will conquer and that the long British nightmare will finally
end. Shakespeare deliberately raises such hopes only to dash them. Edgar's
first sentence lulls us into false security. "Pray that the right may thrive"
is plainly a signal to the audience that everything is going to come out just
fine. There's an even stronger "foreshadowing" of success in Edgar's definitive
announcement that "if ever I return to you again, I'll bring you comfort."
Sly old Will has set a grand trap. And it's not just the plain import of the
sentences; it's the warm and cozy vocabulary: "host," "pray," "right," "thrive,"
"comfort," "grace." It's all light and clarity and optimism. But King Lear is
a play, as the audience well knows, in which "the worst is not/ So long as we
can say 'This is the worst'"  There's no bottom to this play's misery. And so
Edgar, briefly absent, returns to the stage with the blunt, four-word message
that is an arrow to every sentient heart: "King Lear hath lost." And onto this
mountain of grief Shakespeare piles even worse news: that Lear and his innocent,
loving daughter have been "taine" -- ta'en, taken, or as we would say, captured.
In the first moments of the scene the audience might be comforted that Lear
is in the charge of his daughter and Gloucester in that of his son, and that
young and sensible people have finally come to the aid of the old fools. But
good things do not last -- not in this play. The forces of evil that King Lear
unleashes are far from exhausted. They will continue to ruin lives and blight
hopes right to the end.

It's Shakespeare's usual practice to lead his audience to anticipate one thing,
but to give them another; this scene, like many such, is carefully constructed
to overturn easy expectations. It seems impossible but it's true that in
these eleven lines Shakespeare has embedded a second reversal that is equally
momentous as the first.

Here we are at last, at the very end of the play; the audience has every reason
to believe that it will be gratified with a big, climactic, flashy battle. It's
always been the way. But once again, expectations are defeated and the audience
gets both less and more than it anticipated. Instead of lances and swords and
duels to the death -- he allows us simply some offstage clatter. Why?  Before
he wrote King Lear, Shakespeare had staged many such battles. But he wasn't
a film director with an unlimited budget and with all sorts of technological
resources at hand; all he had at his disposal was a sunlit stage thirty-four
feet wide and a handful of supernumeraries. Not nearly enough. Shakespeare
adepts will be well aware that the playwright had already expressed, some half
a dozen years before, his great frustration with the limitations of his martial
scenes. In Henry V, the Chorus, speaking for the author, had apologized for
inadequate representations of warfare: "our scene must to the battle fly,/ Where
- O for pity- we shall much disgrace/ With four or five most vile and ragged
foils/ Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous/ The name of Agincourt." In King
Lear, Shakespeare shocked his audience with the outcome of the battle, but he
shocked them even more, if possible, by not giving them the battle at all. King
Lear is too serious, too desperate, too sad for yet another ridiculous brawl.
Nor did Shakespeare take the other easy option -- the long narrative of the sort
with which messengers had been regaling audiences from the days of Aeschylus.
Instead, Shakespeare offers his audience a profoundly revolutionary experience:
noise, followed by four monosyllables. "King Lear hath lost."  Could any artist
be more economical -- or more devastating.

These eleven lines therefore constitute an entire tragedy in little. Hope,
followed by loss and despair -- succeeded by a moderately uplifting moral.
Hearing the horrid news, Gloucester once again falls into suicidal thoughts.
"No further, sir.  A man may rot even here." The defeated old man is weary
of the world and anxious to leave it behind. But Edgar will have none of his
despair. "What, in ill thoughts again?" he says.  (The word "ill" is stronger
in Elizabethan English than it is now; it's closer in meaning to our "evil.")
"Men must endure/ Their going hence, even as their coming hither."  Shakespeare
doesn't say, "You must endure." It's the more general, "men must endure"; not
the individual, but the species. We're on this planet and we're human and the
world may be, as Chaucer says, "a thoroughfare of woe" and we're born in pain
and we die in pain, but it's our burden and our obligation to endure, to hold
on. It's not exactly an optimistic statement, but it's realistic, and stoic,
and appropriate to the context, and it's wise. And then Edgar/Shakespeare adds
a further expression of condensed and gnomic wisdom: "ripeness is all." 
"Ripeness is all" -- to expand the metaphor -- signifies that we human beings
can't opt out, can't surrender until the cycle of life draws to its natural
close. We, or men, or humanity, must continue the struggle to the last breath.
Shakespeare doesn't say, if you commit suicide, you're going to go to hell. He
doesn't, at this point in the magnificent eleven lines, threaten Gloucester with
eternal damnation. Instead, he exhorts him to persist, to endure, to live life
to the bitter end. And when Edgar says to Gloucester, "Come on," and father and
son leave the stage hand-in-hand, we appreciate and admire, even in the midst of
all the horror, the perennial human virtues of endurance and loyalty and love.

Source: 2007/06/worlds_largest_

Title: World's Largest Ball of Twine
Date: June 10, 2007

Today In Cawker City, Kansas, we made a pilgrimage to the world's largest ball
of twine. It's enormous: 40 feet in circumference and 14,000 pounds (when last
measured and weighed in 1986). And still growing. We were offered some twine to
add our bit, but declined. It would be desecration -- like adding a stone to the
great Pyramid at Giza or to Stonehenge. Instead, we paid silent homage.

We didn't stop to see the world's largest prairie dog in Oakley. Or the Russell
Stover birthplace in Alton. Nor even the Evel Knievel Museum in Topeka. Can't do
everything.

And yet there are these pseudo-sophisticates who say that there's no culture in
Kansas.

Source: 2007/06/travels_with_do

Title: Travels with Dorcas
Date: June 14, 2007

We've named our GPS navigatrix,  who gives instruction with a schoolmarmish
London accent, Dorcas (which is, along with Prunella, one of my very favorite
English given -- or as they call them,"Christian"-- names).  Dorcas has proved
to be, on the whole, a reliable friend. She had a little trouble in Cincinnati,
where, it turns out, there are two entirely distinct 225 Hill Terrace addresses.
She took us to the wrong one -- but I confess that in this case the error can
fairly be traced to information-inputter, Dr. M. himself.

Dorcas also had a royal hissy fit when we had to detour onto a single-lane-on-
the-other-side-of the-road somewhere in Ohio -- she "recalculated" twenty or
thirty times, until I had to temporarily stop her mouth.   It could only be my
imagination, but I thought I detected a trace of exasperation in her tone of
voice.

Despite these failings, the Dorcster is a dream at finding her way around
unfamiliar towns. No longer will I have to stop at gas stations for
incomprehensible advice about how to get back on the highway.  I just call on
Dorcas and I've got a friend, oh yeah, I've got a friend.

Source: 2007/07/rodent-wars

Title: Rodent Wars
Date: July 02, 2007

The house was unoccupied for a month and the mice moved in, bigtime. I peanut-
buttered some mouse traps and caught five or six adults. But I'm not finished
with the mice; there's some compelling evidence that an occasional mouse is
still attempting to share my food. Meanwhile, the lawn and garden are dotted
with mole-holes. The moles are harder to deal with than mice, but they stay
outside, so they're less offensive. In the compost pile, chipmunks are at work,
but I don't begrudge them their scraps of vegetables. I'm more worried about the
groundhogs, who can strip a flourishing garden in an evening. I've patrolled the
places in which they've installed themselves in the past, and, so far, there are
no signs that they've returned. One of these years, though -- the garden is a
tempting target. But the big news is the beavers. When we arrived, two weeks ago
Friday, the pond was up a good eighteen inches. It was also stagnant and there
was a huge heap of mud and sticks where the water should have been flowing out
rapidly. I tore out some of the material and produced a little Niagara  -- 
a couple of acre-feet of water leaving us in a hour. But by Saturday morning
the dam had been re-built and the water was up again. I got out the shovel and
hoe and totally dismantled the dam. I must have sent several hundred pounds of
mud and a big pile of twigs and branches downstream. Sunday morning I made my
inspection: no repairs. This meant one of two things: either the beavers had
moved on, or they don't work Sundays. But it's now two weeks, and they haven't
returned, so I'm declaring victory in the rodent wars.

This morning I found some suspicious stuff that looks like bat-droppings in one
of the shed rooms. Are bats rodents?

The north American beaver, Castor canadensis, is a formidable creature -- males
characteristically weigh 60 pounds and a big one can reach a hundred. But the
extinct local beaver was 5 to 6 times larger --bear size. It's a good thing I
didn't have to use shovel and hoe on the dam of one of those babies. I wouldn't
want to get on the bad side of a four hundred pound rodent --even if it were a
vegetarian.

July 5.  Sarah (see comments below) asks:  what's the problem with beavers.
Well, they render the pond unusable, for one. No more grandchildren peacefully
paddling. Because they create a new dike which water flows through, not over,
algae, twigs, and scum of all sorts accumulates, rots, and sinks to the
bottom.  The size of the pond expands very rapidly as the beavers move to
create a suitably large habitat -- so the fields become flooded.  The beavers
cut down all the trees that I've been carefully cultivating.  In a few months,
the land will be totally transformed.

I'm hoping that the beavers find a new home on someone else's land. I didn't
want to trap or kill them, but I'm certainly happy that I was able to discourage
them from taking up permanent residence.

Source: 2007/07/when-i-was-seve

Title: My Life in Periodicals
Date: July 02, 2007

When I was seven or eight years old, I was given a subscription (by whom?)
to a children's magazine (which one?) Was it my older brother who said,
"you still reading that magazine for babies?" Always susceptible to public
criticism, I soon lost interest in the publication. Since then, I've subscribed
and unsubscribed to dozens of periodicals. Here are some that I remember.
In my teens, Mad Magazine, of which I was a serious enthusiast, and had
been since Mad's Harvey Kurtzman comic book days. Also, Sport Magazine -- a
precursor of SI. And various pulp sci fi mags -- Astounding Science Fiction and
Galaxy Science Fiction and probably others that came and went. In the '60s,
political magazines: The Reporter, The Nation, and before it went totally wrong,
The New Republic. A decade later, Local Population Studies, The Journal of
Interdisciplinary History, The Psychohistorical Review, The History of Childhood
Quarterly. When I became serious about Shakespeare, I was an assiduous collector
of the Shakespeare Quarterly and the Shakespeare Newsletter and Shakespeare
Research and Opportunities and the Shakespeare on Film Newsletter. Closely
related: English Literary Renaissance and the George Herbert Journal (of which I
at one time owned every issue). In the '70s or '80s, Organic Gardening (sample
title -- "How We Grew Papayas on our Vermont Hillside Using Organic Methods and
Faith in God"); later, Fine Gardening (sample title: "How We Converted a Defunct
Brewery into an Extremely Expensive Bed-and-Breakfast Complete with a Replica
of an 18th-century Capability Brown Landscape"). At various times: Scientific
American, Science News, Bluebirds Across Vermont, the newsletter of the Southern
Vermont Dairy Goat Association, One Two Three Four (a magazine briefly in
existence that concerned itself with the early history of rock and roll), the
Atlantic, The Skeptical inquirer. Newspapers: The New York Times, United Opinion
(nowadays the Journal-Opinion), Behind the Times, the Daily Camera. Nowadays: 
Harvard Magazine, New Yorker, New York Review of Books, Northern Forests.

I'm sure there must be many others that I can no longer recall.

Source: 2007/07/good-news-for-t

Title: Good News for the Directionally Impaired
Date: July 09, 2007

I've been indoctrinated by our uncomprehending society to regard my geographical
dyslexia, or my directional disability, or whatever it's to be called, as a
shameful condition. So it's good to know that DD can be otherwise valued.

I've been informed by one of my readers that the Pilipino word ligaw has two
meanings: a) courtship, and b) totally lost. As a result, the adjective ligawan
can refer either to a person who has no sense of direction, or to someone
who is especially attractive to suitors. It stands to reason that a person
who has absolutely no awareness of direction (right or left, east or west)
whatsoever and is constantly buffaloed and flabbergasted by the well-meaning
instructions of friends and would-be guides must be extremely radiant, perhaps
even charismatically magnetic.

I find this new information to be both highly probable and extremely consoling.

Moreover, my admiration for Pilipino language and culture and good sense has
skyrocketed.

I therefore propose that the term "geographical dyslexia" be replaced by
"ligawan."

From this moment on, there's a new order to the universe: to be hopelessly
dysgeographical, hopelessly lost is now, officially, sexy.

Source: 2007/07/summers-at-sear

Title: Summers at Sears Rosebush
Date: July 19, 2007

I worked for Sears, Roebuck and Company at its warehouse on Utica Avenue during
the summers of 1957, 1958 and 1959. The job lasted for ten or twelve weeks
each year and I was paid $1.25 an hour for the first two summers and then was
catapulted to $1.30 for the third. At 40 hours a week, I could, in theory, earn
$50 a week and take home $40, but Sears managed to calculate it so that I had
worked 39 hours or 38.5 hours. Always less than forty. I was routinely baffled
and disappointed by my pay envelope. I'm utterly convinced that the time clock
was rigged, but there was no one to whom to protest, and if I had made a fuss, I
wouldn't have won my case anyway. No one did. (It might seem frivolous to worry
about a few cents, but cents mattered a lot more in the 50s than they do now.
Ten weeks at $40 amounts to $400. When I entered Cornell in 1956, tuition cost
$450 a semester and a half of a double room in the dorm for the year was $315.
At college, I survived on chocolate malts ($.25), hamburgers ($.25), and an
occasional celebratory cheeseburger ($.30).)

At the Sears warehouse, my job was to pinch hit for people who were absent for
their annual two-week vacations. I performed a variety of services of which I
have clear memories of just two. I was a substitute "receiver" on the loading
dock where I kept records of railroad cars and tried to minimize "dunnage." A
second job: I operated the manual telephone switchboard, inserting jacks into
receptacles in order to complete a connection; it's stunning to remember that
such equipment, now seen in old black-and-white movies and found only in museums
of early technology, was still in wide use. I can't remember my other jobs,
except that each one took about two hours to learn, was interesting for a day,
but stupefyingly boring for the remainder of the two-week stint. I developed
real sympathy for the people who were Sears lifers. What a test of will to
come to work every day, year in and year out, to the tedious rote dehumanizing
employment that the warehouse provided! Job satisfaction? I doubt that anyone,
employee or employer, had stumbled upon such a concept, let alone given it an
instant's thought.

The warehouse stocked "big-ticket" items: washing machines, dryers, and reefers
(refrigerators). Day one: sales orders were sorted and routed; day two: goods
were pulled and lined up on the dock in the reverse of the order in which they
would be delivered; day three: items were loaded onto trucks and sent out to
various Brooklyn neighborhoods. The system worked well but there were always
crises when a particular model in a particular color wasn't available. It might
be impossible for this generation of youth to believe, but in those pre-civil
rights years Sears didn't sell refrigerators at a fixed rate. Salesmen (at
the main store on Flatbush Avenue) received 11% of the negotiated price on an
item and therefore had an incentive to set the figure as high as possible.
It quickly became evident to me that there was a pattern: the poorer the
neighborhood, the higher the sale price. Moreover, 99% of big-ticket items
were purchased on time. The obvious corollary: the poorer the neighborhood,
the higher the negotiated rate of interest. Prices and interest were most
outrageous in Bedford- Stuyvesant, at that time -- and perhaps now -- Brooklyn's
Harlem. Occasionally I'd see a repossessed used model (no cardboard carton)
on the loading dock. It was to be delivered as if new to Bed-Stuy. When I
questioned the practice, I was told, very definitively, "Who's going to believe
them?" Working for Sears was, in a word that had not yet come into existence,
"radicalizing."

The warehouse was a Staszewski-Sullivan stronghold. No Italians, no Jews, no
"Negroes." Well, actually, there was one African-American, but he was assigned
to a broom rather than to a forklift. I didn't make any friends at the warehouse
(I was chronically, disablingly shy), and although I was fearful that I might
be ostracized as a "college kid," I was treated not unkindly. I suspect that my
paltry wage made me an object of pity.

An embarrassing moment: Sears held a sale on cheap, shiny suits. They sold so
many that I was called to the main store to help fold and pack. Even today I'm a
hopelessly inadequate folder and packer. It was a nightmare. After watching me
fumble for a few moments, the wives would snatch the suit impatiently from my
hands. "Here, sonny, let me do that."

A good moment: I was on the ROR desk for a week or so. ROR stood for "record
of return." When a refrigerator or washer came back, Sears didn't reimburse
the purchase price until the ROR had been cleared. One day, bored, trying
to kill some time, I was searching the desk to which I had been temporarily
assigned. Stuck behind a drawer I found a misplaced three-or-four-year-old ROR,
unprocessed. I called the telephone number on the ticket and asked the woman who
answered if she'd ever been reimbursed for the refrigerator she had returned --
$350 or so. There was a long silence. Then the woman broke into tears and into
fervent thanks. "I've been trying to get my money back from Sears for years.
I've tried everything. I can't get anyone to believe me." I arranged to have the
money sent to her and I felt that I had done a good deed. Not much satisfaction
for three summers of employment, but something.

The principal result of doing my time at Sears: a decision to give a wide
berth to the much revered "corporate sector." It's a decision that I've never
regretted, not for a moment.

Source: 2007/07/equines-and-ovi

Title: Equines and Ovines
Date: July 21, 2007

There are now five horses and about twenty-five sheep pastured on our fields.
The horses are Morgans; they're handsome and dignified. They have mucho gravitas
and very distinct personalities.  I'm proud to say that we're friends; the
horses make a point to trot over and say hello when I'm working nearby. They
have big brains (or, at least, room for big brains) and they seem to want to
communicate. I sweeten our intimacy with windfall apples. My relationship with
the sheep is less satisfactory. Frankly, we're not on the same wavelength. Today
I was cutting some brush (mostly beaked hazelnut and red maple) on the other
side of the pond right against the sheep fence. Because I know that sheep take
a gourmet interest in leaves of any sort (although we keep them away from lilac
and wilted cherry), I carried a stack of branches out into the field. The sheep
were interested but wary. Finally, one of the lambs (Braveheart, let's call him)
sidled up to the pile and pulled on a leaf -- at which point the whole stack
moved an inch or two. The entire flock started and immediately skedaddled back
home.

The sheep are Scottish Blackfaces. My neighbor Ed, who owns them, claims that
Scottish Blackfaces are the smartest of all ovines. Talk about damning-with-
extra-faint-praise. Here's how utterly brilliant sheep can be. There are two
gates right next to each other to a second pasture. One of the gates is for
the horses and one is for the sheep. The sheep gate is nothing more than a few
boards tacked together to make a space 4 feet high and 4 feet wide -- just large
enough so that the sheep can slip through but the horses can't. The gate for the
horses must be 12 or 14 feet across. It's metal and it rests on a hefty pair of
hinges. Sometimes it's left open to allow the horses access to the field. But
even when it's wide open, the sheep don't use it. Instead, they line up single
file at their own little gate and wait their turn. Not a one of them, even
Braveheart, has the sense to look around and notice that the main thoroughfare
is available to anyone who wants to show a little initiative.

The horses are organized. Gillian, who's a twenty-something-year old mare, is
the boss. Gabe, an ex-boy, is at the bottom. In between, the two young chestnut
mares and a newly gelded bay struggle for status. In social terms, the sheep
are a horse of another color. If there's a system to the society of sheep, I've
not been able to discern it. It's all random Brownian movement. I asked Ed,
who knows his sheep and has kept them for many years, if he'd ever been able
to discover the structure of ovine social life. "Near as I can figure out,"
he answered, "one of them gets it in his head to go somewhere, and the rest
follow."

Horses are noble; sheep are amusing but duller than Charles B., who was twice
left back in first grade in P. S. 217, and duller also than my long-time
colleague Joel S.

Whose idea was it, do you think, to placate the gods by sacrificing sheep? 
Were our ancestors trying to pull the wool over their deities' eyes?  Were they
being deliberately disrespectful?  What sort of offering is a sheep?

"Here, sir god, I'll kill you a sheep. It's enough. What would you want with a
horse?"

Source: 2007/08/christopher-mar

Title: Christopher Marlowe's Shoes
Date: August 11, 2007

At age seventeen, awash in hormones, I took a serious shine to the sensuous
words with which, in Marlowe's play, Faustus addresses Helen of Troy.

Oh, thou art fairer than the evening airClad in the beauty of a thousand
stars;Brighter art thou than flaming JupiterWhen he appeared to hapless
Semele;More lovely than the monarch of the skyIn wanton Arethusa's azured arms.

Just a bit more polished and glorious than what I myself could devise in the way
of compliment, the outer limit of which was "you're looking kinda nice."

No wonder I was impressed. Marlowe was, and still is, a young person's poet.
Ageless because he was murdered at age 29, he was flamboyant, unsubtle, and
hyperbolic beyond any ordinary hyperbole. And above all, musical. "Wanton
Arethusa's azured arms?" "Azured" only because the unusual adjective jauntily
reinforces the timbre of  "Arethusa."  In actual fact, even the most alluring
of female arms aren't blue --unless they are bruised, which Marlowe surely
did not mean to imply). "Wanton?"  In the story, Arethusa was chaste and
preserved herself from the approach not of the monarch of the skies, but of the
minor river-god Alpheus. Marlowe could trample on visual accuracy and learned
tradition. But who could grudge him when the outcome was sonic delight. Nor did
it seem to matter that Helen was compared not to a female goddess (many were
available) but to Jove himself. And so I toted Tucker Brooke's old-spelling
edition of Marlowe's works to my 1950s summer job, hoping and pretending that
the poet's escapist rhythms could put a little shine into the grim warehouse
where I earned my pittance.

I've just read a new biography of Christopher Marlowe. It's Park Honan's
Christopher Marlowe, Poet and Spy (Oxford, 2005). It's a good but not great
book. It's a revelation how much new information has come to light in the last
fifty years  -- not so much about Marlowe himself as about his co-workers in
the espionage business. Honan attends to Marlowe's plays, but he's clearly more
interested in spying and in the Elizabethan political milieu. He repeatedly
employs such formulas as "Marlowe could not help think... or "Marlowe must have
felt..." in order to lace public events to the poet's putative consciousness.
It's a doubtful procedure, but I suppose justified by the paucity of direct
biographical evidence. Honan is diligent in accumulating information but his
writing is careless and his interpretation of the plays hardly more than
slapdash.

It's no secret that Christopher Marlowe, son of a mere shoemaker, wrote
obsessively about men of lowly origin who achieve greatness. Faustus was (in
Marlowe's version only) "base of stock," Gaveston a commoner who attends a
king, and most notably Tamburlaine a simple shepherd who sets his foot on a
large slice of the Asian steppe. Honan thinks that Marlowe was ashamed of his
father's trade, and adduces as evidence the fact that the playwright "never
uses words such as shoe, shoemaker, or sole but distances himself from his
father's concerns. At the various times when he refers to leather, or boots,
the allusions are oddly repulsive: 'Covetousness: begotten of an old churl in a
leather bag,' 'a worm eaten leathern targets,' 'As if he had meant to clean my
boots with his lips,' 'our boots which lie foul upon our hands.'"  Such lines,
according to Honan, "suggest hatred" of the cobbler's work.

Perhaps, but not the whole story. In Tamburlaine, when the Scythian shepherd
woos Zenocrate, his seduction technique is to pile gifts at her feet. "A hundred
Tartars shall attend on thee/ Mounted on steeds, swifter than Pegasus./  Thy
garments shall be made of Medean silk,/ Enchast with precious jewels of mine
own./ With milk-white harts upon an ivory sled,/ Thou shalt be drawn amidst
the frozen pools,/ And scale the icy mountains lofty tops." And on, and on --
Marlowe, bless his enthusiastic heart, was never embarrassed by excess. No shoes
in the royal dowry?  But wait. There's also Marlowe's best known poem, the
"passionate shepherd to his love." The Arcadian shepherd, following at the heels
of the Scythian, also offers a long list of gifts to his beloved.

I will make thee beds of roses

And a thousand fragrant posies,

A cap of flowers, and a kirtle

Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle.

A gown made of the finest wool

Which from our pretty lambs we pull,

Fair linèd slippers for the cold,

With buckles of the purest gold.

"Fair-lined slippers for the cold,/ With buckles of the purest gold!!"   Not
your ordinary, trudging-around-Canterbury-in-the-mud shoes, but footwear
nevertheless. When he wrote these lines, "Marlowe could not help think" --
to use the formula of biographers -- that he had celebrated and ennobled his
father's profession.

Or so I like to think. Although John Marlowe probably did very little business
in the gold-buckle line.

Source: 2007/08/bring-me-the-he

Title: Bring Me the Head of Alberto Gonzales
Date: August 14, 2007

It's public knowledge that Bush recently underwent a colonoscopy, but the
doctors' reports have not been widely disseminated. It appears that, in addition
to the polyps, way up high, lodged against the pyloric sphincter, was found
the entire head of Attorney-General Alberto Gonzales. Until this discovery, it
was not generally known that Gonzales' head was missing; according to received
Washington wisdom, it was only his brains. A second smaller mass, puzzling
at first, has now been definitively identified as the nose of Senator Joseph
Lieberman (I-Conn).

(August 16)  Spike Schapiro adds: "Not the whole story. Bush's head was also
found in there. It had been missing since late in his last term as Texas
Governor."

Source: 2007/08/the-absence-of-

Title: The Absence of the Elms
Date: August 16, 2007

When we arrived here, in the summer of 1968, there were so many huge old dying
elms that we jokingly referred to the place as "Dead Elm Farm." One by one
every single elm succumbed to the virus. Bare and leafless, they dropped their
branches and then stood as barkless pillars until rot or a windstorm toppled
them. For many years there were young elms around, but as soon as they grew to
twenty or so feet, the disease would take hold. There are still a few adolescent
elm skeletons, but they're harder and harder to find.

We have some slippery elms and an occasional water elm, but the good old
American elm, a prominent feature of our landscape for several hundred million
years down to this present moment, is virtually extinct.

Am I a member of the last generation on earth to marvel at the majesty of these
great trees?  Sure the landscape is still rich -- maples, oaks, birches both
white and yellow, beeches, spruce, pine, fir, hemlock, the big-toothed aspen,
a cottonwood or two, cedars and our most plentiful wetlands inhabitant, the
deciduous conifer variously called the hackmatack or tamarack or larch (in
taxonomists' parlance, the larchy larch, larix laricina).  But I grieve for the
elms. Their absence makes a space in my mental landscape.

I don't, of course, long for the American chestnut, which was gone for fifty
years when I came on the stage. Just as my descendants won't notice the absence
of the elms.

Not far from the house an old elm has coppiced in an awkward place, and it needs
to be removed. It's ugly -- twenty or so stems ten or twelve feet high racing
for the sun. It should go. But I imagine that I'll leave the best of the shoots
and hope that it will thrive. It would be almost criminal to saw down the last
lonely elm. There's always the one-in-a-million chance that this unhandsome
specimen will prove to be virus-immune. Wouldn't that be something?

Source: 2007/08/a-exceedingly-w

Title: A Exceedingly Weird Dream
Date: August 22, 2007

Aficionados of this blague know that I'm directionally disabled. I don't think
that I've admitted that I suffer from frequent nightmares in which I'm totally
lost in a strange city or building.

Last night I experienced another such dysgeographical dream. I was trying to
walk north in some unidentifiable but mysterious city. A large building, which
seemed to me to be a junior high school, blocked my path. I decided to cut
through the building and continue on my way. I traversed various confusing
corridors and staircases until I was satisfied that I was about to exit the
correct door (one of many). But I couldn't get out because there were wires
(which looked like electric fencing for animals) strung across the doorway. I
attempted door after door and each one was wired -- chicken wire, barbed wire,
all sorts of stuff. I started to panic, as I often do in such dreams.

At last I decided to force my way through one of the doors. I tangled myself
in various wires which had somehow metamorphosed into thick chains. The chains
rattled loudly and I said to myself that someone would hear them  --  it was
as though I was back in school and had gotten myself into deep trouble with the
principal. And sure enough, along came a guy who seemed to be either a janitor
or a detective. He was speaking rapid Spanish and I couldn't understand him.
Although I begged him, he would not untangle me. I cried out, "I'm  tired of
this basura (basura is the word for garbage in Spanish, which happens to be
a language I've never studied and don't know). I shouted, "With basura, with
basura."  And then I thought, wow, the phrase "with basura" could be used as
the basis of a parody of Ezra Pound's Canto XLV, "With Usura:" ("With usura
hath no man a house of good stone/ each block cut smooth and well fitting/ that
delight might cover their face" etc. etc.)   A person could substitute the
word "basura" for the similar sounding "usura" and make good fun of Uncle Ez's
economic theories -- theories which are in fact nothing more than a great big
load of reactionary pseudo-medieval poppy-and-lily trash. Inspired, I decided to
wake up and get to work on the poem, but I wasn't alert more than a few seconds
before I came to the realization that the great world is probably not exactly
aching for a parody of Pound's Canto XLV.  Even an exceedinglyl clever parody.

Source: 2007/08/clean-deer

Title: Clean Deer
Date: August 27, 2007

That most malicious of all living creatures, the white-tailed deer, has been
destroying the phlox. Also the roses, the blueberries, the plums, the hollyhocks
(tender new leaves only), the day lilies, and most particularly, the precious
new apple trees. They've weakened the Wealthy, noshed the Norland and bonsaied
the Baldwin. My friends and neighbors suggest various remedies. Eight-foot high
fences is the consensus -- although occasionally, allowed a running start, the
deer are able to leap even these. But do I want an unsightly eight-foot fence
around my garden and orchard? Let's consider some other wisdome of the ffolke.

Should I buy human hair from the local barber and hang bags of it around the
orchard? I don't think so -- far too voodooish for a post-Enlightenment gardener
such as myself. I could douse the grounds in coyote urine, though I'm not sure
that I want to milk a coyote -- or, a fortiori, a mountain lion. I know one
kind of urine that doesn't repel deer  -- at least when anecdotally applied.
Some folk, more determined than I could ever be, soak rags in human urine and
ring the garden with them, but I suspect that I would not savor either the
administration or the aesthetic repercussions of this method. A strong solution
of garlic might work, but it's deer I want to repel, not vampires. A spray of
peppermint seems like a more pleasant choice, but apparently it must be renewed
after every rainfall, which is highly impractical in our moisture-abundant
climate. A recipe of a slightly beaten egg mixed with a gallon of water is
claimed to be effective, but must be applied nightly -- too much cookery for me.
Some people claim that moth balls repel deer, but the same people claimed that
moth balls would repel raccoons. My raccoons took the moth balls for marbles and
made a game of them and of me. Decaying fish heads would no doubt repel deer,
but they'd also repel bees, birds, friends, and family. Even if I could procure
them ("I'll have a couple of pounds of decaying fish heads, please"), do I
really want to sit, contemplative, in a garden of such stinkiness?

Besides, I don't believe in these superstitions. I want data. I want double-
blind experiments. I want science.

My sister, who lives in prime white-tail country, hangs bars of Ivory soap in
her apple trees. It works, she says. Not credible, not scientific, say I. But
last week we visited her, and there they were, a half-dozen or so thriving young
apple trees. Not a nibble on a one of them. New growth allowed to be new growth.

Hers are New Hampshire deer. I bet that our Vermont deer will sniff the soap,
chortle, and proceed to bathe face and hoofs. We'll soon have the cleanest deer
in all creation.

In desperation, I've joined the ranks of the credulous. I've threaded Ivory soap
with baling twin and hung a cake on each of the young apples. White rectangular
scarecrows. But for the first time all summer, I'm seeing new growth. This could
work.

One of my neighbors says, "No, no, don't use Ivory soap -- use Irish Spring."

Source: 2007/09/why-i-hate-mach-1

Title: Why I Hate Machines
Date: September 05, 2007

So I've been trying, by god, to figure out why the riding mower has been cutting
on an angle, the right side leaving the grass higher than the left, and I've
been crawling under the machine looking at the cutting deck from all angles
and not able to understand the mechanism except it's obvious that it's not
parallel to the ground, and my neighbor Ed was by and he's kind of a genius with
machinery which I most definitely am not, and I said to him, Ed would you take
look and see why the mower is cutting at an angle and he said, Well, here's one
problem your left rear tire is flat which made me feel really dumb because I
was so busy trying to understand the suspension system on the deck that I never
even looked at the tire and I said, Flat, how can it be flat, I never run it
anywhere but over the grass and he said, Well, look right there it's got a thorn
in it, A thorn, I said, how can a thorn penetrate a Carlyle Super Tuff tire, and
he said, Oh yeah they do that, but I can fix it, I'm busy today but I'll do it
tomorrow I have a system you just push through what looks like knitting needle
with sticky stuff on the end and pull it out, it will seal it right up, it's a
tubeless tire isn't it? and I said Yes it is, and if you could fix it tomorrow
that would be great, well next day he took the tire and tried it his way but he
couldn't get it to hold air so he says Take it down to PTOs and they'll patch
it from the inside, so I put it in the trunk of the car and drove to town and
they fixed it and then I put it back on the axle, it has three small washers
and one large washer and one of those spring nuts and I started the engine but
by god the mower wouldn't move and I thought what the heck is going on here, I
put everything back exactly as it came off and it was running just fine when
I took it off so what could I possibly be doing wrong, I took the wheel off
and put it on again and I still couldn't figure it out so I got in the car and
drove over to Ed's, he was cutting wood but he stopped and I said, Ed, what's
wrong with that lamb, why do you have him penned up all by himself and he said,
you know how the lambs are always butting heads and pushing each other around,
well I went out in the field and he was down, couldn't move a bit, so I took
him home and I don't know whether his brains are addled or he's really hurt,
I thought we'd better have him slaughtered but you can see he's doing better,
getting up and eating so we'll hold off a day, and I said maybe he has a bad
back like me, and he said, No, he's too young for a bad back, so I said, Well,
maybe he has vertigo like you, which is not all that funny because Ed lost a
week to vertigo last June, and he kind of laughed and said, Well, is your mower
working now, and I said, Not exactly, the engine's fine and the belt turns but
it's not moving frontwards or backwards and he said, How can that be, I'll come
over and take a look so later that day he came by and sure enough it wouldn't
move, so we took off the wheel again and studied it but I certainly couldn't
figure it out and he couldn't either, everything looked good and perfect, we
puzzled over it for a while and then he called the John Deere dealer in North
Haverhill and the technician said maybe you lost the key when you took off the
wheel and Ed said, O yes of course, we must have lost the key, I didn't think of
that, and I said What the heck is the key and he said Well, in a lot of these
machines the axle is broached which means there's a slot in it and a slot in the
wheel and you have to have a key which is just a small piece of metal otherwise
the axle will spin but the wheel won't rotate, so we looked all around for the
lost key but couldn't find it and then Ed said, Look at your tire they didn't
even mount it right, it's out of round, you'd better bring it back in and while
you're there check if the key is in the shop somewhere, it might have stuck in
the wheel because of the grease, so I took the wheel and put it in the trunk and
drove back to PTOs and showed him that the tire was out of round, the owner was
embarrassed about the bad job he had done and wouldn't even look me in the eye
but he re-mounted the tire and when he finished I said, By the way, you didn't
happen to find the key I lost it, and he said I'll look inside but he couldn't
find it, so he said I'll make you another one which was nice of him though the
key is only at most a 50 cent piece but it saved me from having to go to Napa
Auto Parts or drive 30 minutes to North Haverhill to the John Deere dealer,
so he made the part it took him only a couple of minutes, he had the stock he
just had to cut and file a two inch piece, I brought it home and I put the key
in the slot and put the wheel on, I had to use a board for a lever to get the
rear of the mower up in the air and it was tricky because I held the board with
my right hand and the wheel in the left but I managed alright and then I got
on the tractor and started the engine and everything worked perfectly except
that the tractor still wouldn't go either forward or backward, I took the wheel
off and put it on again, but it still wouldn't work, so I walked over to Ed's
and I said, Ed, I can't for the life of me figure it out, I got the key and it
fit just perfectly but the machine still doesn't move, and he said It's got to
work, it makes perfect sense, I said, Hey look, your lamb looks a lot better
but why did you put a hog panel across your driveway, he said It's because of
the dog, he's been getting out, tomorrow he's going to be snipped and that will
quiet him down a bit, which is a good idea because the dog is far too friendly
even to me and I don't particularly like the dog, he's a beagle mix, not as bad
as their other dog which was a rescue dog a bulldog, very ugly in my opinion,
which also got out and trotted over to the pottery down the road where he was 
seen running off with the Murrays' Silkie in his mouth, a Silkie is a fancy
chicken, they charged Ed a hundred and sixty dollars for vet bills and mental
anguish, the chicken died anyway, so Ed got out his rifle and shot the bulldog
and then dug a hole four feet deep, he said that all the way down it was nothing
but powder, it's been that dry the last few weeks, anyway Ed came by again and
we tried the machine and it wouldn't go forward or backward and I was about to
surrender and load up the damn thing and take it back to the dealer when we
lifted both back wheels off the ground and suddenly the axle which hadn't been
turning even though the belt had been turning started to spin, it must have been
something about the gears that didn't mesh properly anyway we put the wheel back
on again and I started it up and by god it ran as good as ever but I had wasted
a whole day fussing with the mower just because it had picked up a goddamn thorn
probably blackberry which is in brief why I hate machines

Source: 2007/09/cuisine-de-minn

Title: Cuisine de Minnesota
Date: September 14, 2007

The Ranch Restaurant (family-owned, not a chain) in Rochester, Minnesota offered
a splendid salad bar. In addition to the conventional fare (greens, onions,
tomatoes, peppers, etc.), there were some items that were distinctly regional:
herring in wine sauce, baked beans, cherry jello topped with whipped cream,
chocolate pudding and also Watergate Salad.

Watergate Salad, new to me I must confess, is a melange of pistachio pie
filling, mini-marshmallows, canned pineapple chunks (with syrup), pecans, and
Cool-Whip. Here's a question for those who are expert in Minnesotan fine dining:
is your Watergate Salad best eaten with or without herring?

Our waiter at The Ranch, asked whether the tomato soup was prepared with cream,
replied, "It's a tomato biscuit with peas and stuff in it." He was slightly off
the mark: lots of stuff in the bisque but alas no peas.

Source: 2007/09/wild-turkeys-in

Title: Wild Turkeys in My  Garden
Date: September 16, 2007

Even a decade ago, wild turkeys were an utmost rarity, and the sight of one in
the distance caused everyone to stop and peer. But each succeeding year, there
are more and more of them. They're everywhere -- on the roads, in the fields,
even under the apple trees, gorging themselves. Last week, a hen and a dozen
poults walked bold as brass right up onto our front lawn, ten feet from the
deck.  Didn't even bother to hasten away -- took their own sweet time wandering
off.

I don't believe that turkeys were native to Vermont, but it's well known
that since the reintroduction, they've expanded well beyond their former
range. They're adaptable and wily creatures.

The domestic turkey is legendarily stupid. Its brains have waned as its breasts
have waxed. The wild turkey, on the other hand, is smart, though given to
occasional lapses. Sometimes the hen leads her brood through the woven wire
fences. She knows the route, but one or two of the poults will find themselves
barricaded from the flock. They set up a wail. The flock comes to a nervous
halt. After a while, the spectator -- me -- can't endure the tension. I slowly
head over to see what I can do, trying not to alarm the lost fowl -- whereupon
the poults suddenly remember that they know how to fly. Unlike their domestic
cousins, they're strong fliers. They clear the fences with ease.

I now understand a few words of Turkeyish. The male gobble: "I am very large and
handsome; come mate with me."  The poult peep: "I'm lost.  Where is everyone."
The hen cluck: "Come along with me." The double cluck: "Everyone fly into the
trees."

Here's what worries me. Every year there are more and more turkeys. Even the
hunters can't keep up with the population explosion. Will the turkeys turn into
a rural version of pigeon? Overrun our gardens and fields?

Where are the fisher-cats, the foxes, the coyotes, the hawks?  Get to work,
guys. While turkeys are not exactly sitting ducks, they're still very tasty.

Source: 2007/09/worlds-finest-n

Title: Tolstoi's Moth
Date: September 24, 2007

A third of the way through Anna Karenina -- the finest novel in this or any
other universe -- Anna's deceived husband Karenin reluctantly brings himself to
consult with a famous divorce lawyer.

The lawyer was short, stocky, and bald, with a dark, reddish beard, long light
eyebrows, and a bulging forehead.  He was dressed like a bridegroom, from his
cravat and double watch chain to his patent leather boots.  He had a clever,
rustic face, but his clothes were dandified and in poor taste....  Won't you
sit down?"  He indicated an armchair beside a writing desk covered with papers,
and sat down himself behind the desk, rubbing together his little hands with
their short fingers overgrown with fair hairs, and leaning his head over to one
side.

The lawyer's "clever rustic face" is the tipoff that he's of peasant origin
and probably only a generation or two away from scythe and flail. With his
pretentious get-up and his bulging forehead and his stubby hirsute fingers, he
is repulsive, even brutish. O, the indignity of it all -- an aristocrat like
Karenin having to seek help from such a pretentious upstart!

And there's worse. The lawyer is not only a social-climber; he's also a ruthless
opportunist.

He had just settled into this pose when a moth flew over the table:  with a
rapidity it would have been impossible to expect, the lawyer unlocked his hands,
caught the moth, and again assumed his previous posture.

I would not want to assert that Karenin is precisely a moth. Nevertheless,
Tolstoi certainly suggests that, given half a chance, the lawyer would not
hesitate to strip his client's wings. It's clear that the awkward relations
between the lawyer (whom Tolstoi never even bothers to name) and Karenin are
governed by centuries of master-serf antagonism and by the prospect of revenge.

Tolstoi quickly brings this episode to a close and never brings the lawyer back
on stage. But he lets him exit exultantly.

He bowed deferentially, showing his client out the door. But once he was alone,
he abandoned himself to his glee.

Our lawyer now decides that it is time to give up moth-catching.  Instead,

he had definitely made up his mind to have his furniture reupholstered in plush
the following winter, like Sigonin's.

The dog-eat-dog lawyer is convinced that he can transform Karenin's distress
into hard cash. The fees, which he savors prematurely, will allow him to catch
up with his rival.

The world of Anna Karenina is both tough and unsentimental -- and revealed with
great economy by its accomplished creator. It's a long novel, but packed with
significance, every rift loaded with rich shining ore.  olstoi takes on all the
great perennial and nineteenth-century issues -- class, wealth, family, labor,
spirituality, city and country, science, women's rights, royalty and democracy,
agricultural reform, bureaucracy, sexuality, etc. -- but he still manages to
extract significance even from the lowly, Czarist moth.

It had been thirty years since I re-read Anna Karenina. Now I've resolved to
make it at least a biennial event. It's too astonishing a novel to let lie
fallow.

Source: 2007/09/some-nights-ago

Title: No Words, No Words?  Hush.
Date: September 27, 2007

A few nights ago, I attended a performance by our local treasure, the ever-
glorious Takacs Quartet. Without asking my leave, they chose to play works
by Aarvo Part and Philip Glass. I suppose that there must be virtues to
"minimalist" music, but a single motif played over and over again in the same
tempo, with the same unvarying dynamics, and in the same non-key -- what's the
point? Music without melody, harmony, or rhythm is like a novel without a plot
or like a severely abstract painting. Sorry folks, I'm antediluvian. A relic. I
want a story and I want it dressed in rhyme and meter. It's exhilaration that I
crave, not forty-five long minutes of total ripvanwinkleization.

I was already in a sulky mood at the intermission when Mr. and Mrs. Talkative
behind me, after gushing over the minimalists, directed their intellects toward
Shakespeare. Mrs T. announced, "You don't need to read a Shakespeare play before
seeing it. Just read a plot summary so that you know what's happening." Mr. T.
agreed:  "Absolutely. Going to the theater is all about the costumes and the
set and the business. As long as you have a general idea of the story, you don't
need to understand the words."

No need to understand Shakespeare's words?  Go to the theater and ignore the
words of the finest poet in human history?  What are the Talkatives thinking? 
The costumes are the work of the costumer; the business is the work of the
director and the stage designer. The only part of the performance that is
Shakespeare's is the language.

One of the teachers of my youth, the late and much lamented Alfred Harbage  --
the finest Shakespeare scholar of his generation -- used to say that he didn't
care what the actors did on stage as long as he could hear the words.  I'm not
nearly so tolerant. I don't want Rosiland and Orlando to send email messages to
each other -- I want them to articulate. I don't want Cinna and Metullus Cimber
to be dressed as blackshirt fascist thugs. And I certainly don't want Snug and
Bottom to ride to the Duke's Oak on motorcycles. Such antics are stupid and
distracting.

The performance for which I'd pay a premium price is one at the Theatre, or
at the old Globe, or at the Blackfriars during the years when Shakespeare was
teaching the parts to Burbage and Hemmings and Kemp. Dollars to doughnuts he
insisted that the actors pronounce the words distinctly.

After the grating intermission, the Talkatives ran out of insights and my
indignation began to wane. Eventually Ed, Andras, Karoly and Gerry returned to
the stage and played one of Haydn's great Opus 76 quartets. It was transcendent
-- melodic, intelligent and intelligible, warm, robust and sensuous. It was
music.

Source: 2007/09/just-checking

Title: A Scene from my Youth
Date: September 30, 2007

This Here is a photograph of Coney Island Avenue, the grim commercial
thoroughfare along which I crept to school unwillingly like snail between the
years 1944 and 1952. The unknown photographer who left us this record stood at
the corner of Newkirk Avenue, just in front of the P. S. 217 schoolyard, and
pointed his camera north toward Ditmas Avenue. It's the east side of the street;
on the west side stood a used-car lot and a gas station, where, if the view were
more panoramic, signs reading "Veedol" and "Mechanic on Duty" would have been
visible.

It takes only a few seconds of detective work to date the photograph. In the
center is the marquee of the Leader Theater, which advertises the 1947 release
It Happened in Brooklyn, a soldier-returns-home musical with Frank Sinatra,
Kathryn Grayson, Peter Lawford, and especially Jimmy Durante, who was clearly
the neighborhood favorite.  The second feature, Undercover Maisie, a policier
with Ann Sothern and Barry Nelson, was released in the same year. (The double
bill was standard -- and at 14 cents for kids and a quarter for adults, a darn
good value). It's early autumn not only because the ivy and, in the distance,
a Norway maple are still in full leaf, but because the Casa del Rey advertises
High Holy Day services (the orthodox congregation's synagogue on 18th Avenue
had not yet been constructed). I would guess that the large traffic sign that
dominates the frame has something to do with the fact that the old trolley
tracks had recently been removed. The shops near the Leader are too small to
identify, but I remember Singer's drug store, Safier's candy store, a shoe
repair place, a small liquor store owned by P. V. Melia, and Joe Montuori's
barber shop.  At the moment the camera snapped, I was eight years old, in Mrs.
Sherwood's third grade class at P. S. 217.

The architecture is hodge-podge -- the featureless apartment house and shops,
the vaguely deco Leader, and then, closer to the camera, the what-the-heck-is-
it-doing-there Moorish Casa del Rey (for weddings and other gatherings;  I
passed it thousands of times but never once entered).

The man at the right of the frame, jingling his car keys in the pocket of his
voluminous slacks, stares at the camera unenthusiastically.

It's a dreary picture, I'm afraid. Gray. A nondescript street in a nondescript
neighborhood.

I'm trying, but I just can't seem to work up the requisite nostalgia for the old
country.

Source: 2007/10/jane-austen-nud

Title: Jane Austen Nude
Date: October 10, 2007

Today's posting is contributed by the art historian, Alan Saxe-Popette.

Jane Austen's quiet private life has been thoroughly explored for events of
emotional import. It is therefore a wonder that there has been such inattention
to the portrait, identified some forty years ago,in which the novelist,
nude, reclines on a green baize fainting couch. One would have supposed
that writers of fiction and especially film directors would have seized on
the opportunities that the portrait presents, especially since the only other
surviving representation of Jane Austen is her sister Cassandra's amateurish,
unflattering, and essentially asexual sketch. The Austen nude has faded
inexplicably from view. Older readers of this blague will surely remember the
mid-1960s flurry of journalistic interest, some of it nasty and anti-feminist
-- a cover story in Time ("Did Jane Disrobe") as well as the scandalmongering
reportage of Huntley and Brinkley.  But just like the revelations concerning
Wordsworth's French mistress and like the notoriety that greeted Edith Wharton's
pornographic short story Beatrice Palmato, the brouhaha over the Austen nude
quickly evaporated.

The portrait itself, a full-length study in chalk and colored pencils, resides
in the Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley and his Circle, which is
housed in Room 319 of the New York Public Library, and  may be viewed upon
request. Perhaps it is unfortunate that the first account of the Austen nude
appeared in the pages of the Keats-Shelley Journal, a publication sponsored
by the Pforzheimer.  More scholarly attention might have been paid if the
identification of the portrait had been announced in a journal of larger
circulation, such as Nineteenth-Century Fiction or Romantic Studies.

The late R. W. Chapman, who knew more about Jane Austen than any scholar of his
generation, resisted the idea that the portrait was genuine. His attack on its
authenticity, published as an appendix to the revised edition of the Complete
Works of Jane Austen, is scathing, but is rather a reflection of Chapman's
Victorian prejudices than of the facts. Chapman was a traditionalist who
believed that young females, even brilliant female novelists, should be, above
all, decorous. His Jane Austen was a bulwark of conservative and hierarchical
values and he would certainly not have recognized the modern revisionist
conception that situates the novelist in an uneasy alliance with transgression
and subversion. In private, moreover, Chapman was notoriously prudish. He is
reported to have confessed to his great friend Kathleen Tillotson (herself a
well-known scholar of English fiction) that "I just don't want to go to my grave
thinking that I've looked upon dear Miss Austen's pubic hair."

In the 1960s, there was considerable resistance to the authenticity of the
portrait, perhaps because, compared to Cassandra's prim drawing, the new
rendering revealed a young woman in full beauty and bloom. Jane retains the
familiar apple cheeks and the dark hair, but her eyes are knowing and forthright
rather than subdued, and her long, glossy and loose black locks, secured only by
a single cherry-colored ribbon, appear as they were described by Jane Austen's
grand-niece, who recalled her aunt having "large dark eyes and a brilliant
complexion, and long long black hair down to her knees." Opinions will of course
vary, but many will find that in this portrait, Jane looks somewhat Italian
or Gypsy or perhaps even Levantine. Her expression is eager, her waist slim,
her legs short but shapely, and her breasts, despite their surprisingly large
aureoles, magnificent.

Misgivings about the portrait's authenticity survived even until the 1970s. But
then it was established that the chamber in which Austen posed was the drawing
room at Steventon that she shared with Cassandra. There's a useful description
in Constance Hill's Jane Austen, Her Homes and Friends (1902). Hill, it is well
known, had access to the Lefroy family papers. The Lefroys were important
connections of the Austens. It was James Lefroy who wooed Jane and then
inexplicably broke off his relationship with her and retired to Ireland. Jane's
brother James Austen's daughter married a Lefroy; Jane's grand-niece Anna
Lefroy, the child of this union, left a remembrance of her great-aunt's sitting
room. "I remember," wrote Anna, "the common looking carpet with its chocolate
ground that covered the floor, and some portions of furniture. A pointed press,
with shelves above for books, that stood with its back on the wall next the
Bedroom, & opposite the fireplace; my Aunt Jane's Pianoforte -- & above all, on
a table between the windows, above which hung a looking glass, 2 tonbridge-ware
work boxes of oval shape, fitted up with ivory barrels containing reels for
silk, yard measures, etc." In the portrait, these two same oval Tunbridge work-
boxes appear just to the left and behind Jane Austen's head; the keyboard of
"Aunt Jane's Pianoforte" is in part visible to the right; the oval cheval-glass
is exactly as Anna described it. Moreover, the ingenious young art historian
Oksana Sartry, who, using powerful magnifiers, was able to identify the books
in the press, discovered not only Richardson's Sir Charles Grandison and Robert
Bage's Hermsprong, both novels known to have been much studied by Austen, but
also a folio with the words "Volume the Second" inscribed on its spine. "Volume
the Second" was the name that the novelist gave her manuscript collection of
early works (which included the unfinished novel, The Watsons). With this
confirmatory evidence, skepticism was at last dispelled. Austen's remark to
her sister Cassandra (reporting on a day spent with James Lefroy), "imagine to
yourself everything most profligate and shocking" took on new meaning.  And
what did Jane mean when she wrote to her sister, "here I am once more in this
Scene of Dissipation & vice, and I begin already to find my Morals corrupted."

What was the exact occasion for the portrait and why was it found among the
Lefroy papers? There are two views. The first is that Jane sent it to James
Lefroy as part of the courtship process: "here's what you get if you marry
me." This explanation is certainly possible, but the greater likelihood is that
it was a "revenge" portrait: "here's what you have scorned."

That the drawing has sexual content is undeniable, but it is absurd to think,
as some have suggested, that Jane Austen would allow herself to be depicted in
a post-orgasmic state. It is true that Jane's skin is rosy and flushed and
that her plump nipples are erect, but the placement of her hand just above
the tendrils of abundant black hair is traditional and would not seem to
indicate that she had pleasured herself. Those who argue that Jane had recently
masturbated seem, frankly, to have surrendered to prurience. I myself, after the
very closest scrutiny, can discover no evidence whatsoever of what one writer
has called "a clitoral cleft in arousal." Jane Austen was bold, but she would
never, ever, have exceeded the bounds of modesty.

Source: 2007/10/robert-bages-he

Title: Robert Bage's Hermsprong (1796)
Date: October 13, 2007

Back in the early '60s, when I was just beginning to learn about literature,
I enrolled in a course on the eighteenth-century English novel. I diligently
worked my way through an ambitious syllabus. There were more than twenty novels,
some of them monumental in size, like Clarissa and Tristram Shandy;  and others
blessedly brief, like Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield and Mackenzie's Man of
Feeling. Diligent lad that I was, I read every single word, every syllable.
In addition to the required reading, there was also an extensive register of
recommended works. On this intimidating list was Robert Bage's Hermsprong,
which, forty-five years after the fact, I've at last read. Better very very late
than never at all.

It's a good book -- not a masterpiece, but very fine, very enjoyable. The plot
is  unoriginal. An heiress falls for a fortune-hunter, elopes to the continent,
but is rescued just before the threatened deflowering; a domineering wicked
old guy forces his unwilling daughter into marriage with an idiot aristocrat;
a man of mysterious origin turns out to be the estate's true heir -- that sort
of thing. But other elements are less cliched. Charles Hermsprong, raised among
Indians on the banks of the "Powtomack," is a plain-spoken 'merican radical;
Maria Fluart is as witty and defiant and independent as Benedick's Beatrice --
sometimes it seems as though her lines could have been composed by Oscar Wilde
himself. Maria is by far the most vibrant character in the novel. If Bage were
as advanced a thinker as he sometimes pretends to be, he would have let his hero
marry her.It's disappointing that Hermsprong falls for a conventional dutiful
young simperer, while Maria, too strong for any man in the novel, is left on the
putative shelf.

Here's a passage that jumps out at the reader. It's from a description of two of
the novel's minor characters:

"But the tender interest they had in each other was torn asunder by pride and
prejudice, and this pride and prejudice, she feared...."

Whoa, daddy!  Jane Austen's novel was originally named "First Impressions" and
only borrowed its familiar title from Bage late in the game. It is obvious that
right there on Jane's bookshelf, next to Sir Charles Grandison and Tom Jones and
the novels of Frances Burney, was a copy of Hermsprong, which Ms. Austen (unlike
your dilatory '60s student) was smart enough to read in a timely manner.

Source: 2007/10/im-trying-to-re

Title: More on Religion and the Rockies
Date: October 18, 2007

I'm trying to remember the name of the superstitious 1940s Dodger pitcher, who,
when the inning ended, would flip his mitt into the first base coaching box,
then walk over and reposition it so that the fingers pointed directly toward the
mound.  (I'd better stop here and remind the young folks that in days of yore,
players left their gloves out on the field when they came in for their turn at
bat. I can't remember exactly when the Commissioner prohibited this harmless,
colorful custom -- was it in the late 50s?)

Baseball players have always been notably superstitious. They don't step on foul
lines or talk about no-hitters in progress.  They wear the same underwear or
socks for the length of a winning streak.  Turk Wendell had to brush his teeth
and chew licorice between innings.  Wade "Chicken Man" Boggs, a good enough
hitter not to solicit divine intercession, had to eat a meal of chicken before
every game.  Craig Biggio refused to wipe the dirt or the pine tar off his
helmet for an entire season.  Baseball is where the Curse of the Bambino and
the Curse of the Billy-Goat are items of faith. It's also where players wear
gold crosses in their ears and ostentatious floppy crucifixes around their necks
and point triumphantly to the sky when they bloop a single to center.

Chewing licorice and making the sign of the cross are equally effective
procedures, as far as I can tell.  The only difference is that one is a private
superstition while the other has the sanction of religion.  It's individual
delusion versus mass delusion.

At this writing, the biblethumpatudinous Colorado Rockies, baseball's most
Christian-y organization -- the only team with a chaplain on its payroll -- have
won twenty-one of twenty-two games and will (after an eight-day timeout) head
for their first-ever Series.  It's astounding and wonderful, and I'm rooting
for the home town boys.  But my enthusiasm is tempered because fanatics are
already calling it "a miracle," or "destiny," or claiming that "it's meant to
be."  Baseball's a gritty, subtle game, and the Rocks are winning because
they're playing excellent defense, getting timely hits, making great pitches
at the crucial moments, and committing very few mental errors -- not because
of their prayer circle or their morning bible study or because the Great
Signifier in the Sky has decided that this year, the Rockies are kosher and the
Diamondbacks are treyf.

But, say the superstitious, it's unlikely that any team could take twenty-one of
twenty-two.  Of course it's unlikely.  But if statistics tells us anything,
they tell us that even unlikely events will occur some of the time.

Here's what's genuinely unlikely:  that the Rockies' shortstop, Troy
Tulowitski, who (if there's any justice under the heavens) will be soon named
rookie of the year, has a "Christian" name that is an acronym for The Rookie
Of Year. What, pray tell, are the odds?  And also, that the Rockies' have a
catcher, Yorvit Torrealba, whose name is an anagram for "real toy vibrator." 
Such an extraordinary unlikelihood has never happened before and it's never
going to happen again, and it's entirely more remarkable than any winning
streak, however extended.  Yorvit Torrealba is one of those gosh-darned
superstitious sky- pointers.  It would suit my Manichean view of the world
if Yorvit would also point downward, toward Sheol or Gehenna or whatever is
supposed to be down there, every time he futilely chases a high fast ball, which
he does far too frequently.

I would also like to point out that the Rockies have a reliever named LaTroy
Hawkins, whose name would also anagrammatize into "real toy vibrator" if he
would simply rechristen himself LaTroy Riverboat.  Coincidence?  Or destiny.

Go Rockies!

Source: 2007/10/real-live-dialo

Title: Real Live Dialogue
Date: October 28, 2007

First the exchange, exacty as it occured in real life, and then the gloss.

The cashier: "Breakfast of Champions?"

Me: "Well, I'm a vegetarian."

The cashier: "Yeah, I know, all organic."

So here's the story. We were driving across the western, uninhabited part
of South Dakota, heading toward the glorious Black Hills and the Badlands.
Somewhere out there, I stopped for gas. It was about 9:00 or 9:30 in the
morning.

As a general rule, I don't drink coffee or other caffeinated liquids, but when
I'm driving long distances, I keep a Coca-Cola by my side on the conservative
principle that whatever damage the caffeine might do to my eccentric heart,
it will be probably be a lot less dangerous than falling asleep, crashing the
car, and mangling myself and my passengers. Moreover, I'm not a consumer of
candy bars, but the day before, somewhere in Minnesota, A. had treated herself
to a package of M &Ms.  I had wheedled a handful or so from her and I had
decided to make good her loss.  So when we stopped to refill the gas tank in
Somewhere, South Dakota, I purchased, at one of those roadside convenience
stores, a 12 oz bottle of Coke and a small plastic bag of multicolored chocolate
candies, and the friendly, tough, old lady who kept the register looked at
me aslant and said, affectionately, questioningly but also with a touch of
scorn, "Breakfast of Champions." I was feeling defensive and while I could
have responded by explaining that I don't usually eat junky stuff, and that it
wasn't even my breakfast, I didn't feel that I needed to apologize, so I went
the other route and capitulated: "Well, I'm a vegetarian." Which made the lady
smile a bit, as I had hoped, and made me feel as though we were on the same
mock-serious wavelength.  It was a moment of deep communication, far superior
to the commonplace vacant salesperson/customer/middle-of-nowhere encounter.
Feeling a kindred spirit, the lady went along with the game and both assimilated
and expanded on my gambit, saying, "Yeah, I know, all organic' --an expression
that was in part friendly but which also carried a little bite, as if she
detected that I was from some tofu/granola city (which, in fact, is true, even
though I myself am an old-fashioned cheeseburger --as opposed to veggieburger --
kind of guy). Altogether, it was one of the more satisfying conversations I've
had in the last while. A moment of deep and profound understanding, the kind of
intimate communication that we all strive for all day, every day, even out there
on a two-lane in one of the "flyover" states.

Source: 2007/10/my-first-earthq

Title: My First Earthquake
Date: October 31, 2007

Here we are again in Alameda, California.  Last night, just after 8 pm, we were
lying in bed reading (me: Conrad's The Secret Agent;  she, Roth's Exit, Ghost)
and recuperating from the grandchildren's pre-Hallowe'en hysteria, when I said
to A., "Would you please stop shaking the bed."  She, of course, replied, "I'm
not moving," and I joked, "Then it must be an earthquake."  And, much to my
surprise, so it was.  Five point six on the Richter scale, just twenty miles
south of here, five miles underground, along the Calaveras fault.  There's
the possibility of another one, but so far, nothing that we've been able to
discern.  Astonishing to say, but just a few hours ago, the sure and firm-set
earth was feverous and did shake -- which put me in mind of the fragility of our
earthly being and also made me recall some other natural phenomena that I've
witnessed.

All that I can remember of the famous 1945 hurricane was watching at the window
while my father, out in the storm, tried vainly to secure his precious peach
tree, which was being shredded to oblivion by the fierce winds.  I have a vivid
recollection of the great blizzard of 1947, because after the storm subsided,
snow was piled so high on both sides of the sidewalks that, for a small boy, it
was like walking though a canyon -- and great fun to clamber up the mountainous
heaps.  I was a young witness to a sudden squall on Long Island Sound that
sank, if I remember correctly, hundreds of pleasure boats.  Even more serious
was the Connecticut River flood of 1972, which washed out the culverts on our
road, tumbled downstream some hefty boulders, and isolated us for a couple of
days.  Throughout the summer, there were memorable mud stains thirty feet in
the air on the trees that grew in the river valley.  Once in the 1980s, driving
across the country just after the Mississippi had overflowed its banks, we
observed standing water many miles from where water had any business to be. 
We were at Mt. St. Helen's a year after the mountain blew its top, but signs of
the devastation -- bald patches, toppled trees -- were still writ large on the
landscape.  Same with the Black Tiger fire;  we missed the fire but couldn't
ignore the extensive blackening.  In Hawaii once, we walked along hardened lava
flows for a couple of miles to find a standpoint to observe magma, fresh from
the earth's interior, fall steaming into the ocean to create new land.  In
Costa Rica, we visited a dormant volcano -- monumental even in its sleepiness.

Not many such events, but a sufficient number to produce respect for the natural
processes.  No tsunamis or crackings of the ice shelf.  And nothing, thank
goodness, comparable to the explosion of Tambura on the island of Sumbawa that
caused the summer without sun and a crisis of subsistence in parts of Europe
and North America. And certainly nothing whatsoever like the meteor that landed
70 million years ago in the Yucatan, after which the fossil record becomes
a blank for a thousand years and every creature larger than a pussycat went
extinct.  Yesterday's trembling was a good reminder that our mother earth
is a lot more fragile than she appears to be on your average warm, pleasant,
quakeless evening.

Source: 2007/11/joseph-conrads-

Title: Joseph Conrad's The Secret Agent (1907)
Date: November 02, 2007

It sometimes happens that you meet a perfectly decent, intelligent person with
whom you cannot conduct a satisfactory conversation.  He doesn't know when
you're serious or when you're being ironic, doesn't get your jokes, misses your
allusions and references, challenges your assumptions, and repeatedly asks,
"What exactly do you mean?"  You and he are just not on the same wavelength. 
There's no empathy, no meeting of minds.

Joseph Conrad and I have been locked into such an unprofitable relationship
for these last fifty years (although, to be fair, the novelist himself is less
engaged in the standoff than I).  In the 1960s, I embarked on a Conrad tour
and, as is my custom, began at the beginning, reading the first six or so
novels, from Almayer's Folly through Typhoon.  It was hard labor, not love. 
The much- celebrated romantic ornamented prose style settled like thick mist
over my hebetudinous faculties, so much so that I frequently lost track of
the plot, failed to differentiate the characters, felt myself strangled by
the metaphors and boggled by the syntax.  Befogged, miasmafied.  Even the
stories that I dutifully re-read, such as Heart of Darkness, required effort and
discipline.

Hungry for books, last summer, I was browsing the second-hand book shelves.
There aren't many respectable options at the bodice-ripper-rich Bookshelf in
Bradford, Vermont.  Conrad's The Secret Agent seemed like a good choice,
especially since I could dimly recall that in the 1950s, the great mid-century
Khan of English Literature, F. R. Leavis, had placed this particular novel way
up high in the literary firmament.  For $3.50, I decided, what the heck, I'll
try Conrad again.

I felt my way through the Conradian fog for a few chapters, set the book aside
for a couple of weeks, then started once again.  On the second or third try I
finally succeeded and, for the first time in my life, connected to Conrad with
ease and full comprehension.  Here's the key:  The Secret Agent is written in
that familiar grave portentous style, but it's a funny, satirical leg-puller. 
A bunch of incompetents, playing at being anarchists and communists, screw
up their lives and the lives of everyone around them.  The Secret Agent is
a spy novel, a police procedural, a political novel, and a comedy all rolled
into one.  While was stuck thinking, late Dostoevsky, I made no progress,
but when I came to the realization, not Dostoevsky but Coen brothers, the
elements immediately fell into place.  Moreover, The Secret Agent is a novel
not just for the pre-World War I moment, but for this present decade.  It's
extraordinarily keen and insightful about the banality of terrorism.

Now I feel that I can tackle those other Conrad novels that have lain in
wait for me all these years.  Stay tuned, fit audience but few, for further
reports.  Joe C. and I may yet become great friends.

Source: 2007/11/john-galts-anna

Title: John Galt's Annals of the Parish (1821)
Date: November 08, 2007

Annals of the Parish is another book that I've waited far too long to read. 
Purporting to be the reminiscences of Mr Micah Balwhidder, minister of
Dalmailing in Ayreshire, Scotland between the years 1760 and 1810, it's the
most charming and friendly novel that I've encountered in many a day.  The
industrial revolution, with all its good and evil, has found its way to rural
Scotland. In Balwhidder's succinct retrospective summation:  "there was at home
a great augmentation of prosperity and everything had thriven in a surprising
manner;  somewhat, however, to the detriment of our country simplicity." 
 The "country simplicity" seems more than half medieval;  the "augmentation
of prosperity" brings with it such benefits as literacy, London newspapers,
commerce, regular transportation to Glasgow, a cotton mill (not a dark Satanic
one, but a place where a decent livelihood may be earned) but also such debits
as bankruptcies, American and continental wars, and social fissuring.  Annals
of the Parish traces the end of world we have lost and the inception of the
world in which we now dwell.  Galt is good solid Age of Reason optimist, but he
knows enough to mourn the very changes that he appreciates.

The novel is written in Scots;  it's not particularly difficult to understand,
but sometimes Galt lays it on with a trowel.  Mr. Balwhidder tries to persuade
the church elders to repair his "manse":  "I made a report of the infirmities
both of doors and windows, as well as of the rotten state of the floors, which
were constantly in want of cobbling.  Over and above all, I told them of
the sarking of the roof, which was a frush as a puddock stool."  "Frush"
means scratched or crushed;  a "puddock stool" is a toadstool or mushroom. 
My unabridged dictionary does not have an entry for "sarking," but it's not
difficult to guess that a sarking roof is not in perfect repair. The rich
dialect, reported with affection and without condescension, intensifies the
regional flavor.

Galt's Dalmailing was in state of constant flux, while the various villages
of Galt's great contemporary, Jane Austen, are, in social terms, static and
immobile.  Who was more the observant novelist?

Source: 2007/11/words-of-wisdom

Title: Words of Wisdom
Date: November 19, 2007

"Skate to where the puck is going to be, not where it is," said the Great One,
famously.  There you have it: perfect advice for hockey players.  It goes
without saying that Gretsky's sentence applies equally well to entrepreneurs,
intellectuals, artists, and in fact, to anyone who has to cope with a world
in continual flux. Ah, but how can anyone know where the puck is going to be
next second, or next week, or a decade hence?  Gretzky was one of those rare
intuitive geniuses who did it all by instinct.  Ordinary mortals must wrack
their tiny brains until their heads hurt to guess at the trajectory of their own
particular puck.  Most of us, no matter how hard we try, are doomed to skate
counter.  There are other people (alas, I'm one of them) who skate aimlessly,
only dimly aware that somewhere out there on the field of play is a target
puck.  Gretzky's wisdom deserves a prominent spot on the refrigerator of every
moderately forward-looking, ambitious human being, where it can hang as both
goad and frustration.

Here's another brilliant bit of Gretskyiana:  "You miss 100% of the shots you
don't take."

Let us now turn to wisdom from Alan Sillitoe (young 'uns might not remember
Sillitoe, but he was one of the important 'angry' English writers of the
1950s).  Sillitoe blessed us with the forceful and epigrammatic truth that
"all writing is fiction, especially non-fiction."  I particularly savor that
uncompromising, zingy "especially."  If I understand rightly, Sillitoe meant
that a) no matter how faithful to experience a writer wishes to be, the act of
writing inevitably emphasizes or omits or compresses or expands and therefore
transforms experience into a story, a fiction.  And he also implied that b)
no matter how factual the information, if it doesn't tell a story and act as
a fiction it's not going to make its point.   Moreover, and more subtly, he
meant that c) any story is ineluctably influenced and shaped by common modes of
storytelling, and even against a writer's will assimilates itself to existing
genres.  Bloggers, for example, are willy-nilly fictioneers who can't help
writing bloglike posts.  But beware:  Alan Sillitoe most definitely did not
mean to imply that because all narratives are culturally and artistically
determined that they are therefore equivalent in value or truth;  he was a
practiced, practical writer, not some post-modern theory-soaked obscurantist.

Here's wisdom from the great Anatole Broyard.   Of his adolescence, he wrote,
memorably, "if it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely at the mercy of
sex."  "Mercy" is the well-chosen word that makes the sentence so piquant. 
Books, says Broyard, have the power to civilize all of us, even pubescents. 
Books can, and did, rescue him.  As for myself, if I remember accurately,
adolescence was, in spite of extra-large doses of books, merciless.

I don't know who first said that "you can't coach seven feet," but it's a common
enough saying.  It doesn't mean that that you can't coach a seven-footer,
but that no matter how much instruction you offer a guy who's five-ten, he's
never going to be seven feet tall or fill the space on the floor that requires
a seven-footer.  As I once heard a track coach remark, "I can teach them
everything but speed."  A similar sentence, of baseball pitchers: "you have
to be born with the whip."  For those of us who tried to teach less exotic
subjects, I can offer some parallels from my own experience.  "You can't coach
brains";  "you can't coach talent."

But you can do something.  You can, in words of great uncommon wisdom, "play
the hand you're dealt."

Source: 2007/11/empson

Title: Foolish Prudery;  Empson
Date: November 26, 2007

It's easy to forget that our immediate forebears were absurdly prudish. Consider
the case of William Empson, who ran afoul of the sex police in the late 1920s.

Empson may be the most influential literary critic of the previous century.
All "close reading" was pioneered by him. Seven Types of Ambiguity, written
when Empson was twenty-one years old and published in 1930, was the book
with which my teachers were still wrestling well into the 1950s. Prompted
by their puzzlement and by their enthusiasm, I dutifully read all about
"ambiguity" and I also tried my best with the equally influential Some Versions
of Pastoral (1935). In all frankness, both books were far too subtle for my
blunt, unphilosophical brain. In 1961, when I was a graduate student, the
pious and reactionary Douglas Bush, whose course in Milton was thrice-weekly
transporting me to the caves of Morpheus, dismissed Empson's ground-breaking
Milton's God (1961) as the work of the "village atheist."  (Empson thought
that Christianity was a cruel and savage religion because it was grounded
in scapegoating; he demonstrated that Paradise Lost became muddy and opaque
when Milton struggled with the ethical basis of core Christian doctrines. In
later years, the literary leviathanette Stanley Fish made his reputation by
domesticating, diluting, and popularizing Empson's challenging ideas.)

Although I had lived with Empson's work since mid-century, I had absolutely no
knowledge of the author's troubled private life until I read John Haffenden's
William Empson, Among the Mandarins (Oxford, 2005) which at 695 pages is the
first of a projected two-volume biography. (It's far too detailed; let me
confess to skipping and skimming.)

As a student at Magdalen College, Cambridge, Empson was mostly homosexual. 
Haffenden says that he was interested in "male bliss and buggery." The upper-
class students with whom Empson interacted were gay-tolerant and the authorities
practiced a de facto "don't ask-don't tell" policy.  In 1929, Empson was
elected to the prestigious Charles Kingsley Bye-Fellowship, which paid the
then-splendid sum of 150 pounds annually. By that time, Empson had turned
his attention to the other gender and was conducting an affair with a woman
named Elizabeth Wiskemann who was seven years his senior. Somehow or other, a
porter, an employee of the College, "found that Empson had some contraceptives
in his possession." It was a scandal and Empson was arraigned by the college
authorities for "sexual misconduct." He was stripped of his fellowship,
expelled, his name expunged from the college records, and he was even banished
from the city of Cambridge (by what authority Haffenden doesn't make clear).

For using contraceptives! For sexual relations with a woman! For preventing
pregnancy! Clearly, Empson should have stuck to boys or kept clear of condoms.

Let us remember the situation of William Empson whenever conservative
commentators trumpet "family values" and call for a return to the stricter
sexual codes of previous generations. Or when we might be tempted to admire the
wisdom of our ancestors.

Source: 2007/11/roths-portnoys

Title: Roth's Portnoy's Complaint (1969)
Date: November 29, 2007

Philip Roth has written some wonderful books but this particular job isn't one
of them. Portnoy's Complaint is nothing more than a comedian's shtick -- the
undisciplined efforts of a borscht circuit comic "working blue." Poor Philip
Roth. He set to be the heir of Lenny Bruce but accidentally fathered that
unfortunate by-blow, the egregious Howard Stern, who is Portnoy raised to a
power.

Like many nightclub monologists, Roth doesn't bother to develop rounded
characters but relies entirely on stereotypes. The women in Portnoy are types
reduced to their crudest manifestations: the ignorant Appalachian, the upper-
class twit-ess, the sabra soldier. The worst instance of stereotyping: the
narrator himself, Alexander Portnoy, who embodies every single characteristic of
the stage Jew except avarice and accent. Portnoy -- or parts of it -- would make
a great Catskill routine. But a novel it's not.

Is it possible that Philip Roth and Woody Allen are one and the same person? Or
aspects of the same person. Both start out doing sex-obsessed comic monologues
and both develop into great artists. They employ similar plots and characters
(compare Portnoy's gentile girlfriend Mary Jane Reed of West Virginia, whom the
monologist half-heartedly tries to educate, with Annie Hall of Chippewa Falls,
Wisconsin, advised to attend adult education classes at NYU by Alvy Singer).

In the coming weeks, class, we will look at other Roth/Allen identities and
parallels. They're both satirists and we'll explore the theory that Roth is an
acerbic Juvenal while Allen is a genial Horace.

No doubt that Philip Roth is envious of Woody Allen's more distinct features
and more compact body, but has anyone actually seen the two together?  Or even
a picture of them in the same undoctored frame?  Until they're sighted in the
same room, I'll reserve judgment on whether Roth/Allen is one or two persons.

Source: 2007/12/interim-report

Title: Interim Report on P. Roth
Date: December 07, 2007

I've now penetrated halfway into the Philip Roth corpus, reading not
chronologically but as the novels become available in our local public library.
At this moment I’ve interrupted my progress to enjoy DBC Pierre’s Booker
Prize novel Vernon God Little, a virgin copy of which I uncovered in a basement
storage box.

Here's my interim report on the works of Philip Milton Roth. No doubt but
that Roth has created a stunningly original and accomplished body of work:
it's witty, inventive, imaginative and unpredictable. So far The Human Stain,
which I read a couple of years ago and plan to re-read soon, is my choice for
masterpiece, but among the Rothgroup are a number of real dazzlers. Not a
single book has been uninteresting (well, of the very early works, Letting Go
was ordinary and Portnoy's Complaint, though notorious, was not serious). But
everything has been engaging, even if only for the coruscating surface. I'm
genuinely impressed. The Roth guy is good.

But, you ask, Is Roth a writer for all time, or is he a writer for this present
moment?  No one can make a fair estimate until the requisite hundred years have
elapsed. Nevertheless, my great pleasure and admiration for his achievement
notwithstanding, I very much doubt the permanent value of Roth's work. My
provisional opinion is that Roth confines himself to too small a slice of
human experience to sit at the table of the greats. The more I read, the
more conscious I become that his engagement with the world is incomplete and
deficient.

At bottom, Roth's subject is domesticity. His major characters, on the whole,
do not track whales or go to war or cure diseases or wrestle with new ideas or
sojourn in the wilderness; instead, they manage relationships with their parents
and with their colleagues and with their mistresses and ladyfriends. It's no
vice for a writer to choose the domestic arena: it's the domain of Jane Austen
and Henry James, among many others. Roth, however, presents us with a severely
circumscribed domesticity -- a partial and skewed view even of his own area of
interest.

Human social life begins with the family from which we derive, but it culminates
in the family that we create. It's a cycle; we’re born, we mature, we marry,
we bring forth children who themselves mature, and then we shuffle off the
stage. Roth understands and engages the first part of life -- the growing out
of childhood into adulthood. In traditional literature, it's the part of life
that, recorded in the novels of a writer less satiric and more comic than Roth,
might end with a wedding feast and the promise of future fertility. But Roth
does not write traditional comedy, and he's inordinately hostile to marriage and
especially to children. He's an acute observer of both the nuclear and extended
families of his west-of-Manhattan Newark-Jewish roots. But when it comes to the
progenitive phase of life, he has little to offer: incomprehension, or less than
incomprehension -- merely vacancy, a hole, a void. There's no sign that Roth
appreciates that to nurture a family of one's own is for most people a profound
part of the human voyage. His characters don't willingly marry, and if they do,
they don't stay married and they certainly don't reproduce. There are no babies,
no boys or girls, no teen-agers in the homes and streets and schools of New
Rothville.

When we (that is, the plurality of human beings) grapple with parenthood, we
inevitably come to some sort of detente with the generation that begot us.
Not only do we learn about life from our sons and daughters, but we find it
immensely satisfying to do so. But in the fifteen or so of Roth’s novels that
I've so far read, I've yet to find the father who loves his own children. It's
as though Roth were deaf and blind to the profounder half of human existence.
Children are not a fulfillment; they are only a burden and an annoyance -- clogs
to Zuckerman's or Kepesh's or Tarnopol's or Roth's freedom. (Readers of Claire
Bloom's memoir of her life with Philip -- Leaving a Doll's House --will clearly
remember Roth's implacable and inexplicable antagonism to Bloom's daughter.) For
many novelists, the non-existence of paternal affection would not be a handicap
to artistic achievement. But Roth writes entirely out of his own experience;
he’s anything but empathic. Roth cannot conceive of the full adulthood that
comes with mature parenthood. So he doesn't know what he can't know -- that his
various alter egos, even as they age, linger in perpetual frozen adolescence.

Unable to imagine the love of children, Roth also lacks the ability to
appreciate or describe a functioning marriage. For Roth and his multiple
avatars, marriages are similar to children in that they are restrictions on
individual freedom.  And therefore Roth's hostility to husbands is corrosive
and aggressive. Husbands are unmanly, emasculated. Real men have lots of women;
those who pretend to enjoy a permanent partnership with one person are either
slaves or eunuchs.

Roth writes obsessively about Jews and Jewishness and Jewish culture but there's
a core Jewish value that he never acknowledges. It's "being a mensch." A mensch
is a mature man who does right by his friends, his associates, and especially
by his family. He meets, and more than meets, his obligations, especially when
it's rough going. He can be relied upon. He enjoys his life, but he would never
put his own satisfactions ahead of his obligations to either his closest kin
or humankind in general. Of such a traditional virtue, Roth's characters know
nothing. In his novels, Roth's various alter egos not only shirk responsibility
and run from trouble, but they judge it virtuous to do so.  In the world
according to Roth, only a schmuck would be a mensch. But perhaps the satirist is
always doomed to be the malcontent outsider. A happy Rothmensch would be no Roth
at all.

Philip Roth is by all odds the greatest novelist of arrested development ever
produced by the state of New Jersey.

Source: 2007/12/more-on-contrac

Title: More on Contraceptives and Prudery
Date: December 10, 2007

Last week I reported that in 1929 William Empson was expelled and expunged
from Cambridge University for owning a condom, a circumstance that I judged to
be an scandalous instance of ancient prudery. But in thanks to one of those
fascinating moments of cultural convergence, I've just re-read, after almost
fifty years, Philip Roth's Goodbye, Columbus, which also turns on a discovered
contraceptive -- in the latter case, a diaphragm. Readers of the novella will
remember that Roth's Newark alter ago, Neil Klugman, enjoys a summer romance
with rich 'Cliffie Brenda Patimkin and pressures her to obtain a pessary. In due
time the incriminating object is discovered by Brenda's protective, overbearing
mother. Shock and outrage ensues, and the romance founders.

When I read about the Empson-Cambridge contraceptive scandal, I felt as though I
was entering an alien, distant and incomprehensible past. But Goodbye Columbus
appeared in 1959, when I was an undergraduate at Cornell -- and is therefore
very much a part of my conscious lifetime. Nor is Roth inaccurate about 50s
sexual prudery. Contraceptives were difficult to obtain (even for married folk)
and pre-marital sex was still taboo -- though, I must say, a taboo honored
more in the breach than the observance. The old ways were slowly changing. In
1958, I participated in my first political demonstration -- or riot -- when
Cornell authorities tried to prohibit women from visiting men's off-campus
apartments. We staged a late-night moderately out-of-control protest march to
the president's office. It was an all-male event because after 11 pm, women were
confined to their all-female dormitories.(The action is recorded in Richard
Farina's Been Down So Long It Seems Like Up to Me [1966]). It all seems so
positively quaint now -- the university trying to police our sexual life and all
that. Parents nowadays, at least the parents that I know, would be delighted to
learn that their college-age daughters are using contraceptives.

In Goodbye, Columbus, Neil Klugman accuses Brenda of allowing her diaphragm
to be discovered so that she can end the uneasy romance. Neil's argument
seemed rational in 1959, but it no longer does so. From the vantage of 2007,
it's clear that the many Roth alter egos have consistently been able to find
justifications and excuses to end both their affairs and their marriages.
Klugman, and Kepesh, and Zuckerman are never, ever, going to be more than
momentarily and intermittently loyal or satisfied, but on the whole it's going
to be circumstances, not their own volition, which causes them to flee. We
didn't know that then. In 1959, Goodbye, Columbus seemed like a disinterested
clearing of the Victorian air; now it has been transformed into a overture  to
Roth's long and tormented psychosexual opera.

Source: 2007/12/book-report-ver

Title: Book Report:  Vernon God Little
Date: December 10, 2007

At  first I found Vernon God Little to be rough going.  The narrative voice
-- a popcultch-saturated south Texas adolescent idiom -- took some getting
used to. The novel is a post-mass-murder burlesque, hilarious in spots, but
not even remotely credible.  Vernon God Little won the Man Booker Prize in
2003, but I wonder whether the novel would be so highly regarded by English
literati if it had portrayed England the way it portrays the U.S -- as a
country where everyone, every single person, is either a pederast, an idiot,
a con-man, a traitor, an opportunist, an incompetent, or just fat, lovelorn,
vicious and vacant. The pseudonymous DBC Pierre, an Australian, seems to have
acquired all his information about the United States from watching trash TV. 
He's written a funny book, because caricature can be very amusing, but I hope
that unwary Europeans and Asians who read Vernon God Little don't think that
they've entered the heart of America, because they sure as hell haven't.
Caveant lectores. I wonder also about the novel's thick impasto of Christian
symbolism.  Vernon lives on Beulah Lane in a town called Martirio; he calls
himself a "skategoat."  Will he die for America's vulgarities?  And are
we supposed to take seriously Vernon's last-minute conversion to faith?  I
couldn't -- in fact, the last- chapter Hollywood ending seemed to me mighty
meretricious.

Source: 2007/12/shakespeares--1

Title: Some Rituals
Date: December 16, 2007

Shakespeare's audiences were notoriously raucous.  Folks entered and left
during performances, commented loudly on the action and the actors, and ate
oranges and hazelnuts during performances.  (When the Rose Theater was
excavated in 1994, its floor was found to be paved with crushed hazelnut
litter.)  The Rose, the Globe, and the Fortune were noisy, busy, vital places,
far different from today's excessively reverent theaters.  I wish it were
otherwise.  I would be much more interested in live theater if I didn't feel
that I was stepping into a museum or mausoleum.  Why shouldn't we voice our
approval or disapproval?  A vigorous environment did not inhibit gentle Will. 
Nowadays we have more Awe but less Art.

I feel the same about visits to the symphony (but I'm more tolerant, especially
on a Brahms or Beethoven evening).  The ritual of concert-going amuses me: the
various instrumentalists wandering to their places, then the concertmaster, then
at last the maestro, the polite applause, the bowing, etc.  There's an old
story about "the man from Borneo"  -- when Borneo was synonymous with the end
of the earth -- who was taken to the Boston Philharmonic.  After the concert,
the M from B was asked, "Which part of the concert did you like best."  "Before
the man with the stick came on."

Yesterday I went to see our local university basketball team. It wasn't a very
good game and my mind wandered to the elements of the ritual:  first the
warming up, then the teams leave the court, then the Star-Spangled Banner, then
the overexcited introduction of the starters, ("at six five from San Bernadino
California") and of course the blond perky cheerleaders with their theatrical
enthusiasm and familiar tumbling routines.  And the band, playing their hearts
out during the TV timeouts.  It's all so very schematized and overdetermined. 
But exciting nevertheless.

Both the symphony and the basketball game are highly ritualized, but I have to
admit that on the whole, I'm more comfortable at the arena than at the concert
hall.  Especially when I have to cough; nothing more awkward than trying to
suppress a cough during a pianissimo passage -- especially for those of us who
are inordinately sensitive to social censure.

I wish the symphonies could incorporate some of the vitality of basketball.  At
the arena, the members of the band swing their trombones to left and right. 
Why couldn't the violins and violas give us a little of that?  And then we have
the tuba cheer, where the tubists come on court and whirl in rapid circles. 
What an opportunity for cellos and double-basses to show off their skill and add
some visual excitement to the performance.  The cheerleaders regularly climb
each others' shoulders.  Why not the woodwinds?

And the audiences?  They can participate by eating oranges and hazelnuts.  And
shouting approval.  "Go woodwinds!"

Source: 2007/12/flirting-with-i

Title: Flirting with Incest, Part II
Date: December 20, 2007

Yesterday I considered the near-incest situations of Philip Roth and Woody
Allen.  In Roth's My Life as a Man, Roth's shadow Nathan Zuckerman marries
Lydia Kettering and when she commits suicide he takes up with Monica, who is
Lydia's sixteen-year-old daughter by a previous marriage.  When Lydia turns
twenty-one, Zucerkman proposes marriage but she, wiser than her step-father,
declines.  I do not know whether Zuckerman's borderline incest had a precedent
in Roth's real life.  I do know that Roth's doppelganger Woody Allen eventually
married Soon-yi Farrow Previn and that he has adopted two children with her. 
(The woodman now has five offspring in his complex family, including two adopted
and one created in the downright way with Mia Farrow.  Child-averse Roth seems
to have avoided paternity.)

While reading My Life as a Man I've also been watching movies by Nicholas Ray. 
Last night I saw In a Lonely Place (1950) with Humphrey Bogart and Gloria
Grahame.  I recommend it to all who love film.  It's tough and intelligent,
filled with great dialog, brilliant lighting, excellent music and stylish
direction.  Trust me, It will hold your interest and give you something to
admire.  Gloria Grahame steals the show;  she's just as good and much more
subtle than Humph.

I didn't know anything about Grahame's career and life, so I looked her up on
the standard databases.  Her life was so unusual that I might even try to track
down a biography.

With the Roth/Allen/incest theme on my mind, I discovered these facts about
Gloria Grahame.  In 1948, Grahame married director Nicholas Ray and gave birth
to a son who was named Timothy.  She and Ray were divorced;  in 1960, Gloria
married Anthony Ray, Nicholas Ray's son, and subsequently gave birth to two more
boys, Anthony Jr. and James.   She had biological children by both father and
son and has therefore left incest-flirters Roth and Allen in her dust.  What an
achievement!

Query:  Tim, Anthony Jr, and James are half-brothers -- but are they also uncle
and nephew?   Half-cousins?  Cousins?    I never fully grasped the theory
of relativity.

Source: 2007/12/rothallen-doppe

Title: Roth/Allen Doppelgangerism
Date: December 20, 2007

A few days ago, noting that their careers and obsessions converge in ways
that seem uncanny, I suggested that Philip Roth and Woody Allen were not just
doppelgangers, but might in fact be one and the same person.

I've just now read Roth's 1970 novel My Life as a Man, which must be the most
self-consciously narcissistic "fiction" ever written -- at least since Ben
Jonson’s Fountain of Self-Love four hundred and seven years ago. The novel
is a large helping of Philip Roth, followed by more Philip Roth and with a
dollop of Philip Roth to the side. My Life as a Man purports to be drawn from
the writings of Peter Tarnopol, who is one of the Roth’s many alter egos. The
first part of the novel comprises two short stories by Tarnopol, so-called,
about a character named Nathan Zuckerman (the very Zuckerman destined to evolve
into the most highly developed of Roth’s self-projections -- Roth’s very own
alter-ego- issimus). So here's the design of My Life as a Man: Roth, writing as
Tarnopol, writes about Zuckerman, who is Roth himself. It’s a closed loop, a
totalizing tautology, a pleonasm brought to perfection -- a literary eruv with
nothing inside but Roth hisself.

In the latter part of the novel, the psychoanalyst Abraham Spielvogel amusingly
diagnoses Tarnopol as "one of the top young narcissists in the arts." But
gosh, just because R/T/Z can poke fun at his self-love (sometimes called
autoeroticism) doesn’t mean that the novel becomes less oppressively
claustrophobic.

While reading My Life as a Man, I couldn't help thinking, “does Roth do
anything other than act like Belmondo looking at himself in the mirror? does he
have interests other than Roth?”

Like Roth, Woody Allen appears in his own works as a familiar continuing persona
–- he's always more or less the same guy: bespectacled, nervous, death and sex
obsessed, self-mocking, a deliverer of one-liners -- who may not be Allen but is
certainly constructed of woodyallenian raw materials. Allen’s collected works,
like Roth’s, approximate an autobiography.

It's clear that one element of their doppelgangerism is their almost equivalent
obssession with self.  But there are also more precise parallels.

In "Useful Fictions," which is one of the short stories that comprise the first
part of My Life as a Man, Peter Tarnopol tells the story of Nathan Zuckerman's
disastrous marriage to a woman named Lydia Kettering. (It's a most puzzling
liaison, because Zuckerman dislikes -- actually hates -- Lydia right from
the start. Roth/Tarnopol claims that  exogamous Zuckerman is enthralled or
perhaps even hypnotized by Lydia's difference -– by her distinctly unJewish,
unbourgeois, uneducated, undisciplined personality.  But Zuckerman’s
attraction to her is inadequately explicated; it makes him seem not enigmatic
but dull, dense, pathetic and ultimately incomprehensible. It's not the
character who's flawed; it's the artistry of the writer. After some lunatic
adventures, the Zuckerman/Kettering marriage begins to collapse. And then
Zuckerman takes a shine to Lydia's daughter Monica, whom he met when she was
just ten years old. (Cf. V. Nabokov, Lolita, 1959). After Lydia’s suicide,
Zuckerman takes sixteen- year-old Monica to his bed and to Italy. When she turns
twenty-one and is technically no longer his ward, he proposes marriage. She
refuses him. Smart girl.

Here’s the question, class. Can anyone recall the name of a prominent film
writer and director who formed a relationship with the daughter of his longtime
companion?  Let me give you a hint: Roth grew up just west of Manhattan
in Newark; the director in question hails from just east of Manhattan in
Brooklyn. No hands?  No takers? Let me offer another hint: the young lady in
question is named Soon-yi Farrow Previn. Anyone want to take a guess?  Yes,
that’s right, it’s Woody Allen, whose romance with Mia Farrow’s daughter
scandalized the nation in 1992.

Omigod!  Woody did in the '90s what Phil fictionalized in the '70s: he married
his wife’s daughter.

Did Woody read and study My Life as a Man?  Did both men imagine that Lolita
was designed as a how-to guide to sexual manners? Or was there something in
the seltzer that provoked both of these guys to dabble with the incest taboo?
What, in other words, gives? Are Roth and Allen joined at the hip or at the area
adjacent to the hip or are they in fact the same person?  Stay tuned as we
explore this continuing mystery.

Source: 2007/12/not-another

Title: Another Violent Dream
Date: December 22, 2007

Our own dreams are fascinating to ourselves but not particularly interesting to
others (exceptions to the general rule are the dreams recounted and expounded in
Freud's Interpretation).  I know that I presume upon my readers to record the
following nightmare.  I do so only because it's such a shocking fantasia.

I was in a jewelry store with my wife somewhere on the Continent and we were
about to purchase a small gold medallion.  It was tarnished;  I called the
hint of greenness to the attention of the middle-aged, bald salesman.  At his
instruction, I rubbed the medallion with my thumb until it began to shine. 
Just as I did so, I noticed that the salesman's flaccid pecker was hanging out
of the fly of his pants;  I said, "OK, that's too weird, we're out of here." 
We hurried to leave but the door to the shop was locked.  The salesman, who now
looked menacing (the dream began to take on the ambience of a horror movie),
reached into his pocket and pulled out a key --strangely enough, a large,
castle-size key.  He flourished it and opened the door for us to leave, but
there was another locked door behind the first.  He took another key, equally
large, out of his pocket and opened the second door.  There was still another
door and I began to think that we'd never get out of the shop.  Then the
salesman reached deep into his pocket, pulled out a large hunting knife and cut
off his own dingus right at the root.  At this point I decided that I'd had
enough and woke up.

Hey, don't tell me that I suffer from castration anxiety.  I don't, despite
what the dream seems to say.  I hate to give such fodder to Freudians, but I
don't invent these dreams, I just report them.  And yes, I'm well aware that a
key is reputed to be a phallic symbol.

I'd welcome interpretations that don't make the dreamer out to be infantile,
maniacal, or excessively StephenKIngish.

Source: 2007/12/nine-years-afte

Title: Antimylarmonofilamentarianism
Date: December 28, 2007

In 1895, my grandparents wisely left the abysmal, backward Ukraine and struck
out for the new world. Nine years later, my father was born in a cold-water flat
in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. The date of his birth: December 22,
1904, exactly at the winter solstice. "And they called his name, Emanuel, God
with us." If he had been born in the old country, before the Russian authorities
imposed legal cognomina upon us, he would have been named Emanuel ben Isaiah--
his father's name appended to his own as a patronymic.

Despite his traditional moniker and his commitment to the essence of Judaism,
my father was fiercely hostile to the irrationalities of religion. His view --
and my grandfather Isaiah's even more strongly--was that for a thousand years
our lineage had been kept in poverty and darkness not just by the czars but
also by the rabbis. In politics, my father and grandfather began as socialists
and became New Dealers; in philosophy, they rejected theological doctrine and
were among the children of the enlightenment whom Moses Mendelssohn had led
to the promised land of evidence and reason. I doubt that any of my ancestors
knew Karl Marx's sentence that "the criticism of religion is the beginning of
all criticism," but they acted as if they had absorbed it from the cradle. My
brothers and I were taught to resist religious exclusivity, superstition, and
ceremony.

We now have a religious controversy in our peaceful, progressive, and largely
secular western town. A group of orthodox Jews have petitioned the city council
for permission to construct an eruv. What is an eruv?  It’s a “symbolic
boundary that allows orthodox Jews to carry things, including their own
children, outside their home during the Sabbath." (Carrying is considered work,
and orthodoxy's strict interpretation of religious law prohibits any sort of
sabbatical labor.) A latter-day eruv is constructed out of fishing line that is
strung on utility poles; curiously, it may incorporate functioning electric and
telephone wires.

I know that my forbears detested eruvim and similar expressions of irrational
piety. I myself am not enraged by these useless but harmless superstitions. 
Constructing an eruv does not endanger our species; it's not like opposing
contraception or prohibiting stem-cell research. An eruv consoles the believers
and doesn't much bother the rest of us. Yet if there is a spirit in the sky,
which I very much doubt, I would hope that he would not be so small-minded as
to issue ukases about carrying infants on Saturdays; infants should be carried
as much as they want, which is just about everywhere and always. And if any god
were so narrow as to promulgate an inside/outside-the-home rule, I would hope
that he would be intelligent enough not to be flummoxed by such transparent
trickery as hanging mylar filament on poles.

I have no intuitive conception of god, but I think that the orthodox trivialize
our shared longing for transcendence when they sanctify such petty practices. It
would be far more pious for the orthodox to take every nickel spent to appease
the Ancient of Days and bestow it on a poor Jewish family from Tashkent. 
If these folks can't locate eligible Jews, there are Hondurans and Sudanese
a-plenty who deserve their attention. When the orthodox re-direct their
enthusiasm and their resources toward truly charitable enterprises, they will
honor the universal immigrant experience and they will also practice the very
worthy Jewish virtue of compassion. Constructing an eruv is a foolish waste of
time and fishing line.

Here's my father's view:  "It took us hundreds of years to fight our way out of
the ghetto and they want to put themselves back in jail. If the rabbis had their
way," he would say, "Mahler and Bernstein and Gershwin would play accordion in a
klezmer band in Bialystok, Einstein would balance the books for a caftan maker
in Kiev, and a hundred and fifty Jewish Nobel Prize winners would spend their
days davening in some dirty dim synagogue in Vilna."

I think it’s in a Wallace Markfield novel that an old Jewish guy confronts a
group of twenty-something Jewish hippies/slackers in Miami Beach. After a heated
discussion, he admonishes them:  "And don't ever be ashamed that you’re
Jewish. It’s enough that I’m ashamed that you’re Jewish."

Which is pretty much how I feel about the eruvistas. Well, not exactly ashamed.
Embarrassed, perhaps, by their superstitious infatuation with the "dark backward
and abysm of time."

Source: 2007/12/-way

Title: "-way"
Date: December 29, 2007

We were in the car heading toward Palo Alto when I brought up the old bromide
that in the English language, a person drives on a parkway and parks on a
driveway.  Immediately, my fellow-passengers began to list other roadways
that contained the element ”way.”   Highway, superhighway, freeway (and
its opposite, tollway) came immediately to mind.  Then came throughway,
expressway (called in England ‘dual carriageway’), broadway, runway, 
pathway, footway, byway, subway, tramway, and skyway.  After a while, some less
common words arrived:  gangway, passageway, arborway (Boston only, as far as I
know;  Boston has also given us fenway), fairway, alleyway and causeway.  To
what cause does a causeway subscribe?  None; the word ultimately derives from
Latin calx, limestone.  As we came closer to home: doorway, hallway, archway,
entranceway, stairway, breezeway.

Ah, wellaway, there must be many others.

Well, why do we drive on a parkway and park on a driveway?  Hey, why does your
nose run and your feet smell?   Why is catnapping pleasurable but kidnapping
reprehensible?   It’s the way of language; it’s wordway.

Source: 2007/12/predictions-for

Title: Predictions for 2008
Date: December 30, 2007

Diligent readers of this blague will recall that last January, I made a
series of daring forecasts about the year 2007.  It's now time to review
my projections and evaluate my record.  I'm proud to say that a panel of
independent experts has confirmed that I hit the jackpot.  I scored an 8 out of
8, 100%, A+.  I'm now a fully accredited prophet.

These were my 2007 predictions:

"1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market, and, finally,

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East."

Did I score big-time,or what?  Note especially #4.  How did I know that
"wide- stance" would become a household phrase?   Boggles the imagination. 
Moreover, stock market fluctuations have been greater than even I could have
hoped for (same with Mideast turmoil).  Concerning athletes and drugs, just
think "Barry Bonds" and "Mitchell Report."  I knocked that one out of the park.

Is everyone ready for my 2008 predictions?

I'm staying with 1-8.  But I'm going out on a limb with #9:  "A religious
leader will be involved in either a financial or a sexual scandal (perhaps
both)."   And #10:  "Questions will be raised about the accuracy of the vote
count."

You read it here first.  Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2008.  Let's
see if Dr. M. can top his scintillating successes of 2007.

Source: 2008/01/sticker-shock

Title: Sticker Shock
Date: January 05, 2008

We're in Manhattan (New York, not Kansas) where I'm suffering from two kinds of
sticker shock:  regular and newyorkish.  Regular:  at DIA, I treated myself
to a cylinder of Life Savers:  $1.35.  Life Savers, as everyone knows, were
invented by Hart Crane's father and are still manufactured to the formula that
has made them a gourmet delight for a hundred years:  "sugar, corn syrup,
high fructose corn syrup, artificial flavors (Red 40, Yellow 5, Blue 1)." 
But Life Savers cost, in my childhood, exactly a nickel.  Now it's $1.35
for a small package!!  Beyond belief!!  But if regular sticker shock is
bad, what about high-voltage newyorkish shock?  In my own lifetime, it was
possible to ride the NYC subway for 5 cents.  Now it's two count 'em two
bucks, making the lifesaverish increase seem like peanuts.  And what about
this morning's breakfast?  An omelet and a cup of coffee:  $17.23 plus tip. 
And the earmuffs at a boutique for brazillionaires on Madison Avenue:  $650. 
After an efficient deliberation, we decided against purchasing the designer
earmuffs. At a nearby shop, knockoffs just as effective were available at
$32.00, which, in context, seemed like a bargain. Only $16 per ear.  But
shouldn't a pair of earmuffs retail for $1.59?

Source: 2008/01/more-on-rothall

Title: More on Roth/Allen Doppelgangerism
Date: January 06, 2008

Michael Hollingsworth, associate professor of American Literature at Texas A & M
University, writes this:  "Dr Metablog:  you claim that Woody Allen and Philip
Roth are doppelgangers. I've got to tell you something you might not want to
hear: you're way behind the curve on this one. It's been well known in literary
circles for many years that Roth and Allen are two different presentations of
the same person. But there's lively disagreement about who's who. One group,
the Rothites, think that Woody is an invention of Philip. The Allenites, on the
other hand, are convinced that the Roth who very occasionally appears in public
is an actor hired by Woody and that Woody has written all the so-called Roth
novels. And then there's a more radical group (gaga conspiracy-theorists in
my view) who claim that both Roth and Allen are the invention of some as-yet-
unidentified third person, a prominent New York intellectual. This last theory
is just nuts"

Wow, this is exciting news. And here I thought that I had discovered something
original when I identified Roth and Allen as one and the same. Isn't it always
the case; you think you have an original idea but it turns out that someone has
anticipated your insight?  Stay tuned, loyal readers, as I bring myself up to
date on Roth/Allen doppelgangeritudinousness.

For a while there I was beginning to think that I was some sort of crank; now
I see that I'm part of the mainstream. How reassuring. And moreover, readers,
I think that I've already chosen my side in this battle. I'm inclined to be an
Allenite.

Source: 2008/01/the-art-that-hi

Title: The Art That Hides Art
Date: January 06, 2008

Today we paid a call on the New Museum of Contemporary Art.  It's an
uncompromising, vibrant building, all the more grand for being plunked down in
the rusty old Bowery.  The space is wonderful.  But the stuff on exhibition
is, in my less than humble opinion, ludicrous.  A mattress covered with
buttons.  A cage made of chain link fencing.  Fluorescent light bulbs 
arranged in a series of "Y" shapes.  Aluminum foil hanging from sticks. Broken
glass on a bench.  Cardboard boxes, some open, some closed.  Plastic pipe
threaded through a deck chair.

Three substantial floors littered with such artlessness.  What a dreadful,
terrible squandering of space and opportunity.

The unifying principle:  a conspicuous antagonism to craftsmanship.  Every
single piece of work left with rough edges and bad joins and unpainted surfaces,
as though not to complete the task is fundamental to the aesthetic.  If there
is an aesthetic other than fakery.

I don't get it.  I don't want to get it.  To me, it looked like the detritus
of a civilization in utter, hopeless implosive decline.  A decadence beyond
ordinary decadence.  In-your-face ugliness.

What is attractive or interesting or even repulsive about old clothes tied into
a tight bundle with an orange electrical extension cord?   It's still a bundle
of old clothes.  It's not art because it's in a museum, and if it's supposed to
be a critique of art, it's not not even remotely clever.  It's stupid.

There were lots of museum-goers who milled unexpressively around the various
objects.  Were we all pretending that we were looking at Vermeers?

One of the sculptures, so-called, consisted of a pile of chairs, randomly
arranged.  A four-year-old boy looked at the "sculpture" and announced, in
a very loud and clear voice, "It's a pile of chairs.  Very funny."  And he
laughed.  It was a great clothesless emperor moment.

Source: 2008/01/twenty-thousand

Title: Twenty Thousand Something-or-Others
Date: January 12, 2008

Today, or tomorrow at the latest, the blague Dr. Metablog will have been visited
for the twenty-thousandth time.  A milestone -- twenty thousand readers.

Well, perhaps not exactly readers.  It would be more accurate to say twenty-
thousand page viewers.  Twenty-thousand page views is considerably fewer than
twenty-thousand readers.  Actually, many of those page-viewers aren't readers
at all and only viewers by accident;  they don't stop long enough to read or
to view; page glancers, perhaps.  They just touch down to find out whether
whatever they've googled is what they want and then, disappointed, off they go
in a microsecond.  For example, Dr. M. once wrote an entry in which he made fun
of the overuse, in book titles, of the word "naked." Consequently, the blague
Dr. Metablog googles to the surface when someone types in "naked weightlifting"
or "naked skiiing" -- a search that is attempted oodles more often than in his
innocence Dr. Metablog might ever have imagined.  Internet pilgrims hoping to
find salacious portraits of naked hairy weightlifters are mighty crushed and
are off like a shot -- but they still leave their electronic trace.  Another
example:  Dr. M once wrote a tribute to Vladimir Nabokov's excellent novel,
Lolita.  Did Dr M. know that the word "lolita" is a term of art in the world of
sexual exploitation?  Pity the internet hairypalms and chicken-chokers, who,
searching for secret pleasure, encounter (gasp) literary criticism.

We here at Dr. M. could increase "traffic" simply by using such code words or by
listing body parts of a groinal or perigroinal nature, but we're too proud to do
so just to increase readership  --or viewership -- or glancemanship.

Nevertheless, all of us here at Dr. Metablog are overjoyed to reach the twenty-
thousand mark, whatever that number signifies.  So best regards to our
readers from regular staff members Vivian de St. Vrain, Otto Onions, and Amber
Feldhammer, as well as  occasional contributors Alan Saxe-Poppette, Michael
Hollingsworth, Professor Marion Morrison Ph. D., Spike Schapiro, and Otis
Jefferson Brown.

Onward to thirty thousand!

Source: 2008/01/rothallens-brea

Title: Roth/Allen's Breasts
Date: January 13, 2008

Michael Hollingsworth writes:

"Dear Dr. M.:  you're directly on target when you claim that Woody Allen and
Philip Roth are the same person, but you've unaccountably omitted to mention
the most pressing evidence.The year: 1972. Philip Roth published The Breast, a
fantasy about a writer transformed into one. Woody Allen released Everything You
Always Wanted to Know About Sex, in which a giant female breast wreaks havoc
upon the countryside.  Obviously, both "Roth" and "Allen" had recently read
Gogol's The Nose and Kafka's Metamorphosis. Just as obviously, "both" of "them"
were struggling with some seriously unresolved maternal issues. How fascinating
that both of their boundless cups of creativity "runneth over" so to speak, in
such similar ways. A coincidence? Hardly.

By the way, both "Roth's" and "Allen's" contributions are embarrassingly false
and flat."

Dr. M. responds:  "You know, Professor Hollingsworth, I think I support your
breast remarks. I'd been aware of both of these upwellings of mammariness but
I never put two and two together. If Roth/Allen aren't doppelgangers, they're
certainly developing along twin tracks.

And let me add my own reservations:  the short stories by Gogol and Kafka are
untouchable contributions to world literature.  Both writers create astonishing
fantasies; they also manage to skewer the particularities of, in the one case,
czarist Russia and in the other, early twentieth-century Prague. Frankly,
neither Roth's nor Allen's breasts are anywhere nearly as full or pointed."

Source: 2008/01/the-tarantass

Title: The Tarantass
Date: January 13, 2008

Here the all but preternatural patience of metablogian aficionados is solicited
as Dr Metablog quotes directly from an ancient (April, '07) posting on sex and
the horsedrawn vehicle -- the R-rated entirety of which can be found here:

"Regular readers of this blague are well aware that I have repeatedly indulged
my bemusement with the names of extinct or obsolescent horsedrawn conveyances. 
My point is that modern readers, who know precisely what is signified  -- in
design, in metal, rubber and plastic and other constituents, and especially in
social value -- by such words as Jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, and jalopy, know zero
zilch zip about "fly," "trap," "landau," "chaise," "phaeton," "cabriolet,"
"sulky," "surrey," "curricle," "gig," "hansom," "buggy," "four-wheeler,"
"spring-van," "berlin," "barouche," "britchka," "troika," "wurt," "tandem,"
"caleche," "tilbury," "dog-cart," "wagonette," "go-cart," "victoria,"
"brougham," "diligence," "clarence" and "post-chaise."  If we notice these
words at all, we tend to savor them as archaic Victorian music rather than to
identify and evaluate them as specific forms of transportation."

My point is that we read Victorian novels with one hand tied behind our backs,
so to speak, when we don't know whether a dog-cart or a clarence or a wurt
delineates rich or poor, stylish or provincial, pretentious or aggressive or
modest.

Perpetually naive, I thought that I had pretty much exhausted the list of
nineteenth-century horsedrawn conveyances.  However, by a curious coincidence,
I just yesterday happened upon two more such vehicles.  The first is a "basket-
carriage," an example of which I observed with my very own eyes at the New York
Historical Society at Central Park West and 77th Street.  A basket-carriage
is a coach constructed of wicker.  The carriage on exhibit looked mighty
comfortable for summer travel but would be frigid and leaky when winter winds
are raging.   A second new conveyance materialized in Nikolai Gogol's story,
The Carriage.  It's the very versatile "tarantass" -- a horsedrawn coach fitted
with removable wheels so that it could be converted into a sled come winter. 
Are there still more to be discovered?  I wouldn't be surprised if there are.
Stay tuned.

Source: 2008/01/a-walk-with-ell

Title: A Walk With Ella
Date: January 22, 2008

Today it was my assignment to pick up the five-year-old granddaughter at the
local Montessori school. We walked home together.  It's a ten minute walk but
it took us more than forty minutes.  Here's why.

There was a patch of frozen snow on the ground. Ella pretended to skate back
and forth on it for a few minutes.  After a while she happened to push some
lumps of ice onto the sidewalk and decided to see how far she could kick them.
When the ice disintegrated, she went back for more clumps to practice her kick
upon.  She repeated this four or five times. But finally, searching for more
ice, she found a black and white feather (she collects feathers), which she
closely inspected and gave to me to carry.  After that she looked at a number
of leaves both on the ground and hanging upon the low branches; she gathered
a few of last year's brittle brown oak leaves.  Next she came upon a small
flock of English sparrows who were pecking at some seed; she chased them off
but waited to see how long it would take them to return. She decided to add
to her rock collection: she found a beautiful, potato-size rock that I was
allowed to carry home.  "Could I open it with a knife?  I'd like to see inside
it?"  Then it was time to dance on a brick retaining wall.  Finished with that
activity, she found two hunks of packed snow and scraped them together.  "It's
beautiful music," she said.  She stopped to practice her whistling, a newly
acquired skill. Then came an experiment:  what happens when clumps of snow are
rubbed on the trunk of a pear tree.  And so on.

Ella's world:  so various, so beautiful, and so new!

Source: 2008/01/the-chinese-bus

Title: The "Chinese Bus"
Date: January 24, 2008

As is our custom, we journeyed from New York to Washington (and back) on the
so- called "Chinese bus." It's a bargain: round-trip between Chinatown here
and Chinatown there for just $35. It's a non-standard, non-greyhoundish, no
frills experience. It's also shoestring capitalism in the raw. When a potential
passenger arrives at the East Broadway departure site, he/she will be accosted
by young female representatives of several different companies, each touting
her own organization. The ladies are aggressive but hard to decipher inasmuch
as they shout in Chinese and possess only the most rudimentary English. A
traveler must be careful to board the right bus at the right hour (the first
time I used this service, I was almost shanghaied to Boston). The buses are
not well marked and misrepresentation is rife. Leaving New York last time, we
talked with a number of travelers who were frustrated and angry. Some had been
told that the bus would set out for Washington at noon, some at 12:30, some at
12:45 -- whatever time would sell the ticket and get the luggage on board and
the passenger into a seat. Because there's no terminal and the streets are so
crowded, the bus had to run a loop around lower Manhattan. Each time it set out,
there was optimism, but then fifteen minutes later it would return to square
one to board more passengers. We circulated three or four times. At 1:30, which
was in fact the scheduled departure time, we were on the road, but with quite a
number of unhappy passengers in tow.

A few years ago, almost all the passengers were Asian. Nowadays, the news is out
and it's all complexions from ebony to ivory. Still, the dominant language and
the dominant food odors are Chinese.

Sometimes the driver bypasses a scheduled stop. Sometimes it's necessary for one
passenger to discipline a fellow passenger for surreptitious smoking. Amenities
are minimal. The waiting rooms are small, dank, and squalid. On the bus, the
john is unspeakably foul. BYOTP.

But it's inexpensive, it's fun, and it gets you there.

Source: 2008/02/cesspool-of-tal

Title: "Cesspool of Talent"
Date: February 02, 2008

Colorado's "flagship" football team has had unprecedented success signing up in-
state recruits.  In the paper this morning:  "If you look around we've just
got a cesspool of talent around here."

A "cesspool of talent?"  Here are two things that we know about the up-and-
coming young linebacker who is credited with that sentence:  a) he's never
come face-to-face with a actual cesspool, and b) he's under the impression that
"cess" means "large" or "deep."   Is he alone?  I'm afraid not.  A quick
googling retrieves sixty cesspools of talent, perhaps a third of which are
ironic.

Shakespeare uses "cess" to mean "measure."  A diseased horse, "Poor jade, is
wrung in the withers out of all cess."  Is it possible that our linebacker is
familiar with The First Part of King Henry the Fourth?  Does he believe that
"cesspool" mean "immeasurable pool?

In a related matter, one of my correspondents sends me this yahoo headline: 
"U.S. woman abducted in Afghanistan. A Taliban snatch."  Clearly, the writer
is ignorant of the demotic use of the word "snatch."  He should have consulted
Shakespeare, one of whose nastiest characters (Aaron in Titus Andronicus) uses
the word correctly:  "Why, then, it seems, some certain snatch or so/ Would
serve your turns."

Source: 2008/02/upper-west-side

Title: Upper West Side Then and Now
Date: February 03, 2008

From 1965 to 1969 we lived on Manhattan's Upper West Side. Now we've returned
for a month-long visit. In days of yore, we were the busy young parents pushing
our baby carriage down Broadway. Now forty years more 'mature, we step aside as
nannies maneuver the twins (without question there are both more nannies and
more twins) around and past us.

And the eternal West Side -- has it also matured? Certainly it's a more
prosperous neighborhood and a more crowded one. With scores of giant high-rise
apartment houses added in the intervening years, it's become even more densely
populated. Paradoxically, it's also safer. In the 1960s, received wisdom stated
that to wander onto 85th Street or onto Columbus Avenue after dark was to risk
death or at least a good mugging. Now the area is peaceful morning, noon and
night, and newly-fashionable Columbus Avenue houses dozens of trendy ethnic
restaurants. Forty years ago, it was foolish to venture across Central Park to
the aristocratic East Side, where, it was rumored, there lived people who were
fair-skinned and blond. Some areas of the Park, like The Ramble, were famously
dangerous and were visited only by those who were itching for action. Now,
single women jog without the least concern. We took advantage of the new freedom
by taking frequent jaunts to the row of fabulous museums along Fifth Avenue.
(In the 1960s, museums were difficult for West Siders to access but admission
was free; today, they're easy to reach but the ticket prices are staggering.)
In the good old days, West Side street-corners were gathering points for
enterprising drug-dealers. On this visit, I didn't spot a single dealer or a
single transaction. Moreover, the neighborhood used to be thick with policemen
on patrol; this time, police are scarce and apparently unnecessary. Why the
improvement in public safety? In a word, money. Only the rich can now afford to
live on the Upper West Side, and rich people don't need to knock you down and
empty your wallet. They have other fish to fry.

There's a new feature of transportation: droves of briefcase-bearing suit-
wearers are shuttled Wallstreetway in luxurious "private cars." Meanwhile, the
subway is as efficient and as filthy as ever, but nowadays we pay not with
tokens but with "metro cards." The New York Times, then 10 cents, is now $1.25;
it has fewer columns, a larger font, and poorer writing. More changes: in
yesteryear, a man shouting in public was very likely a paranoid schizophrenic;
now a noisy talker has a gimmick in his ear and a cell phone and he's doing
nothing more lunatic than snapping up undercapitalized mortgages.

Dogs, here as elsewhere, are horribly indulged. One day we peeked into a "pet
exercise" gymnasium and later were amused by a well-appointed van labeled "Pet
Limousine." Although there are many more curs, there are fewer piles of canine
poopery on the sidewalks; most dog-walkers make use of plastic bags. Thank you,
dog-walkers.

Affordable supermarkets have disappeared and there are only specialty food shops
where the prices are beyond astronomical. But where do the waitresses, cooks,
cleaning ladies, nannies, cashiers, shop girls, bank tellers, kioskers, subway
maintenance men, bus drivers, janitors, and policemen shop?  Where, in fact, do
they live? Not in the neighborhood; not since the entire West Side went condo.

It's still a polyglot world, but there's much less Spanish and a lot more
Russian, Chinese, Hindi and Arabic.

More novelties: there's a Duane Reade (sometimes two) on every street and
there's a second crowded Starbucks visible from the Starbucks where you sit
poring over your wireless laptop and nursing your gigantico skinny dry vanilla
latte. In the 1960s, there were seven movie theaters within walking distance --
including the New Yorker and the Thalia, the mother churches of cinema worship.
Now, there are none -- nor even a single dvd rental store. It's all Netflix and
downloads.

There's been a phenomenal growth of personal services: not just the barbershops
and hairdressers of old, but also whole galaxies of nail care shops. Who
could have imagined that in the new millennium, fingernails would become the
cornerstone of the economy? An economy of which I'm not a part; my nail care
consists of occasionally biting off a sliver of stray keratin and taking
a cosmetic nibble or two at the paronychium. I don't believe I've spent a
nickel, lifetime, on my nails, nor do I intend to do so. Nope, no manicures,
nor pedicures, nor medicures (what the heck is a medicure?) nor massages nor
aromatherapy for me. Nor will I have my ears candled (a process that one medical
website calls 'useless and dangerous") or my eyebrows threaded or any part of my
body, public or private, waxed. It appears that every facial feature and every
organ has an entire industry dedicated to its hygiene and its remediation. Is
the upper West Side experiencing an outbreak of good health? Or a triumph of
narcissism?

One final observation: since we lived here, many expensively-architected fancy-
shmancy private schools have appeared. Meanwhile, public schools have been
allowed to slide further into poverty. Ugly, concrete block buildings surrounded
by chainlink fence and razor wire -- not temples of learning, but prisons.The
gap between rich and poor, evident then, has become a chasm. Manhattan is safer
and more livable than it was (at least for the prosperous), but it will not
be truly healed until its citizenry moves beyond "private wealth and public
squalor."

Source: 2008/02/confessions-of

Title: Confessions of a Dysgeographicoid
Date: February 04, 2008

This post is written for members of the directionally dyslexic community.  Non-
members are welcome to read but they probably won't get it.

Some cities are easy to navigate;  others are nightmares.  In the small
western city where I live, the mountains are always visible, and they're always,
blessedly, to the west.   In addition, the streets that run north-to-south
are consecutively numbered.  I'm thankful that I live in a city where it is
difficult to lose your way.  Manhattan, where I spent last month, is pretty
good too, except for the confusing lower downtown.  Manhattan is on a grid. 
Ninety- fourth Street Street is always north of 93rd and 2nd Avenue is always
east of 3rd Avenue. The worst that can happen is that you walk one short
block in the wrong direction and then right yourself. But other cities are
impossible.  Take Washington D.C., for example.  Washington could only have
been laid out by a sadist whose aim was to drive the directionally-disabled off
their collective rockers.  It's those damn diagonals, which cut through the
grid at every conceivable angle.  A few steps along one of those diagonals and
the points of the compass become hopelessly shuffled.  And then Washington
throws in a few wayward, wandering streets that were added just to cause pain.

When we visit Washington, we stay at a home on Nevada Avenue that's a half-hour
walk from the Friendship Heights Metro.  I've memorized the route (I'm good
at rote learning).  But last month, we (that is myself and my spouse --
actually "guide" is the better term) -- set out on a different path from station
to home.  Why did we do so?  I don't know;  it wasn't my decision.  A
minute hadn't elapsed before I had lost my bearings and had no idea whether
we were heading north south east or west or how our improvised path stood in
relation to the route that I had mechanically mastered.  My guide, who is not
directionally- disabled, sometimes forgets, even after all these years, that a
few steps on the oblique and I'm completely buffaloed.

This time, I decided that instead of whining "where are we?" at every street
corner, I would just keep my mouth shut.  I pretended confidence, though I hung
back at every corner so as not to commit to a ludicrously wrong direction.  I
played follow the leader.  Sometimes we were on the grid, sometimes we took
diagonals, sometimes we took one of those eccentric curving streets.  My DD
compeers understand that at each of the thirty or so corners that we approached,
I had not an inkling whether my guide would choose left, or right, or straight
ahead.  But I was, let me tell you, oh so cool.  After a while, the terrain
began to grow familiar, but just between us, let me confess that it wasn't until
we were thirty feet from our target that I knew where I was.

So, friends, here's my new formula:  keep quiet, hang back, avoid humiliation.

Source: 2008/02/what-happened-i

Title: What Happened in Our Precinct
Date: February 05, 2008

The big news is that our caucus drew unprecedented hordes of voters.  Our site
is the local elementary school.  We're a "super-site" -- seven precincts in
one building.  In the past, we'd have ten or a dozen or at an absolute maximum
thirty attendees per precinct.  Tonight, at 7pm, when we were supposed to come
to order, there were still long lines of folks of all ages waiting patiently
to register. Eventually, the super-site drew 707 people! When our precinct was
finally able to get organized, there were an astonishing 129 people in the room
-- breaking all records by a multiple of four or five.  We voted 92 for Obama,
37 for Clinton and we divided our delegates 4-2.   It was exhilarating to see
so many unfamiliar young faces.  It was also, as dem events are likely to be,
chaotic, amusing, and enthusiastic.

I asked new attendees what brought had them out.  I received two answers. 
Most frequently, George Bush, who, I was told, has driven the country into a
ditch, broken the treasury, ruined the civil service, shredded the constitution,
exhausted the military, ruined the environment, packed the judiciary, fought
a senseless unnecessary, and endless war, and put loyalty to his wing of the
party ahead of loyalty to the country.  The second reason:  Barack Obama.  No
question but that Obama has given people in our precinct new hope.

My conclusion:  Colorado is looking good for the Democrats in November.

Source: 2008/02/forthcoming-swi

Title: Forthcoming Swiftboatery
Date: February 08, 2008

HRC, who is essentially a centrist Democrat, is widely perceived as a divisive
and polarizing figure. Why so?  Because she's a woman, because she's married
to Bill, but mostly because  for twenty years now, unscrupulous Republicans
have been investigating, castigating, and smearing her. Is there a more vilified
politician in the world? She's a murderess, a lesbian, an adultery-enabler, a
frigid bitch... etc. etc.

Barack Obama is not perceived as a divisive and polarizing figure, but only
because Karl Rove and his cruel band of conscienceless propagandists haven't yet
gone to work on him. I guarantee that right at this very moment there's a room
full of "conservative" operatives who are brainstorming the most vile imaginings
about Obama. Think Willie Horton, think swiftboat. They are forging documents,
photoshopping pictures; they're developing sick fantasies about Obama's sex
life, his wife, his children, his parents, his patriotism, his education, his
finances, and certainly, his religion. Don't dare to imagine that racism is
dead; the Rovistas will give it new life.

And don't think that you are able to anticipate the attack. It will be
disgusting beyond anything that ordinary people are capable of inventing. And it
will be cloaked by 527s or disseminated anonymously or leaked.

And then Obama too will become a divisive and polarizing figure.

Source: 2008/02/a-few-weeks-ago

Title: Philip Roth's American Pastoral
Date: February 11, 2008

A couple of months ago, when I had journeyed through roughly half of his
writings, I made some preliminary observations about the fictional world
invented by Philip Roth. In the course of discussion, I advanced two hypotheses.
The first was that Roth hated children, whom he regarded as encumbrances to male
freedom and pleasure. The second is that although Roth had invented a boatload
of adult male narcissists, he had not created a single mensch -- a caring,
responsible, mature man. In Roth's vision of the world, I suggested, "only a
schmuck would be a mensch."

After a pause for rest and rehabilitation, I've now resumed my upriver voyage to
the heart of the Rothworld. I've just finished reading American Pastoral (1997),
a novel set during the difficult, still-controversial Vietnam war. I must boast
that my hypotheses about children and menschdom are fully confirmed by the new
evidence provided by American Pastoral.

In this novel, children are indeed hateful, and the mensch who has at last made
an appearance is nothing more than a schmeggegy. Roth has given us Seymour
"Swede" Levov, an archetypal mensch, and behold, what a poor naive schmuck is
he! Levov nurtures everyone he encounters, but Roth works it so that his virtue
leads directly to his downfall. Poor Swede owns and manages an exemplary factory
but he is betrayed by his workers; he's loyal to Newark, so Newark riots and
pillages; he loves and supports his fragile wife only to discover that she's
sleeping with his friend. Most of all, he adores his daughter, unamusingly
called Merry, who turns out to be, just as we might expect, a devil child. She
screams unaccountably from the moment of birth and stutters through her awkward
childhood (Roth seems to think that colic and speech impediments are signs of
inherent viciousness). At adolescence, Merry transforms into an unhandsome
Patty Hearst clone who participates in several senseless but deadly political
bombings. She then goes underground, only to return secretly in Newark to haunt
Levov all the more. Under this succession of attacks, Swede Levov's carefully-
crafted menschdom is little-by-little exposed as naive schmuckhood. If only
Levov had taken the Zuckerman route: love only thyself, fuck 'em and forget 'em;
abort when necessary.

And now, for the benefit of younger readers, I pause for a few refresher
sentences about the historiography of the Vietnamese catastrophe. The
significance of this period is highly contested. For those on the left, the
war was a foolish attempt to block a peasant uprising against neo-colonialist
overlords. The Bundys and Lyndonites and Kissingers squandered fifty thousand
American and two million Vietnamese lives (plus moral authority and treasure
uncountable). Nevertheless, as the left sees it, the war provided an opportunity
for heroism: for the first time in human history, a free and patriotic people,
making use of peaceful assemblies, petitions, political activism, boycotts, and
resistance to the draft, succeeded in turning an erring government from its
mistaken path. On the other hand, the right wing knows an entirely different
Vietnam war. For conservatives, the war against communism was lost because
squishy liberals lost their nerve. Conservatives remember only the excesses of
the anti-war movement: the culture of drugs, the sexual freedom, the violence,
and of course, the bombings.

American Pastoral is firmly of the right-hand file. Roth has performed an
amazing piece of legerdemain. He has written about the period of Vietnam, but he
has omitted (or suppressed) both the atrocities of the war and the organized,
largely peaceful opposition to it. In American Pastoral, resistance is not
political but personal. It's embodied in Swede's daughter Merry Levov, who is
vacant, violent, angry and disgusting. By stripping the novel of its historical
context and coloration, Roth reduces the opposition to the war to an oedipal
conflict between a demon child and her well-meaning but ineffectual father. The
novel lacks even the decent ambiguity that Roth might have created if he had
given Levov other and perhaps more reasonable children. But it's a sure thing
that in a novel by Philip Roth, more children would have led not to a widening
of focus or to a richer novel, but only to more tsouris.

It's a shame that so skillful an artist (and one who is not generally a right-
winger) has written a novel that's only inches away from neocon propaganda.

Source: 2008/02/upon-upon-julia

Title: Upon "Upon Julia's Clothes"
Date: February 13, 2008

This pretty six-line poem is not nearly as naive as it first appears. But it's
a poem to savor and one that has richly earned its place in the anthologies.
It's often, mistakenly in my opinion, listed among the best "love poems" in the
English language.

Whenas in silks my Julia goes,

Then, then, methinks, how sweetly flows

The liquefaction of her clothes.

Next, when I cast mine eyes and see

That brave vibration each way free

O how that glittering taketh me.

The story, the "plot," is simplicity itself: a poet becomes infatuated with
"Julia's" garments.

"Upon Julia's Clothes" may be a poem about "love," but it seems severely
truncated, because every reader anticipates that, even though the poet
is attracted to his lady's adornments, he'll soon confess that he truly
desires Julia herself -- her hair, her eyes, and if he takes the well-trodden
path, her virtue, which he intends to overcome. But not this poet, not this
poem. "Upon Julia's Clothes" is exactly what it announces itself to be; a
sestet upon Julia's clothes. Readers learn nothing of Julia, and to tell
truth, almost nothing of her costume. The poet lays claim to no interest or
expertise in fashion. Instead, he offers a series of images of a silk dress in
coruscating, shimmering motion: its flow, its "liquefaction", its "vibration,"
its "glittering."

It's in this lovely, odd, and surprising sequence of nouns that the poem's
intrigue lies. The word "glittering" is troublesome. A ardent wooer would
be unlikely to claim that he was attracted to his beloved's "glitter.'' To
do so would be an admission of both his and her superficiality. Plus it's a
matter of record that all that glisters is not gold. The word "vibration" is
an equally curious choice. "Vibration" was brand-new to the language when this
poem was written and the Latin word from which it had recently been annexed
meant "shaking" -- as a spear or a sword is shaken in defiance of the enemy.
"Vibration" was more aggressive than it was loverly. "Liquefaction" -- the
most startling noun, was confined to an alchemical context. Taken together,
the series of dispassionate nouns dilutes any expectation that the poem is
an invitation to romance. The poet may have been "taken" --charmed -- by the
"glittering" -- but he's not all that pleased to have been so.

The contrary or anti-romantic tendency in the poem is realized in a subversive
metaphor so ingenious and subtle that it registers only subliminally."Upon
Julia's Clothes" is, figuratively speaking, about the sport of fishing. The
most overt hint is the employment of the phrase "when I cast mine eyes" which
replaces the more ordinary "when I look." Once a reader notices that piscatorial
"cast," the secondary meanings of other words become immediately clear --
especially when we recall that in those days, fishing line and fishing ties were
made of silk. The watery metaphors in "flows" and "liquefaction" provide the
stream, the "brave (extravagant) vibration" is an oscillating lure, and "how
that glittering taketh me" refers to the deluded poet, who has snapped at a
shiner and is now hooked. As soon as the metaphor bobs to the surface, "how that
glittering taketh me," which at first glance meant only "how that dress enchants
me," acquires a second meaning -- "how that lure hooks me." Julia's clothes, of
course, have been transformed into the dangerous lure.

The sestet is therefore not so much about love-longing as it is about confusion
and ambivalence toward women, toward sex and toward sexuality. Julia's clothes
captivate the poet, yes, but he's a poor fish, unwillingly enthralled.

And so the reader now understands why nothing much is made of Julia, the
supposed inhabitant of these silken, seductive clothes. It's because there is no
Julia -- that is, no specific warm-blooded woman worth the wedding, the wooing,
or even the sport. In her place, there is only an archetypical Dangerous Female
and a culturally-loaded intrapsychic battle between reluctant desire and the
deeply puritanical fear of desire.

Would it be possible to guess, strictly on the basis of this poem, that the
author of "Upon Julia's Clothes" (Robert Herrick [1591-1674]), was a clergyman
and a lifelong bachelor?

Source: 2008/02/car-chases

Title: The All-Time Most Tired Movie Cliche
Date: February 17, 2008

We watched, don't ask me why, the most recent Jason Bourne extravaganza  -- The
Bourne Hyperventilation I believe it was called. So-called "action" pictures are
not my cup of tea. In my view, it's a genre that is far too deeply infatuated
with its own cliches. The Bourne Mystification was not only prefamiliar but also
unusually tricky to follow. It consisted of swatches of flashback interspersed
with vigorous but interminable fight and chase sequences. The "action" was
delivered in a multitude of stitched-together one- and two- second slices,
which, even on the small screen, were vertiginous and almost barfitudinous.

The Bourne Hyperbole is a multiple car-chase movie. How many time do we need
to revisit this cliche? Cars spinning out of control, cars shouldering each
other for a place on the highway, cars ramming into each other, cars becoming
airborne, cars landing on their sides, cars weaving into the oncoming lane, cars
on sidewalks, sirens blaring, hoods flying open, windows shot out, guys shooting
pistols at each other while driving one-handed at 100 mph -- interspersed with
one-second glances at the speedometer, one-second glances of a foot on a brake
-- all followed by the inevitable noisy, multiple-vehicle crash where the nasty
hired killer winds up dead while our invincible hero emerges with only minimal,
symbolic scathe. Is there anything in movies today that is more hectic, more
predictable, or more boring?

Let me ask my readership this art-versus-life question -- what is the ratio of
your own participation and/or observation of real-life car chases compared to
the number of car chases that you've seen in movies?  Am I the only twentieth-
century American who has never been shot at or pursued? Never seen a fleeing
Oldsmobile pass just inches in front of the oncoming semi? Yet I've experienced
the film version of that very scene scores -- perhaps hundreds -- of times.

I think that in the next century, when movies will be studied by historians
eager to understand the great age of petroleum-based transportation (as well as
the golden age of film), our descendants will take it for granted that it was
absolutely ordinary for pedestrians out for a Sunday stroll to be driven from
the sidewalk by an out-of-control vehicle (usually a commandeered taxi trailed
by a gaggle of motorcycle cops). They will think that in our century, there was
never a time that a fruiterer put that last orange on top of his pyramid of
oranges that some sort of vehicle didn't barrel into the display. They will know
that any time, day or night, every plate glass showroom window in North America
was liable to have a station wagon hurtle through it. Often in slow motion.

So here's my proposal for a new rating system for movies. In addition to the
three or four stars, let's announce in advance how many car chases we are going
to experience  -- or better still, exactly how many cars were destroyed during
the making of the film. It would certainly help me choose my entertainment if
I were to learn that The Bourne Yesterday was a three-star, two-car chase, 197
exploded vehicles film.

While we're changing the rating system, I have another idea. Let's also have
a Cute Puppy warning.  I'm thinking of that scene where the hero and heroine
finally make it to bed and there's a reaction shot of Cute Puppy putting his paw
over his eyes. I never, ever, want to see that one again. Agreed: no more car
chases, no more Cute Puppies. Life will be richer.

One further exercise: let us divide the number of cases of amnesia encountered
in film by the number of cases of amnesia encountered in real life. And the
answer is: it's impossible to divide by zero.

Source: 2008/02/john-milton-and

Title: John Milton and Docosahexaenoic Acid
Date: February 19, 2008

Your “mature” brain has mind of its own. It is intermittently balky and
stubborn, reluctant to yield up its stored data.

Many years ago I memorized a few of John Milton’s sonnets.  These poems are
not only noble and politically engaged, they are also reflective, immaculately
crafted, challenging, and melodious  -- as good as any short poems in the
language.

One night, a week or so ago, insomniac as usual, I tried to recall one of the
finest of the sequence -- the great sonnet in which Milton condemned the ethnic
cleansing by Roman Catholic Savoyards of a colony of Swiss Protestants.

There was a time when I knew this poem like the back of my hand, but try as
I might, all that I could dredge out of my recalcitrant mind was the single
phrase “triple tyrant.”  (In Miltonese, the “triple tyrant” is the
Pope, wearer of a three-tiered crown.) It's mighty frustrating to have so rusty
a brain.

The next night, sleepless once again, I re-activated the tired old memory system
and was able to scrape up a few more words. I retrieved “where still doth
sway the triple tyrant.” (The word “sway” does not imply that the Pope
has taken to dancing but rather that the holy father “holds sway” over his
dominions.) In two days, I had assembled only a single line of poetry and still
needed thirteen more to complete the sonnet.  This sorry state of affairs cried
out for radical new approach to memory-jogging.

It is well known that Omega-3 fatty acids (i.e. fish oils) increase the rate
of transmission of certain brain waves that are linked to memory. On the third
day of my adventure in sonnet-recall, I swallowed a fish oil pill rich in
docosahexaenoic acid (commonly known as DHA). When I woke up next morning, there
it was on the tip of my tongue (or the top of my brain) -– another line and
a half of the sonnet:  “Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that rolled/ Mother
with infant down the rocks.” Did I do it all by myself? Or could it possibly
have been the DHA?

And in what part of the brain lay hidden this poignant line of poetry before
I was able to summon it?  In what chemical form?  Clearly the words were
in storage, so to speak, but why couldn’t I freely access them? Was I
unconsciously running some sort of failed search program?  Attention
searchers:  examine poetry quadrant for missing sonnets by Milton, John
[1608-1673]. Did the DHA shift the words from a dusty neglected old storeroom to
facility currently in us?

Does fish oil really lubricate memory?

The next day, I doubled my intake of the oily acid and, marvelous to say,
came up with the poem’s last line:  “Early may fly the Babylonian
woe” ("Babylon" is reformation code for "Rome"). On the fourth day of this
experiment, I took three fish oil pills and lo and behold was able to remember
the entire first quatrain of the sonnet:  “Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered
saints, whose bones/ Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold,/ Even them
who kept thy truth so pure of old,/  When all our fathers worshiped stocks
and stones.”  There it is: Milton’s agony and fury, his uncompromising
conviction, his contempt for pre-Reformation idol-worship, plus the confidence,
that, because he's something of a prophet himself, he can boss god around.

I continued to take the pills but I was scared to increase the dosage for fear
of provoking what Milton elsewhere calls the “fishy fumes.” After several
days of medication and head-scratching, I had conjured up this much of the poem:

Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones

Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold,

Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old,

When all our fathers worshiped stocks and stones;

Forget not:

in thy [blank], [blank] their [blank]

Who were thy [blank]

Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that rolled

Mother with infant down the rocks.

where still doth sway

The triple tyrant;

A hundred-fold

Early may fly the Babylonian woe.

And then, progress came to a halt. No matter how many glutinous pills I popped,
no matter how I greased my memory, I could recover nary another syllable.
Where was the rest of the poem concealed? Why couldn’t I fish it up? Had the
molecules of which memory is constituted long ago disintegrated?

I've now declared the experiment officially over.  Although the results are
inconclusive, I've decided to continue with the fish oil regimen.  It's obvious
that my brain needs all the phospholipids it can get.

And after a week of disciplined forbearance, I've now peeked at the text of
"On the Late Massacre at Piedmont."  Every word was familiar -- even the ones
that I could not recall.  Perhaps I might ultimately have brought them to the
surface;  I'm convinced that they were lurking somewhere in the inner recesses
of the brain.

I’ll re-memorize and hope for the best.  Perhaps my newly fishified
brain is ready for a renaissance.  After all, I’m a lot richer in
phosphatidylethanolamine, ethanolamine plasmalogens, and phosphatidylserine than
I was just a week ago.

Loyal readers: here you may find John Milton's masterful sonnet "On the Late
Massacre at Piedmont." Trust me, it's worth a look. In fact, it's worth
committing to memory.

Source: 2008/02/another-roth-de

Title: Another Roth Demon-Child
Date: February 22, 2008

Philip Roth's American Pastoral (1997) attacked home-grown resistance to the
Vietnam war and featured a child of unparalleled wickedness named Merry Levov.
I've now read I Married a Communist (1999) which ridicules the post-World War
II political left and gives prominence to an even more horrible demon-daughter.
This time it's Sylphid Pennington, an Iago-strength villain, who destroys her
mother's marriage to Ira Ringold. She does so by forcing her mother to abort
Ira's child, which, if it is born, she will "strangle in its crib." Roth's
hatred of children is persistent, intransigent and obsessive. Has there been a
writer since Thomas Kyd whose writings were so empty of love (except for self-
love) and so focused on vengeance?

Moreover, what does Roth's prominence tell us about ourselves?

Source: 2008/02/two-three-tens

Title: Two Three Tens to Yuma or Two Three Ten to Yumas
Date: February 27, 2008

I had trace memory only of Delmer Daves' 1957 3:10 to Yuma, a film that I had
not seen since the days of my youth. In my mind it was bracketed with a much
better morality-play western, High Noon (1952). I am, frankly, a little vain
that I was able to recall that Van Heflin played the Gary Cooper part of the
good man deserted by fearful townspeople while the clock ticks toward the
climactic arrival of the Iron Horse and while Frankie Laine strums and sings
off-screen. Of course, so much detail had evaporated from the ol'  tired brain
that the return to the 1950s was, once again, well, not mind-blowing, but
certainly eye-opening.

3:10 to Yuma is a remarkably spare noirish western -- not a classic, but
respectable and well-made. At its heart is the near-friendship that develops
between the bad guy Ben Wade as acted by smooth and charming Glenn Ford, and his
captor, the god-fearing impoverished settler Dan Evans, played by the ever-gruff
Van Heflin (reprising his role in Shane). As the two (Wade and Evans) test
each other, an odd mutual respect springs up between them. Wade has money and
authority and the perennial appeal of lawlessness while Evans is grounded in his
ranch and his family.  Each envies the other. The relationship is imperfectly
delineated and as a result the ending of the film is huddled and unsatisfying.

Slipping the DVD of the brand new 3:10 to Yuma into the machine, I thought,
ah, here's a chance to remedy the original. This time, get that off-kilter
relationship between Wade and Evans right;  clarify the ending. I wanted a
suspenseful film rich in psychological insights. I couldn't have been more
disappointed. James Mangold's reworking of 3:10 to Yuma is bigger, noisier, and
a ton more expensive than the original. It adds a lot of ruckus:  a fight with
Indians, a barn-burning, feuding townsfolk, a pair of sadistic monomaniacal
killers, a gruesome bullet extraction that belongs on the surgery channel, a
cursed pistol, thirty seconds of gratuitous torture, and most of all, hundreds
of fatalities. In terms of melodrama and gunfire, there's certainly much
more bang for the buck, but the characters themselves are flatter and less
interesting and the climax, problematical in the first 3:10 to Yuma, is totally
botched and incoherent. An opportunity squandered!

And yesterday I saw the acclaimed Michael Clayton, an eastern western. This
time the bad guy is a woman, chief counsel to a nasty polluting international
conglomerate. Will the good man, Michael Clayton, under financial and emotional
siege, resist temptation and stand up for the right, like Gary Cooper and Van
Heflin and Humphrey Bogart before him? What do you think? Will it spoil anyone's
appreciation of Michael Clayton if I hint that George Clooney finds his place in
the long line of inarticulate American heroes?

Here's the paradoxical upshot: there's less of the old 3:10 to Yuma in the new
3:10 to Yuma than there is old 3:10 to Yuma in the new Michael Clayton.

Source: 2008/03/cautionary-song

Title: "Cautionary" Songs of the 1950s
Date: March 03, 2008

A while back, I recalled that during the late 1940s and early 1950s, students
at P. S. 217 in Flatbush were force fed patriotic and religious music. I've now
remembered (perhaps it's the DHA) that we were also indoctrinated with songs
that could be called "cautionary."  For example: do not chase a bouncing ball
into the street, because while you could get a new ball, but "you can't always
get a new leg."

I also remember a lyric in which we were exhorted to solicit divine
intervention, and which contained these deistic lines: "Pray in any language, to
Him they all are dear/ Pray for it is music to His ear." It was this same song,
I believe, in which we were allowed the ecumenical freedom to pray "in temple,
mosque, or tabernacle,/ He won't need to search."  (I had heard of temples, but
the word "mosque" was beyond my ken and "tabernacle" was a complete mystery,
though it had warm associations with "pumpernickel.")

Does anyone out there in Bloglandia remember either of these songs?  Or other
cautionary songs from the old days? They don't google. Any information or
citations will be much appreciated.

Incidentally, despite the well-meant advice, I pursued many a rubber ball into
the street. Nor was I ever once moved to pray in a consecrated building, except
perhaps in Ebbets Field, and then only in tough ninth-inning situations.

Source: 2008/03/hoop-news

Title: Hoop News
Date: March 04, 2008

Extremely important bulletin:  Cornell's basketball team is going to the NCAA
tournament -- first time in a generation.  Twelve and 0 in the Ivy League,
Randy Wittman's son the main man.

Is the Big Red going to manhandle Kansas and UCLA and Duke?  I'm not, at this
moment, prepared to bet the house.  But Cinderelloid success is not beyond
possibility.

Let's hear it for Cornell, where I took my first timid steps into adulthood.

March 22.  Bad news:  Cornell played like a bunch of junior high-schoolers. 
They were nervous and intimidated.  Hey, Duke didn't do much better.  And is
that a rug that Coach K is wearing, or is he just using too much black shoe-
polish?

Source: 2008/03/sweet-and-lowdo

Title: Sweet and Lowdown
Date: March 08, 2008

Woody Allen's Sweet and Lowdown is a sentimental love story with an unhappy
ending.  Like most of Allen's works, it has become a far better work of art
with a few years on its back than it seemed on first viewing (1999) -- probably
because audiences habitually come to the Woodman's films with the mouth set
for wisecracks and one-liners.  Woody's films grow on you;  some day, when
the fuss has died down, their emotional range and artistry will be better
recognized.

The lovers in Sweet and Lowdown are Emmett Ray, who talks constantly but says
very little, and Emmett's girlfriend Hattie, who is mute but miraculously
expressive.  Emmett is a shallow, vain, brittle, damaged bit of goods who
exempts himself from emotion and human connection with the assertion that he's
an "artist."  Hattie is said to be dull-witted but whether she is or not we
don't know.  We do know that she's a woman of great appetites: for sex, for
food, for music.  Emmett cannot acknowledge that she's his best audience and he
runs like the wind when it's revealed that she loves him.  The climax of the
film is inarticulate: all Emmett can manage is "I've made a mistake."  Viewers,
however, can easily fill in the gaps.

It's a fine and lovely movie, well worth the re-seeing if only for the music and
the affectionate re-creation of the 30s jazz scene.  And also for the acting. 
Sean Penn twists his face into an expression of perpetual dissatisfaction.  His
Emmett Ray, except for a redeeming moment or two, is horrid and knows it.  On
the other side of the coin, Samantha Morton is transcendent as the vulnerable
but resilient Hattie.

See Sweet and Lowdown for what it is.  It's not a farce;  it's not raucus. 
Don't look to it for more than it offers or for something other than it
offers.  It's sufficient unto itself.

Source: 2008/03/away-from-herfi

Title: Away From Her/Fiona Andersson/Julie Christie
Date: March 10, 2008

Away From Her explores the infinitely sorrowful subject of early-onset
Alzheimer's. Fiona Andersson, in her vigorous mid-sixties, has begun to lose
her way and to forget names; she stores the frying pan in the refrigerator. She
thinks that she’s “beginning to disappear.” Fiona’s plight is worrisome
to every human being but it is especially disturbing to people of her own and of
Julie Christie's generation.

Here in our home we still manage to find appropriate places for the cooking
utensil, mostly.  Nevertheless, things happen. We set out to purchase six
items at the market and come home with just three. We have three errands to
perform and we arrive back home with two of the tasks undone. We put the camera
in a special secure place and then spend a couple of hours searching for it.
Keys and lists and books and tickets regularly evaporate or disintegrate or
dematerialize.  Are these forgettings normal or are we en route to something
that is too horrible to contemplate?

We exercise, we eat carefully, we gulp those horrid fish oil boluses. Perhaps
these defensive procedures have value. Perhaps we'll be the ones to dodge the
Alzheimer bullet.  Perhaps we won't.

It doesn’t help that we spend many hours a week at the facility where the Aged
Parent is incarcerated. We encounter people just like Fiona -- or the remnants
of them -- every day.  They're hollow shells, slumped in the wheelchair or
poking at the boiled-to-mush food. The angry ones, the ones with dead eyes, the
ones who moan all day long, “help me.” Better the Seconal and applesauce,
the ice floe, or the bullet in the brain than to live in such horrible oblivion.

In Away From Her, Julie Christie is entirely persuasive as the alzheimered
Fiona. But let me ask you, friends of a certain age-cohort, is it really
possible that that gray old lady was Julie Christie? Here’s a woman I’ve
known for forty-five years, ever since she was Liz for thirty incandescent
seconds in Billy Liar -- and feckless Billy was too much of a jerkass coward
to run away with her. Julie and I have had a long (albeit entirely one-sided)
relationship.  I was dazzled by her when she was the voracious Diana Scott in
Darling and I feared for her when she was Laura Baxter in Nicholas Roeg’s
scary-as-all-hell Don't Look Now.  She was my favorite Gertrude. But Fiona
Andersson is outside any recognizable trajectory;  she's too raw, too
dislocating to my tender sense of the way things ought to be.  No, Julie will
always be Liz to me.  I've held on to that first image for most of my adult
life.

I have no intention of progressing to the "second floor," or to sunset village
or to memory lane or to however they euphemize the place that they put the folks
with clogged synapses, but, if I should find myself in such a state, let's hope
that it won't be Fiona but Liz to whom the brain clings.

Source: 2008/03/what-happened-i

Title: What Happened at the County Assembly
Date: March 16, 2008

At the precinct caucus last month, I was chosen to be a delegate to the county
assembly.  The assembly is where we Dems nominate candidates for county-wide
offices (and do a lot of other business, using procedures that are obscure to
veterans and incomprehensible to first-time attendees).  Yesterday, we filled
the Skyline High School auditorium with 1600 delegates, at least three-quarters
of whom were young, impatient pro-Obama initiates.  It was exciting and even
more chaotic than usual.

All of the local Dem incumbents were re-nominated without opposition, but there
were some open and contested seats: a state senator, a university regent, and,
the big one, a congressman (our longtime representative Mark Udall is making a
run for the U. S. Senate).  And also the Clinton-Obama showdown, but that event
wasn't held at the morning county assembly but reserved for the afternoon county
convention, to which I was not credentialed.

I was in place at 7:15 A.M, handing out leaflets and stickers for Rollie Heath,
a candidate whom I'm supporting for state senator.  Politicking inures you to
rejection.  Some delegates for the other candidate, Cindy Carlisle, wouldn't
accept my piece of paper; they acted as though it would compromise their
integrity to read or even to touch my pamphlet.  Sometimes they were downright
and inexcusably rude, even though we're all Dems and all in the same family.

The new attendees didn't seem to realize that before we could get to Obama,
we had to carry out the business of local government.  I heard occasional
grumbling and a lot of puzzlement and confusion.  But in compensation there
were some rousing addresses:  Ken Salazar, our middle-of-the-road Senator,
adapting to his audience, emphasized his liberal side.  I'm skeptical of
Salazar, but better a centrist Democrat than a benighted Republican.

Eventually we voted.  The morning results were predictable.  My candidate for
state office came in second but qualified for the party primary, which is in
August.  The race will be a marathon.  But the good news is that whoever wins
the nomination won't have a Republican opponent -- the other side is punting on
state senator.  The Repubs are also surrending the congressional seat, where
Fitz-Gerald won over Polis;  there will be a three-way Democratic primary
(Shafroth is "not going the caucus route" but petitioning on -- I said that
it's  complicated).

In the afternoon, Obama had a smashing 3-1 win over Clinton.

Here's the million-dollar question:  will the Obama enthusiasm carry over to
the general election?  Will the young 'uns who turned out yesterday still
be around in October to donate, to walk the precincts, stuff the envelopes,
make the phone calls?  Or are they just in it for the glamor of the moment? 
Colorado's now in play; it's a swing state.  We could go blue. But not unless
Bush-disgust, Obama- love translates into weeks and months hard work.

Source: 2008/03/pmy-positionsp

Title: My Campaign for City Council
Date: March 16, 2008

It's election season once again. I'm thinking of making a run for city council
in our progessive western town. Here's my new platform, voters.

1.  NO LEAF BLOWERS.  Rationale: it's a horrible noisy unecological machine that can easily be replaced with a broom. And everyone knows that single-stroke engines are major polluters.

2.  ALL MALL PERFORMERS MUST BE JURIED. Rationale: no more off-key singing. No more bad juggling.  No more ugly balloon animals. No more noisy drummers or whining didgeredoos.

3.  EVERY RESTAURANT MUST KEEP A PIG. Rationale: a perfect. ecologically-sound solution to the waste food problem. Come to think of it, let's require a piggery of all institutions with lunchrooms, such as high schools and hospitals. Let's fatten up those porkers, turn them into bacon and savory spare ribs.

4.  NO "HOLIDAY" LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce resources. Global warming. Bad taste. Bad theology. Bauble-olatry.

5.  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale: uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. (I reject out of hand those extremists who propose to celebrate Darwin's birthday on December 25. I'm a uniter, not a divider.)

6.  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897?  Death of Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music of any kind in an automobile that is audible outside the vehicle. Higher fines and jail terms hip hop and for excessively patriotic "country."

7.  NO SMOKERS.  Rationale:  lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, disgusting odor, cigarette litter. Note: not "no smoking"-- "no smokers." No going outside of city limits to light up and then re-entering.

8.  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Why only "visible "tattoos?  Because whole-body inspections might be considered intrusive by squishy civil libertarians. Also, no nose rings, navel rings, or other bodily piercings. Except earrings. I rather like earrings. But no more than one per ear.

9.  ANNUAL JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PRAIRIE DOG SHOOT AND BARBECUE. Let them kids exercise their Second Amendment rights; eliminate them pesky varmints;  learn to cook. One platform position, three social benefits.

10. NO DOGS PERMITTED WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal dog attacks, dog bites, barking dogs, whining dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs carrying on in parks and open space, the goopy indulgence of dog "guardians," the ecological disaster of dog food. But what about seeing-eye dogs, you ask?  Well, that's a slippery slope, ain't it. Sorry folks, no dogs (except for purposes of vivisection).

11.  NO MORE COLLEGE FOOTBALL. Rationale: I don't like college football.

12.  NO "FACILITATORS" WITH WHITEBOARDS OR FLIPCHARTS AT OFFICIAL MEETINGS. Goodness gracious, do I ever hate those things.

That's about it. I feel that I have my finger on the pulse of the
electorate. It's going to be a landslide. Tell me that life won't be better as
soon as we enact these new laws.

Source: 2008/03/irene-nemirovsk

Title: Irene Nemirovsky's Fire in the Blood
Date: March 21, 2008

Irene Nemirovsky's spare but luminous novella, Fire in the Blood, is set in an
out-of-the-way French village a few years before the start of World War II. 
Just as the plot is beginning to come to a boil, the author interjects an easy-
to-overlook but very telling incident.  "A car full of Parisians arrived and
stopped in front of the Hotel des Voyaguers. 'It's so quiet,' one woman said." 
The automobile and its condescending passengers soon drive on and Nemirovsky,
speaking through her narrator, offers her readership a few words of guidance: 
"How many peaceful sleepy places they'll drive through tonight, how many sleepy
villages.... They'll pass silent sombre country estates and will not begin to
imagine the dark secret life within -- a life they will never come to know."

In Fire in the Blood, Nemirovky's subject is Issy-l'Eveque and its "dark secret
life."  As it turns out, there is as much mystery and passion in this corner
of rural Burgundy as in Paris or any other modern metropolis.  In fact, the
yearnings and loves and jealousies and inhibitions of these patronized village
folk soon achieve nothing less than tragic proportion.

Fire in the Blood resists easy classification. It's a satire, a novel of
manners, a mystery, and also a romance. Nemirovsky manages to depict an entire
society in little -- not only its ingrained customs, but the resistance to those
customs.

Not to spoil the story, but here's the situation: unmarried old Uncle Sylvio,
after many years abroad, has returned home to the village of his birth.  His
upstanding young niece Colette marries a local miller named Jean Dorin.  A
couple of years later, Jean Dorin falls into the river and drowns.  Uncle
Silvio happens to know that his niece has been carrying on an affair and he
also knows that her young lover has been visiting not just Colette but also
Brigitte Declos, an attractive woman married to an elderly farmer.  From this
beginning, the story takes a series of winding and unanticipated turns.  But
Nemirovsky is not content merely to complicate the plot. Her quarry is larger: 
it's the moral and psychological ramifications of Issy-l'Eveque's mysteries. 
Indeed, the story, the plot ends thirty pages before the novel comes to a close,
and revelations that at first seem like a coda became a climax. It's a little
miracle that Nemirovsky has created a story that manages to be both a wicked
satire of rural complacency and an exhortation to a more full life.

I've now read Fire in the Blood twice, the second time with great care.  The
novella was more intricate, more carefully plotted the second time than I had
noticed or appreciated.  Unless I'm deceiving myself, this is one heck of a
piece of writing.  I'm dazzled.

Irene Nemirovsky was thirty-nine years old when she was murdered at Auschwitz in
1942.  She wrote Fire in the Blood in 1940.  Thought to have been lost, the
manuscript was discovered in an old valise and the novella published for the
first time in 2007.

How many more stories might Nemirovksy have told?  How much more life might she
have lived?

Source: 2008/03/the-kent-theatr

Title: The Kent Theater/ Sex
Date: March 23, 2008

I can't recommend Marion Meade's The Unruly Life of Woody Allen (New York,
2000), which I too hastily snatched off the library shelf. Written at the
tabloid height of the Woody-Mia-Soon-yi fracas, it masquerades as a biography
but in truth it's nothing more than scandalmongery.

Before it gets down in the dirt, however, Unruly Life offers a quick summary of
Allen’s life, a matter of which I was largely ignorant. Of course I knew that
Allen was a Brooklyn boy who grew up in the old neighborhood. Allen Koenigsberg
attended P. S. 99 on East 10 Street near Avenue K (where my cousin Louie was
also a student). In addition, I knew, from Louie, that P. S. 99's principal was
Eudora Fletcher and that, in the very inventive chameleon movie, Woody gave Ms.
Fletcher's name to the psychiatrist who takes Zelig under her wing.

But cousin Louie did not know, or did not bother to tell me, that Allen was a
frequent patron of the Kent Theater on Coney Island Avenue and that it's rumored
that it was at the Kent that the interior scenes in The Purple Rose of Cairo
were filmed. I've seen Purple Rose recently and if it wasn't the Kent, it sure
looks like the Kent of my memory. The Kent, along with its sister theater, the
Leader, was one of my own childhood haunts. In fact, it was my father’s aunt
Manya, substitute cashier, who sometimes sat in the box office and took my
quarter.

It was not at the Kent but at the Jewel Theater on Kings Highway that Allen
encountered Ingmar Bergman for the first time. Well, not exactly Bergman
himself. It was Harriet Andersson disrobing in Summer with Monika that seems to
have caught Allen's attention. Unruly Life reports that Allen sat “with eyes
bulging” to watch this and other early Bergman films.

Allen’s protruding orbs brought to mind the impact that those shocking 1950s
Scandinavian films had on the days of my early adolescence. It was at the Kent
(aunt Manya must not have been on duty that day) that I once watched a Danish
film in which there was a very brief flash of a woman in naked silhouette. All I
can remember is that I sat through to watch the picture again -- it might even
have been a double feature -- and that by the time the silhouette appeared a
second time, my poor bladder was so swollen (I was afraid to leave my seat for
fear of missing the moment) that it was about to rupture. How embarrassing it
would have been to die of an aneurysm of the urinary tract simply to catch a
glimpse of Harriet Andersson or one of her friends.

In the 1950s, naked bodies were simply not on view. Never at all, at least not
in my slice of the universe. I doubt that anyone from the post-Vietnam, post-
sexual-revolution generation can imagine how nude-deprived were those severely
repressed years. Bodies, women's bodies, were so rare and mysterious that a
brief and evanescent flash of shadowed skin, circa 1953, could remain in the
memory for more than fifty years.

Which is why I retain the warmest feelings for Coney Island Avenue's Kent
Theater.

Source: 2008/03/aficionados-of

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  Mutiny on the Bounty
Date: March 24, 2008

Aficionados of this blague will remember that Dr. M. occasionally revisits
books that were notorious in the days of his unnaturally elongated adolescence.
Here’s a small sample of the novels that Dr. M has reported upon: I the Jury,
King Solomon's Mines, The Caine Mutiny, Blackboard Jungle, The Amboy Dukes, Lord
of the Flies, Catcher in the Rye, Scaramouche. It’s quite the roster, isn't
it, of time-sensitive material.

Some of these novels have worn astonishingly well. Others are merely
astonishing: what in the world could I (or the drab Eisenhower-era sensibility,
for that matter) have possibly found worthwhile in most of these colossally
dated and inartistic fictions?

To extend my anti-nostalgia, I’ve now tackled, for the first time in more
than fifty years, a novel that enthralled the heck out of me back then. It’s
Nordhoff and Hall’s Mutiny on the Bounty, first published in 1932 but widely
read at least through the 1950s. Why was I so infatuated? Certainly not because
of the novelists’ skill. The story of the tyrannical Captain Bligh, the
Byronic rebel Fletcher Christian, the mutiny, the open boat, and the settlement
of Pitcairn offered the opportunity to engage all the important themes: family,
power, sex and love, religion, sanity, rebellion, technology, colonialism and
cultural conflict. But N and H fell far miles short of the mark – not only did
they write gawky sentences, but they also left gaping holes in the plot, created
disappointingly shallow characters, and failed to explore the opportunities for
thoughtful commentary. The novel is swift and superficial and clumsy.  It’s
not for all time; it’s for the supermarket checkout stand.

Nevertheless, there’s little mystery as to why the novel captured this
Brooklynites's youthful fancy. What adolescent would demand artistry from a
novel that is awash with exoticism, romance, and sex?

Let us consider the following piece of reheated anthropological observation.
Midshipman Byam (the story is cunningly told through the eyes of a juvenile
narrator) attends a Tahitian entertainment at which young women perform a dance
“believed by the Indians (i.e. Tahitians) to ensure the fertility of the
crops.”

The dress of the dancers consisted of no more than a wreath of flowers and green
leaves about their waists, and the dance itself, in which they stood in two
lines of three, face to face, was of a nature so unbelievably wanton that no
words could convey the least idea of it.

“No more than a wreath of flowers about their waists?”  Does that
mean…?  Holy smoke. “Unbelievably wanton?"  Exactly how wanton is that? 
What in the censorious world did these young ladies actually do?  They
didn’t…?   No, they couldn't. “No words could convey….”

What grand openings did N and H leave to be filled by an inexperienced but
lascivious imagination!

And how does Midshipman Byam deal with such provocations?  Good luck for him as
well as for all the randy young readers who identified with his circumstances. 
Byam takes as his eager concubine a young Tahitian woman. “Slenderly and
strongly made, in the first bloom of young womanhood, and with her magnificent
dark hair unbound, Maimiti made a picture worth traveling far to behold.”

OK, so I fell for it.  Sure it was contrived and manipulative.  But I was
thirteen or so years old, living in concrete, subwayed, bepigeoned Flatbush
where young ladies danced not in wreaths of flowers but in stiff and forbidding
crinolines. Exactly how many fertility ceremonies had I attended?  I was
exoticism-deprived.

I’m just slightly embarrassed to admit that I did not just read Mutiny on the
Bounty and call it a day.  Not at all.  Instead, I read everything that I
could find about Bligh and Christian and Pitcairn Island and even about Norfolk
Island, where the mutineers relocated after Pitcairn became overpopulated. I
became something of an expert on the geography of these islands. I also took to
reading about nineteenth-century sailing vessels, and though an arrant land-
lubber, I could accurately, in those days, define taffrail, yardarm, orlop,
lanyard, hawse-hole, gimbal, lanyard, poop, mizzen.

Nor was it all erotic displacement. Although I began with Nordhoff and Hall, I
later read Cook and Bouganville and eventually moved on to the writings of Mead
and Malinowski and others in that pioneering generation of anthropologists. 
Of course I didn't understand much and have long forgotten what I read -- but
neither Maimiti "with magnificent dark hair unbound" nor that unbelievably
wanton ceremony ever entirely evaporated from my susceptible, impressionable
young brain.

Source: 2008/03/a-parable-for-1

Title: A Parable for Teachers of Writing
Date: March 29, 2008

My good friend Professor L---- is an eminent scholar of American literature
and an upstanding  teacher at the University of C------.  A few months ago,
Professor L------ told me the following story. I repeat it unvarnished and
unadorned -- a curious but instructive anecdote from the trenches of learning.
Some years ago, on the last day of the semester, a student approached my friend
and gushed:  "Oh, Professor L-----, I just want to tell you what a great course
this was, and what a great teacher you are. I learned so much. Especially about
writing. I really really appreciated all the thoughtful comments you made on
my papers. You were so helpful. I feel like I've made a great deal of progress
with my writing. I have just one question. Why do you always write "frog,"
"frog," "frog" all over the margins of my essays?"This anecdote raises a number
of questions. The most obvious: if the student thought that Professor L -----
was afflicted with some sort of obscure batrachian obsession, why didn't she
raise the point with him or with the proper medical authorities?  Poor child,
she must have been both mystified and intimidated.However, it's not the student
but the teacher who should profit from this parable. Here are a few of its many
moralia.If you're a teacher of writing, don't assume that any student knows the
difference between a sentence and a fragment. Or even knows that there is such a
thing as a fragment. Don't assume that just because you have written something
that you think is helpful in the margin of an essay that therefore a student a)
reads it, b) understands it) or c) profits from it. Even more important:  don't
imagine that enthusiastic praise from a middling student has the slightest value
-- it's simple vanity to think so. In fact, better not to build any structure,
however slight, on a foundation of student regard.

And finally: mind your minims.

Source: 2008/03/news-from-alame

Title: News from Alameda
Date: March 31, 2008

We’re in Alameda, California, for ten days, visiting the grandchildren and
also their parents. The big news here is that the Alameda public schools
are in a money crunch. The root cause is Proposition 13, the granddaddy of
pernicious tax-limiting amendments (we have one in Colorado, too -- it’s
paralyzed us). The immediate precipitant of the Alameda crisis is Governor
Schwarzenegger’s plan to balance the budget by cutting brazillions of dollars
out of the education budget. Public-spirited citizens in the island city
have responded by proposing a supplementary “parcel tax” -- most people
say property tax –- of $120 per "parcel" of real estate to help the school
district survive these dark days. To me, the tax supplement is an imperfect but
obvious fix.  Public schools must be supported, and if the state shirks its
responsibility, local effort must ride to the rescue.

There’s the usual testy opposition: too much fat in the budget; teachers are
overpaid; school board is incompetent; bad planning. I know enough about public
education's lean diet not to be swayed.

What gets my goat is that some of the arguments against the supplement are just
plain mean. Here’s an example. A local curmudgeon named Guy Smith has written
a guest opinion in the Alameda Journal under the heading: “Make Parents Pay
for Child’s Education,” His gist: “It is no longer appropriate to tax
childless homes for public education.” And also:  people who support such
taxes suffer from “collectivist mentalities."

And here I thought that the American constitution had in its preamble a phrase
about promoting the “general" and not just the individual welfare. No doubt 
Mr. Smith would stigmatize Madison and Jefferson as early collectivists.

The argument that the childless need not contribute to education is flimsy  --
so slight that it’s hard to believe that it’s argued in good faith and is
not just a rationale for skinflintism. Does Mr. Smith think that he shouldn’t
pay for the fire department or the police department, except on the days that he
happens to use them?

Does he think that he doesn’t profit from the educational system because he
has no children in school. He can read and write. Did he teach himself?  He’s
sitting at a computer, designed by someone with an education. His chair and his
table and his coffee and the cup out of which he drinks his coffee were designed
or planned or imported or constructed or distributed by people who could read
and write and figure. Take away the learning of his predecessors and members of
his own age-cohort and Mr. Smith would be out there chasing squirrels with a
flint hand-ax. And whining about the cost of the clan-supplied flint.

The essence of  Mr. Smith’s argument is selfish and narcissistic  --
“I’ve got mine – you take care of  yourself.”  It’s shallow, vulgar
libertarianism.

It's a shame that these nay sayers need to be reminded that we’re all in this
together. We’re interconnected -- a tissue of tessellations.

Even Mr. Smith must know, deep in his heart, that when he promotes the general
welfare, he improves his own lot. In fact, the parcel tax will be the best
investment he’ll ever make.

Source: 2008/03/post

Title: P. S. 217 Graduating Class:  June, 1952
Date: March 31, 2008

On your left is the official photograph of the 1952 P. S. 217 eighth grade
graduating class, contributed by a classmate who now teaches in Brazil. (Click
to enlarge). It's quite the time capsule, isn't it -- the dated costumes, the
old-fashioned hairstyles, along with the clean-cut and dewy enthusiasm of far-
away-and-long-ago youth. What has become of these promising young people? Some
of them have long since left the planet and some are no doubt still engaged in
distinguished careers. Do any of them still live in the old neighborhood? 
Sent their children or grandchildren to the old school?

A panel of experts has tentatively identified some of the graduates. Some of
these ascriptions are sure to be inaccurate. Corrections, suggestions and
comments are very welcome.

FIRST ROW, left to right:  Carl Bernstein, Robert F. Cohen (now Robert C.
Forst, attorney, Montecito, CA), Michael Silver (ret. stockbroker, Queens),
Michael Gerber, Nicholas Antonucci (said to have died in Korea), Arne Neilson,
unknown, unknown, William Roberts, unknown, George Coven (entrepreneur, owner
of Score Oil and Zodiac nightclub, d. 1983), Ralph Tromba, supposedly living
in steamy Florida, Theodore (Teddy) Schorr;  SECOND ROW: Ira Bernstein,
Bernard Sandigorsky, Anthony (Buddy) Sogluizzo (semi-retired from a career in
librarianship), Elihu Pearlman (Boulder, Colorado), Helene Rosen, Sylvia Gordon,
Harold Jacobson, Fred Ljubicich, Donald Carbone, Michael Brody;  third row:
Ann Cacioppa, Ria De Castri, Claire Rabinowitz (now Claire Maret, formerly
Dominican Republic, now Orlando), Charlotte Meineke, Carol Gerber, Marlene Gold,
Ruth Rubinstein, Eleanor Troy, Sheila Katz, Carol Coniglio, Barbara Heiferman,
Maureen Haynes, two unknowns, Josephine Casalino, unknown, unknown, Mary Anne
Abrahams, Sandra Abrahams;  fourth row: Yvette Rosenthal, Beryl McLeod, Sandra
Roseman, unknown, Anita Friedman, Karen Scheer, Jeanne Boyce, Barbara Dinner,
Bridget Pugliese, Carol Zeitlin,  Marjorie Rennick, Selma Schnier, unknown,
Wendy Rosenberg, Mimi Shyko, Barbara Wolowitz, Evelyn and/or Norma Greenberg,
unknown, Leah Goodman, Rochelle Yasser, Ruth Wintheil, Beverley Leventhal, Lori
Katcher (now Laurie Lindner, psychoanalyst, NJ), two unknowns, Hilda Tarud; 
fifth row: Herbie Wessoly aka Percy Wessoly, Albie Luongo, Donald Schiebel,
Daniel Roos (Prof at MIT), Thomas Bellavita, John McKay, Alan Lipis, Robert
Goldstein (retired orthodontist, now of Asheville, NC), Alan Ihrig, Lester
Silberman (ret NE ob/gyn), Harvey Greif, Melvin Polay (CPA, died 1996) Howard
Nirenberg, Morton Kamienny, Eric Sanders, Herbert Damsky, unknown, unknown,
Melvyn Krauss, Martin Wallenstein;  SIXTH ROW:  Anne Perkins, Linda Bly,
Francine Hershkowitz, unknown, Diane Spatz, Appolonia Yacovelli, three unknowns,
Pauline Aridas, Estelle Tarman, Lisa Pomerance (finance, LA), Phyllis Mancuso,
Roberta Katcher, unknown, Janet Solomon, four unknowns, Marcia and/or Virginia
Gargiulo, unknown, Evelyn Fleishner, unknown; SEVENTH ROW: Stuart Blickstein
(now a South Carolinian), Allen Guday (longtime Israeli), Paul Citron, Stuart
(Sandy) Stillman (atty, Southampton and Scottsdale), Donald Caress (MD), Carl
Sprung, Norman Young, Jonathan Guliner, Michael O'Gorman, Stephen Lewin (ret
from a career in publishing), Edwin Lawlor, Stanley Weinberg, George Molinari,
Allan Stern, Robert Jaclin, unknown, Fredric Litto (Prof in Brazil), Fred Hohl,
Richard Schwartz, Stephen Richard Conn (Cornell grad; deceased); EIGHTH ROW:
Barbara Williams, Marcia Katz, Judith Peretzman, Norma Harris, Diane Wert,
Marilyn Snow, unknown, Dolores Bormann, Rosalind Simons, unknown, Loretta
Tillman; top row:  Alfred Podhurst, Michael Welch, unknown, Ira Blum, Herman
Bressel (USN ret, Long Beach, CA), Norman Kaufman, unknown, unknown, unknown,
Kenneth Tucker aka Drupiloff, Gary Steinberg, Charles Gillen.

May 14, 2008.  More names of members of this class have been recovered.  They
can be found at this site,  Match the name to the face and win the eternal
gratitude of your classmates.

Source: 2008/04/tamim-ansarys-w

Title: Tamim Ansary's West of Kabul, East of New York
Date: April 02, 2008

Some months ago, I reported on Hosseini's very popular novel of Afghanistan, The
Kite Runner. I thought it was a must-read-bad-book, that is, a book that is so
informative and interesting that we should overlook its inferior construction
and prose. I've now read another Afghan-American story and I have come to much
the same opinion. Tamin Ansary's West of Kabul, East of New York (FSG, 2002)
is swift and likable and necessary, but oh so very disappointing. Ansary is an
author of children's books, and, perhaps out of habit his prose is so guileless
that it seems aimed not at adults but at a junior high school audience.

Ansary's is the familiar story of an immigrant (this time half Afghani, half
Finnish-American) stranded between two cultures. His transformation may be a
little harder than most because Islam can be an inflexible integument. It's sad
to read that Ansary's brother has become a fanatical fundamentalist who has
embraced some contrary-to-reason, contrary-to-the facts-of-history dogmas. It's
even more discouraging to read of Ansary's encounter with an Egyptian cab-driver
in New York City, who says, "Thank God for the Taliban. I hate America. The
sluts.The booze. The filth. In Egypt, I am a lawyer. I can't earn enough to
support my family, so I come here for six months a year. But I never bring my
wife. I don't want her to get polluted. One of my friends brought his wife
here, and you know what she said to him. 'Don't touch me anymore.' You know
what I would do to my wife if she ever said that to me. I would take her to
the country, I would dig a hole, I would put her in that hole...."   Ansary
is a responsible and rational being and of course he's appalled and I think
embarrassed by the hatred and misogyny that he encounters in that cab. Let us
hope that it's not the angry cabbies but the Ansarys who will prevail  -- in
Islam as well as in closer-to-home religions.

Source: 2008/04/a-corner-in-ala

Title: A Corner in Alameda
Date: April 04, 2008

Over there on the west side of Alameda, at the intersection of 9th and Santa
Clara, plunked down right in the midst of an otherwise residential neighborhood,
is a most intriguing commercial island. Once upon a time, I'm sure, it would
have consisted of (let me guess) a hardware store, a mom-and-pop grocery, a
haberdashery or a shoe store, and a gas station. Now it's a fully  contemporary
American mish-mash.

The gas station has been converted into the Islamic Center of Alameda. Where
there would once have been a sign advertising Esso, there's now the harder-to-
parse motto "there is no God but Allah, the self-sustaining, eternal."
Directly across the street from the mosquette is a second store-front worship-
opportunity, the Love Fellowship Church of God in Christ. Here pride of place
goes not to Allah but to "Pastor Elder Samuel Butler," or "Pastor Elder Samuel
Bulter," depending on which hand-painted sign you put your faith. Kitty-corner
to Love Fellowship is Dance 10, no longer a shoe store, but now a venue where
budding toe-tappers are instructed in "Hop. Lyrical. Modern. Musical. Theater.
Jazz. Tap. Ballet. Acrobatics. Hip-hop."  On the fourth corner, there's a
"convenience" store, where outsized neon signs advertise "Budweiser" and
"Tecate."

It's a comprehensive assemblage: feed your soul (for them as believe they have
one), feed your feet, feed your gullet.

Source: 2008/04/advice-for-writ

Title: Advice for Writers
Date: April 13, 2008

One of this blague's more inquisitive readers is a talented young journalist who
knows that before Vivian de St. Vrain morphed into Dr. Metablog, he had spent
a lifetime either bent unproductively over the ball point or wearily pounding
on the word-processor. The young reader has asked this question:  what have
decades of practice taught you, Dr. M., about the craft of writing?  And in
response, Dr. M. has peered soulwise and discovered -- not a heck of a lot.

Yet in all fairness, the curious reader's question is flattering and deserves
a response. And therefore Dr. M. has pondered and pondered and has now refined
the drossy deposits that clog his brainal synapses into as much wisdom as he
feels qualified to dispense. (Let us be clear -- the advice that follows is not
meant to be argumentative or prescriptive or know-it-all. Different writers do
things in different ways. The precepts that are offered here may not apply to
all writing; they describe only the Way of the Metablog.)

Let us assume that the seeker of advice brings to the table intelligence and
information and a point of view -- but needs a little coaching on tactics. Point
one:

Just as I respect the first tenet of real estate -- location, location, location
-- so I subscribe to the most important (but often neglected) rule of writing,
which is

A)  plot, plot, plot, plot, plot. The writer must tell a story. People
relish stories, respond to narrative, and are most engaged when they pursue a
plot's twists and turns. Just because it's non-fiction, doesn't mean that the
story- teller's bag of tricks cannot be accessed. Fortunately, every piece of
prose from the briefest anecdote to the most convoluted intellectual argument
can and should be structured as a narrative. In non-fiction, the first rule
of plotting is to "establish the enigma." The enigma need not be a formal
question, but it's indisputable that every essay answers either an explicit or
an unspoken question. Is not every writer free to shape that implicit inquiry
to his own purposes? And in the process of delivering an answer, is he not also
free to sprinkle clues (some of them red herrings) along the path? And also
at liberty to let his readers dangle until the moment comes to gratify their
curiosity--and while they dangle, to let them endure suspense; suspense that can
be intensified by teasing the reader about what's going to happen next? And
every once in a while, to spring a surprise by veering off on an unanticipated
or even misleading tangent? Nor is there anything wrong with the judicious
flashback, the flash forward, or the deceptive digression -- tricks of the trade
that have won the laurel since the bronze age, centuries before the time when
"establish the enigma" became the watchword. Remember: "all writing is fiction,
especially non-fiction."

Connoisseurs of storytelling know that the most indispensable element in any
narrative is climax. Because climax is so essential, it must be exploited to the
full, not just on the universal level but also on the particular, and therefore

B)  every sentence should achieve climax. As a general rule, the climax should
come in the sentence's last phrase, or better still, in its final climactic
word. The crucial, contributing part of every sentence, the idea which it
strives to convey, the very target of its forward motion, should, whenever
artistically feasible, come dead last. When this precept is honored, each
sentence becomes an arrow aimed at its own natural target. And it follows
as night the day, that every paragraph should also come to climax--and that
the climax of the paragraph should be its own last sentence. So designed,
sentences and paragraphs carry within them both the exciting pressure of forward
motion and also coherence of argument. There's an ancillary benefit: when a
sentence terminates in a climax, transitions become less awkward, because the
intellectual content (or logic) of sentence B begins just where sentence A left
off, and the logic of sentence C starts where B concludes. Sentences and logic
coalesce and become as one. This maxim, true for sentences, is even more true
for paragraphs. And therefore it follows that a practiced writer, making deft
use of climax, can easily

C)  avoid ungainly mechanical transitions, such as "nevertheless," "moreover,
"on the other hand," and even that offensive bit of pop neojargonianism, "having
said that" -- for these fillers are words that constrict the thoroughfare of
thought. Of course there will be times when such connectives usefully signal a
switch in direction, but for the most part, transitions between sentences and
paragraphs should not be mechanical, i.e. by the use of conjunctive phrases and
adverbs, but logical. Logical transitions need not rely on distracting howevers,
however easy and tempting it might be to employ them. The best transitions
are transparent or, even better, invisible. If a writer studies his sentences
and is compelled to admit that they are only linked by banausic connectives,
then he must judge whether the argument he offers is truly coherent or whether
its logical weaknesses have been plastered over with rhetorical flimflammery.
Any writer who wants his prose to be persuasive will profit by examining his
connectives. And while the writer is engaged in such scrutiny, he should also
check to see that he has

D)  transferred important concepts from nouns and adjectives into verbs. And
by verbs, I mean verbs of vigor--not copulatives, passives, or colorless
neutral words like seem, appear, make, or do. I mean verbs with punch, or
better still, verbs that punch. In revising a sentence, it's a good idea to
determine whether it's the nouns and their modifiers that bear the brunt of
the argument. If they are doing more than their fair share of the labor,
then it is mandatory to reconfigure the sentence so that the verbs strain and
lift and carry. A paragraph rich in colorful verbs is active and infectious
and engaging; a paragraph loaded with nouns and modifiers can be clotted and
static. Strong verbs keep things moving. They keep the plot in gear. They add
grit and heft. And so does the related process whereby

E)  generalizations and abstractions are replaced by instances and examples.
Let me provide an example. A friend, a large man who has always savored his
sauce Bearnaise, wrote this sentence to me: "My doctor--an Asian woman who
weighs about fifteen pounds--has been hectoring me about my reluctance to
subsist on twigs and grasses." What an excellent sentence -- not just because
of the colorful verbs ("hector," "subsist"), the ironic faux-hyperbole ("about
fifteen pounds") or the fact that the sentence rises to a splendid climax,
but because of the specificity of "twigs and grasses." A lesser writer might
have, instead of "subsist on twigs and grasses," employed a bland formula such
as "go on a diet" or "become a vegetarian." But by using the concrete "twigs
and grasses" for the abstract "diet" or "vegetarian," my correspondent has
not only caught our attention and amused us, but he has created a metaphor.
"Twigs and grasses" is specific and visual and memorable. While these nouns
stand for "diet" and "vegetarian," they also stand for whatever penumbra of
meaning my friend's readers bring to the interpretation of these words. In my
own case, it's a irresistible vision of a big guy metamorphosed into a large
twitchy-nostrilled rabbit nibbling the bark of willows. Such is the paradox
of the metaphor: the more specific the word, the more spacious the liberty of
interpretation. Poets know this instinctively; that's why they're poets. But
remember, writers: metaphor is only one of a bucketload of figures of speech.
The astute writer does not limit himself to metaphor alone, but remembers
to     F)  use figures of speech of all kinds: pun, simile, alliteration,
oxymoron, parataxis, hyperbole, understatement or litotes, irony, metonymy
(where an individual stands for a class), synecdoche (where a part signifies the
whole), aposiopesis -- I could go on and on!  It's the figure of speech that
keeps things lively, that makes prose sparkle and that make readers, already
enthralled with plot and dazzled by recurrent exciting climaxes, fully engage
with the written word.  After all, writing has no value unless it attracts and
holds the reader. And so it follows that a writer must, finally,

G)  know and respect his readership. He must provide all the information that
a reader needs to follow the argument. Yet at the same time, he must resist the
temptation to be over-explicit. Let readers do some of the work. Let them
complete the connections that the writer only suggests. It will keep them on
their toes, make them feel intelligent, and retain their interest. And while
they're so engaged, the writer might remind himself of another precept, which
is to try to

H)  make syntax and logic work together. Get them on the same track. Put the
main idea in the main clause, put subordinate ideas in subordinate clauses. Put
the parenthetical idea in a parenthetical clause. Put parallel ideas in parallel
clauses, but when ideas are not parallel, emphasize their incompatibility by
using contrasting syntactic structure. Syntax is a tool. Sentences in which
logic is chugging onward and syntax is all over the map can be confusing and
even impenetrable. Alexander Pope said about poetry, "The sound should be an
echo to the sense."  In prose, the syntax should be an echo to the sense; or
rather, the sense should be an echo to the syntax; or even better, the syntax
and the sense should take each other's hand and dance the same dance. And
finally (and this time the "finally" is not meant to be misleading),

I)  scrutinize every word and see if it is necessary or whether it can either
be omitted or made more precise. When in doubt, throw it out. Or amend it. It
should be a maxim that in good writing, no one ever "walks down the street."
And by "walks down the street," I certainly do not mean "walk down the street."
"Walks down the street" is a metaphor for a colorless expression. Why should
someone walk down the street, when he can totter, or saunter, or sashay, or
hurtle, or trot, or swagger, or stagger, or promenade down an avenue, boulevard,
lane, causeway, footpath, or promenade?  English overflows with words that are
specific, evocative, and suggestive. Let's have fewer street-walkers and more
sidewalk-promenaders. Keats said the the poet should "load every rift with ore,"
and so should the writer of non-fiction. But be careful not to overload; don't
allow prose to slide toward the baroque. And at last

J)   feel perfectly free to ignore the canard that you were taught in grade
school  --that every piece of writing needs a conclusion.  It doesn't.  As a
general rule, avoid formal conclusions.

Source: 2008/04/two-separate-ti

Title: Williamsburg Bridge/ Naked City
Date: April 14, 2008

On two occasions this year the Williamsburg Bridge (from Manhattan to Brooklyn)
has made a guest appearance in the plot of my life.

In January, as faithful readers know, we set up shop in Manhattan. One day we
strolled over the bridge from the Lower East Side to the Williamsburg section of
Brooklyn. The bridge is a splendid monument of nineteenth-century technology and
the view from above is spacious and commanding. It's a restless, busy path from
one side to another; all around you, automobiles, subway trains, bicyclists,
runners, baby carriages -- the works. NYC in a Victorian nutshell.

Then, a few days ago, came the news of the death of Jules Dassin. Dassin is
famous for Never on Sunday and Topkapi, but as movie-lovers know, he was a
polished director of films noirs during the 1940s -- before Nixon, McCarthy,
and the blacklisting boys drove him into exile. We decided to embark on a
Jules Dassin festival and tribute right here on our very own giant TV. Our
first choice was Naked City (1949), a highly un-subversive policier, markedly
patriotic but disturbing because all the bad guys are vaguely "ethnic." The
climactic scenes of Naked City were shot in the Lower East Side (just where the
Williamsburg Bridge hits Delancey). The murderer/wrestler/harmonicat Willie
Garzah attempts to flee. A voice shouts, "he's on Norfolk near Rivington."
Right where we had just a few months ago wandered! It's right off the bridge!
And then Garzah panics and tries to escape by running across the Williamsburg
into Brooklyn. Police in pursuit, squad cars, pistols, shouting, shots. Garzah
climbs the girders--the very same girders, which, just a few months before, I
had decided to honor my acrophobia by not climbing. And then he's wounded, and,
as always in the movies, falls theatrically to his death.

It's peculiar, isn't it, when a store or a street-corner that you know in real
life appears in the movies. Does it mean that film tells the truth, is real,
or does the celluloid appearance provide us with some evidence that our own
life is genuine? Why should the movies sometimes seem more substantial than
the reports of our own five senses? How can art validate life? And at the
same time, don't we feel a little cheated--in the sense that our privacy--our
uniqueness--has been violated and the things and stuff that are personal to us
have been delivered over to an unappreciative anonymous world? It's odd and
disorienting when a familiar non-fiction bridge plays a supporting role in a
fictional film.

Naked City is a good, solid, intriguing piece of work, well-paced and well-
written. I'm not entirely happy with the way it treats women or the working-
classes, but then, many such films are far more culpable. I liked best the
authentic, unstaged street shots of Manhattan as it was sixty years ago.
Delancey Street was nostalgic and poetic (although the shop signs, then lettered
in Hebrew, are now mostly Chinese).

The Williamsburg Bridge, solid and substantial, has weathered the years
extremely well. It's well positioned to star in many another film.

Source: 2008/04/an-irish-airman

Title: W. B. Yeats, "An Irish Airman Foresees his Death" (1919)
Date: April 19, 2008

I know that I shall meet my fateSomewhere among the clouds above;Those that I
fight I do not hate,Those that I guard I do not love;My country is Kiltartan
Cross,My countrymen Kiltartan's poor,No likely end could bring them lossOr leave
them happier than before.Nor law, nor duty bade me fight,Nor public men, nor
cheering crowds,A lonely impulse of delightDrove to this tumult in the clouds;I
balanced all, brought all to mind,The years to come seemed waste of breath,A
waste of breath the years behindIn balance with this life, this death.

Whether the Germans or the British win the war is a matter of utter indifference
to Yeats's Irish airman. Even his own death is of no particular concern. The
pilot's detachment is Olympian. Why then does he participate in the war? The
motive, he says in the poem's most challenging phrase, is "a lonely impulse of
delight."

There is more than one historical resonance to the word "lonely." Primarily,
in this poem, it's the individual who feels himself to be separated from the
mass of mankind, which in late Romantic thought transforms him into some sort
of nascent artist. But "lonely" arises out of a second context: the solitude
experienced by the self-sufficient warrior. In this second sense, "lonely"
expresses a nostalgia for the days of chivalry or single combat that survived
into the early twentieth century only in the skies when one skilled pilot faced
another (on the ground, it was all inglorious machine guns, barbed wire, poison
gas, trench warfare, and death by dysentery). "Impulse" is also a word with
Romantic roots. Readers will recall Wordsworth's famous and extraordinarily
irrational assertion that an "impulse from a vernal wood" could be a source
of moral learning, where an "impulse" stands superior to clarity of thought
or to consistency of logic. An "impulse" is a feeling or sentiment, not an
argument, and so functions in this poem also, where the motives traditionally
advanced for going to war (loyalty, patriotism, evidence that one's country is
endangered, profit, law, duty, politics) are specifically disclaimed. For the
Irish airman, a Wordsworthian "impulse" is sufficient -- especially if it's an
impulse of "delight." "Delight" signifies the thrill of the game as opposed to
the dreariness of ordinary life, which is twice dismissed as merely "a waste of
breath." "Delight" is a word that harks back to the art-for-art's-sake movement
of Yeats's youth, though even the most prescient would not have foreseen that it
would come to describe the death-defying or, in this case, suicidal artistry of
the fighter pilot. In "An Irish Airman Foresees his Death," a "lonely impulse of
delight" counterbalances other and more conventional experiences and patterns of
thinking. Some will find the airman's reasoning immensely sad, others will judge
it to be invigorating. Yeats himself does not tip his hand.

Source: 2008/04/poem-for-my-nei

Title: A Poem for my Neighbor, concerning his Cat in my Backyard
Date: April 24, 2008

Your cat comes

on silent haunches.

It shits, polluting both

arbor and garden

with catty scat,

and then goes home.

Source: 2008/04/book-report-the

Title: Book Report:  The Dean's List by Jon Hassler
Date: April 24, 2008

I had never heard of the novelist Jon Hassler, who died last month. The
obituaries took me by surprise: Minnesota's best artist, more significant than
the Coen brothers, or Bob Dylan, or Garrison Keillor. Or Sinclair Lewis. How
could I be so ignorant?

Off I trotted to the library, where there was a nearly pristine shelf of Hassler
novels. They were clearly virgin and untouched  -- so I'm not the only diligent
reader who is ignorant of Hassler.  From the shelf I plucked The Dean's List
(1997) and attacked it with great expectations.

I'm very sorry to report that this particular novel is a lot less exciting than
the ecstatic obituaries would have led me to believe. The Dean's List is an
academic story with a familiar cast: a  harried dean, a celebrity poet, an
overbearing mom, an elusive girlfriend -- nothing that David Lodge or Malcolm
Bradbury hasn't done with more wit and verve. Or Robertson Davies, for that
matter. Too many quirky characters; too many satirical targets. Perhaps I made
a mistake and chose the wrong Hassler novel. I'll borrow another one and report
back.

Source: 2008/04/crockery

Title: Crockery
Date: April 24, 2008

I'm not a person who cares terribly about material objects. Some of the
evidence: I've now written two hundred and fifty essaylets on this blague, and
nary a one of them took as its subject a purchase or a possession.

What I've read, what I've thought, where I've traveled, people I've known, yes;
what I own, or bought, or didn't buy, no.

But in these last weeks, we're in the process of discarding and giving away
while we prepare to move to much smaller quarters. The things we own, and there
are too many of them, have been front and center. The general rule here is,
"when in doubt, throw it out."  But yesterday, I didn't throw away, I packed
and preserved.

We have two sets of crockery. The first was part of the 1960 wedding loot. It's
a perfectly fine set of dishes, and we've used it on formal occasions for half
a century. It's Franciscan china, very 1950s abstract-modernist in design.
Entirely sufficient. Why, then, is there a second and redundant set?

Because when I was a boy, my folks owned a handful of pieces of flowery Charles
Field Haviland china that came out of storage once a year, at Thanksgiving, to
eke out the festive board.  I thought, and still think, that these plates were
simply beautiful. In addition, because they were so seldom used, they had very
specific and warm Thanksgiving-y associations -- food and drink and laughter and
conviviality  -- that were once-a-year events in our not-particularly-sociable
household. When the folks died, I inherited the Haviland remnants:  a few
hand- painted plates, some of them chipped; a number of saucers and a few
very delicate coffee cups. A decade ago, at age sixty, feeling nostalgic, I
decided to make it my business to fill in the set. It wasn't easy. I located a
couple of cups at an antique show and by mail-order acquired some plates from a
"replacement warehouse" in Georgia. But one day, browsing Ebay, I discovered on
auction a complete -- serving pieces and all -- set of dishes in what I had come
to think of as "my pattern." I bid, I was nervous, I won. The design exceeded
my hopes. It's a handsome bunch of crockery and it's now standard for our
occasional parties and our annual Thanksgiving. We'll carry the Haviland with us
to the new home.

What to do with the old? The next generation expresses utter and uniform
indifference; the generation that follows is far too young to care. Nor can we
sell or discard -- there are just too many fond memories. But here's what I'm
thinking. Suppose one of the offspring comes to feel, as I did at sixty, an odd
longing for objects that carry familial resonance. That set of Franciscan china
might become valuable to them. I don't mean monetarily valuable, but genuinely
valuable, in the ways that matter.

So I've carefully packed the crockery. It's multi-newspapered and double-boxed.
If not preserved for all eternity, it's certainly packed in a way that will
outlive every member of my age cohort.  It's labeled. It will go into the
"storage unit" in the basement of the new condo. It will sit there for an
unpredictable but not infinite length of years.

We'll let someone else decide whether to retain or discard.

Source: 2008/04/the-helene-mull

Title: The Helene Mullins Mystery
Date: April 26, 2008

We're still cleaning out and throwing away (as I reported a couple of days
ago). Today I discovered, in amongst a small cache of books that I inherited
from my father, a volume of poems called Earthbound. I'd never heard of the
poet, Helene Mullins, but I traced her via a 2001 The New York Times obituary.
"Helene Mullins Johnson, a poet, died on Oct. 26 at her home in Manhattan. She
was 92 years old. She died of congestive heart failure. Mrs. Johnson first had
her poems published in The Pagan, a Greenwich Village magazine, in the 1920s.
After Thornton Wilder introduced her to his publisher, Harper's published her
first novel, Convent Girl, and her first volume of poems, Earthbound, in 1929.
Her final collection of poems, Mirrored Walls, was published in 1970. There are
no survivors." Google provided me with another couple of facts. Helene Mullins
was born in 1899 in New Rochelle, New York, and educated in "convent boarding
schools." In 1935, she was so severely injured in an automobile accident that
she lay unconscious for three weeks.

And also: the library nearest to me that owns a copy of Earthbound is the Dakota
State University, in Madison, South Dakota, which is precisely 502 miles from
where I sit.

The poems are, in my view, brimming with pre-Raphaelite fervor. The precursoress
whom Mullins most resembles is Christina Rossetti, though there's an occasional
dash of Ernest Dowson, and every once in a while, a gesture borrowed from the
early Yeats. The poems are as intense and agonized and spiritual as Rossetti's,
and were, even in their own time, composed in an extremely old-fashioned style.

What does the world offer a hard-working but not brilliant poet who was clearly
ambitious and tense, and who poured all her strength and feeling into her
writing? There she was, a young woman fleeing the convent and shocking her
family by taking up residence in Greenwich Village, where she lived near
Thornton Wilder and other 1920s gentlemen of literature and where she frequented
the irreligious offices of The Pagan. I mourn for the struggle and yearning and
effort that went into those long-forgotten poems.  And which, all said and
done, earned her little beyond a  perfunctory obituary in the Times.

But what in the ever-living universe was this volume doing in my staid father's
library?  It's implausible that he could have found anything empathetic in
such poems as "St. Theresa" and "The Boy Christ."  Especially since Earthbound
was the only volume of "contemporary" poetry that he seems to have possessed.
In 1929, when Earthbound hit the streets, my father would have been a buoyant,
studious young fellow of twenty-five -- a diligent bachelor law clerk with still
a year or so to go before he would find Lilly. Helen Mullins herself was just
thirty years old. Is there a story here? Am I missing something?

There are no clues; not even a single pencil mark. Nothing from one end of the
book to the other. Something doesn't compute.

Source: 2008/04/a-blaguer-is-hi

Title: New Words
Date: April 30, 2008

Dr. Metablog, like all bloggers, is his own editor. With the new freedom comes
a downside: lapses of coherence and flaws of grammar, along with the occasional
typos and printos that an editor's eye would catch, now go uncaught. But
independence is also beneficial. In my former incarnation, I was regularly
disciplined by stern editors who called me on the carpet for undermining
academic prose by smuggling in a smile.

Once upon a time I composed an encyclopedia entry on the earthy and entertaining
seventeenth-century English diarist Samuel Pepys. Pepys was an extremely
diligent writer who kept his voluminous diary for nine years, rarely missing a
day. To appreciate Pepys's art, it's wrong to rely on snippets; a reader has
to swallow whole large hunks of the diary.   recommended, therefore, that
nouveau- Pepysists engage in "deep and promiscuous reading" of the volumes.
My joke, weak though it may have been, played on the fact that most people
read Pepys not for illumination so much as for the frank revelations about his
vigorous sexual life. I was not sent page proofs of my contribution to the
encyclopedia, and so I was surprised when I cracked open the spruce new book to
discover that, for the words "deep and promiscuous," a vigilant but unsmiling
editor had substituted "wide." What can I say? The editor batted last and had
more clout.

It was perpetually curious to me that the editors would give a pass to
incomprehensible jargon but would go to the mat against playfulness.

A few months ago, on this blague, I parodied the curious language of literary
criticism in an entry on the imperialist romance King Solomon's Mines. I
did not invent the ridiculous vocabulary that I poked fun at, not even
"multichronotopic" or "hybridity."  Now that I have no glum editor peering over
my shoulder, I'm free to play my own game of word-coining. I'm not alone;  Is
it my imagination, or is English vocabulary going through an internet-fueled
growth spurt?

Reviewing my own posts for the past few months, I see a number of words that
I can claim to have invented.  I'm proud of "precursoress," "soulwise,"
"brainal," "neojargonianism," "flimflammery," "mosquette," "skinflintism,"
"bepigeoned," "scandalmongery," "baubleolatry," "alzheimered," "cinderelloid,"
"prefamiliar," and "barfitudinous."  Can I guarantee that I'm the first
user of these contributions to linguistic variety? Of course not -- I've
no doubt been anticipated in most of them. But I attest that each one of
these novelties came to me in a thrilling burst of clarity and light.  I'm
especially fond of my jekyllian word "menschdom" and its hydish antonym
"schmuckhood," of "swiftboatery," "dysgeographicoid," "wallstreetway," and
"gigantico."  My favorite, and here I'm 99% sure that there can be no other
claimant, is "antimonofilamentarianism", defined as opposition to certain recent
manifestations of orthodoxy in religion. I also claim "eruvista," (a person
who adheres to these particular beliefs). Only time will tell if one of these
novelties turns out to be a nonce word (or as the classicists say, a hapax
legomenon), or a word that sneaks into our working vocabulary, its origin as
well as its proud originator obscured by the mists of time.

Source: 2008/05/the-springless

Title: The Springless Kibitka
Date: May 01, 2008

No, despite appearances, I'm not obsessed with nineteenth-century horsedrawn
vehicles, although I do love those classic novels in which our hero dashes to
the rescue in one kind of coach or another.

It's just that I have this little bee in my bonnet about the fact that we
gasoline-era moderns understand the exact social significance of jeep, Jaguar,
Jetta, and jalopy, but we are, except for specialists, utterly clueless as to
the valence of barouche, basket carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard,
buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, coupe,
croydon, curricle, cutter, dearborn, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, four-
wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, jaunty car, jersey-wagon, landau,
phaeton, post-chaise, rockaway, shandrydan, shay, spider-phaeton, spring-van,
stanhope, sulky, surrey, tandem, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika,
victoria, vis-a-vis, wagonette, or wurt. Which of these words tells us that
the driver is rich or stylish, and which of them implies that he is vulgar and
tasteless?  Or downtrodden?  We don't know, and so we read our traditional
literature with a handicap.

It is good fortune that when in Don Juan (a comic epic well worth the
revisiting), Byron trots out a kibitka (a vehicle new to me), he tells us
all we need to know: "And there in a kibitka he rolled on,/  (A cursed sort
of carriage without springs,/ Which on rough roads leaves scarcely a whole
bone...."  [IX, 234-6]). Byron testifies that the kibitka is down there in
the horsedrawn slums. An online dictionary is less poetic but more detailed
than Lord B: "a kibitka is a rude kind of Russian vehicle, on wheels or on
runners, sometimes covered with cloth or leather, and often used as a movable
habitation."

Definitely not the kind of vehicle out of which Sir Plantagenet should step when
he opens Parliament or accompanies Lady Glencora to the ball.

May 10.  My friend W. S. wants to know if history provides an instance in which
a "a cabal of kibbutzniks kibitzed in a kibitka?"  A good question to which I
am at present unable to provide an answer. May 19.  Professor Marion Morrison
wants to know why I prefer Russian vehicles to "les voitures hippomobiles."
Whoa, Professor M. Time to get off your high horse!

Source: 2008/05/a-truly-romanti

Title: A Truly Romantic Poem
Date: May 09, 2008

The poem that might entrance you when you're young might not be the poem for
your older years. In my "mature" phase, poems that I earlier ignored take on
new significance. I'm now quite taken with Tennyson's "Ulysses,'" a dramatic
monologue that meant nothing to me until a few years ago. "Ulysses" celebrates
perseverance, a late-onset virtue.

Another poem that I've latterly come to love is Robert Burns' jaunty "John
Anderson my jo, John." To me, in my present incarnation, it's the most romantic
poem in the English language (or, to be precise, the Scottish language).  While
most love poems celebrate desire and longing, "John Anderson," takes as its
subject continuity and longevity. As opposed to more conventional works that
come to climax with a wedding, "John Anderson" situates itself near the end of
life and glances happily backward over a life well lived. Its frankness about
bodily changes is comforting (especially to readers who may no longer glow with
first youth). John Anderson may be bald and gray and tottering, but he's still
loved and loving.

The cheerful woman who speaks the poem has lived "hand in hand" with John A. for
a lifetime.

John Anderson, my jo, John                            dear

When we were first acquent,                         
 acquainted

Your locks were like the raven,

Your bonnie brow was brent;                           smooth

But now your brow is beld, John,                      bald

Your locks are like the snow;

But blessings on your frosty paw;                     head

John Anderson, my jo.

John Anderson, my jo, John,

We clamb the hill tegither.

And many a cantie day, John,                          happy

We've had wi' ane anither.

Now we maun totter down, John                      must

But hand in hand we'll go,

And sleep thegither at the foot,

John Anderson, my jo.

Source: 2008/05/more-p-s-217-19

Title: More P. S. 217 1952 Graduates
Date: May 13, 2008

Searching the out-of-the-way corners of this ol' house that we are leaving
behind after thirty-five years, I discovered a mutilated copy of The Log, an
eight-page mimeographed pamphlet produced by students of P.S. 217 in June of
1952.  The entries seem to have been written not by the students but by the
teachers and  were designed to inculcate a moral. For example: "Class 8-1 has
made many things in cooking, shop, sewing and arts and crafts. The girls under
the supervision of Miss Willig have baked many good cookies and cakes while
the boys, under the supervision of Mr. Kaminsky have made expertly constructed
pieces of furniture. In grammar we have learned to diagram long sentences and
are beginning to excel at it. On Graduation Day, when the girls wear their
beautiful organdy dresses which they themselves made, they will be very grateful
for the instructions they received from Mrs. Ennis." The bottom line: "you may
have run wildly amok, you horrid little creatures, and created ruckus after
ruckus, but some day you'll appreciate us, we hope hope hope."

Also In The Log,  and far more interesting and useful than the forced feeding
of pre-nostalgia, is a list of the 1952 graduates of our fabled elementary
school.

A month or so ago, I posted on this blague a formal picture of the assembled
graduates, and, with the help of a committee of distinguished volunteer
mnemosynists, was able to identify about half of the members of the class.
With the discovery The Log, I am now able to to list the remaining students
who graduated from P. S. 217 that last Truman June.  Here's hoping that
my enthusiastic comrades will now be able to assign faces to the following
seventy- seven most musical names: Carol Berse, Diane Goldberg, Norma Harris,
Rosalind Symons, Sheila Slovis, Dorothy Steinfeld, Sara Steinman, Harriet
Young, Robert Derwin, Harold Schienkoff, Myron Sklar, Maryann Abrahams, Sheila
Carp, Ria DeCastri, Anita Friedman, Ricki Gottlieb, Marcia Katz, Sheila Katz,
Sandra Kopelton, Rochelle Miller, Diane Spatz, Janet Solomon, Eleanor Troy,
Appolonia Yacovelli, Carole Zietlin, Thomas Bellavita, Donald Carbone, Joseph
Cassano, Robert Cohen, John McKay, Arne Neilson, Toby Anker, Renee Dickson,
Sylvia Gordon, Francine Herskowitz, Marguerite McGinty, Florence Rosenthal,
Yvette Rosenthal, Doris Sippel, Hope Steuer, Michael Gerber, Alan Lipis, Stuart
Stillman, Stanley Weinberg, Michael Welch, Carol Coniglio, Carol Gerber, Marline
Gold, Leah Goodman, Evelyn and Norma Greenberg, Laurie and Roberta Katcher,
Selma Schnier, Edith Snyder, Robert Goldstein, Leslie Shernoff, Barbara Bider,
Ann Cacioppa, Sheryl Jerome, Patricia McCabe, Marilyn Snow, Barbara Williams,
Ruth Wintheil.

Identifications as well as news of our friends and companions are solicited. 
Who are these people?  What paths in life, glorious life, did they tread?  Did
they embark on careers of baking, or furniture making, or sewing long dresses? 
Did they ever truly excel at diagramming long sentences? Your contributions are
most welcome.

Source: 2008/05/dying-etc

Title: New News
Date: May 13, 2008

My friend Bob, with whom I've shared many a pleasant lunch, went outside to fill
the bird-feeders and never returned. Was it heart attack, aneurysm, or stroke? 
Bob had taken early retirement a few months ago to spend more time with his
ladylove, from whom he had been forced to live apart by circumstances. His
sudden collapse was untimely, but not more so than the death of Edward Peter,
who had a bad reaction to a flu shot, or Rubin, who drowned while fishing, or
JB, whose testicular cancer went to his lungs, or Phyl, whose stealth ovarian
cancer finished her after nine dreadful months, or my brother Gene, dead thirty
seconds from the onset of whatever it was that leveled him. It's all happening
much too frequently and and much too fast. Nowadays, I read the obituaries first
and I keep my one respectable suit, my funeral suit, cleaned and pressed. I do
not like this trend among folks of my own years.

Source: 2008/05/what-we-read-in

Title: What We Read in the Fifties:  The Ox-bow Incident
Date: May 15, 2008

Walter van Tilburg Clark's 1940 western, The Ox-bow Incident, was required
reading in English classes at Erasmus Hall High School during the Eisenhower
years.  I assume that I studied and possibly even answered some assigned
questions about the novel, but judging by the minute shards of information that
my porous head has retained, I’d be hard put to swear yea or nay.

The Ox-bow Incident is still in print and apparently still part of many
curricula, which is a surprise, considering its racist caricaturing and taboo
language. For those who can overlook its offenses, it raises some peculiarly
American questions about violence and personal responsibility. It's not a
beautifully-crafted novel: it takes a long time to get going, leaves gaps in the
continuity, and although just a couple of hundred pages long, is peopled by more
characters than I could easily track. The principal defect is that the narrator,
a young cowpoke named Art Croft, is never forced to choose between the good guys
and the bad.

Despite these defects, The Ox-bow Incident proved to be well worth the re-
reading, largely because of the story, which is inventive and which takes a
number of surprising, unexpected turns. It's an anti-western, I now realize, in
which readers wait in vain for a white-hatted hero to ride to the rescue and to
wing the black-hat and bring the gang of bad guys to justice. Instead, thugs
and bullies drag the weaklings down to their own level. Although I had already
read my share of Zane Greys, I’m sure that I did not understand that Clark was
toying with the conventions of the western genre. Nowadays, The Ox-bow Incident
seems less kin to Riders of the Purple Sage than it is to Lonesome Dove.

Clark wrote when Hitler was menacing the world and he clearly aimed his shafts
at temporizers and appeasers. I suspect that at Erasmus, my teachers understood
The Ox-bow Incident in the context of the anti-communism that was the religion
of the 1950s. I would not be at all surprised if the novel is now taught as
anti-Jihadist, but it needn't be, because it's not so much anti-this or anti-
that as it is about decency and the need to stand firm for law and justice.
"Because most men are more afraid of being thought cowards than anything else,"
says the author, and because "real" men, so-called, believe that it's manly to
take the law into their own hands, the cowboys and shopkeepers and drifters who
cohere into a necktie party are defenseless against masculinist demagoguery.

While Clark never uses the word "honor," he implies that the cowardly-fearful
would think it dishonorable to back off from their commitment to violence.

I think it was Spinoza who said that "honor" was a "slavish dependence on the
opinion of others." His definition could serve as a an epigraph to this novel.
Honor, as well as law, justice both domestic and international, masculinity, and
violence, are all matters of contemporary debate, and as a consequence, The Ox-
bow Incident hangs in there quite nicely.

I've now seen the 1943 William Wellman-Henry Fonda-Dana Andrews-Anthony Quinn
film of The Ox-bow Incident. It's faithful, much too faithful to the book. I
found it plodding and prosaic, inoffensive, but far too moralistic. It was just
the merest tad more optimistic than the bleak novel. The political semi-allegory
was barely there.

Source: 2008/05/ccny-basketball

Title: CCNY Basketball Ups and Downs, 1950-51
Date: May 18, 2008

My friend Otis Jefferson Brown reminds me of the crushing sports-and-morals
tragedy of our joint childhoods. It all took place in 1950/51, when I was a
creeping like snail to sixth grade in P. S. 217 and Otis, a child of Bay Ridge,
was trudging his shining morning face to P.S. 102. Our guys, our local heroes,
the CCNY basketball team, won both of the major basketball tournaments, the NIT
as well as the NCAA. The city -- New York City, especially Brooklyn  -- was
electric with excitement. Headlines, victory parades, and demonstrations in all
the neighborhoods.

The twin wins -- it never had happened before and will never happen again --
were great events in the public sphere but of even greater moment in our 9th
Street home.  Back in the 1920s, my father had attended CCNY for a year, but
like so many of the sons of impoverished immigrants, had to drop out to help put
potatoes and black radishes on the family table. While at City, he had played on
the freshman basketball team. Would he have made the varsity? Who can tell? He
was a strong man, a fine natural athlete, very graceful in his movements even
into his 70s, and very serious about basketball.

His coach had been Nat Holman (one of the earliest stars of professional
basketball), and Nat was still the City College coach twenty-five years later.
So whenever CCNY played, everything in our family came to a halt, and we all
gathered around the wooden Philco to listen as my father's team went down to the
wire against Bradley or Kentucky or Toledo. My father, generally a restrained
man, was as partisan and as jubilant as I ever knew him to be. Not only were the
victories a fulfillment of his own hopes, but they were all achieved by a bunch
of local players -- Jews and "Negroes" from the Bronx and Brooklyn who, in those
days, would not have been welcome at most of the big basketball powers. Ed Roman
and Ed Warner and Irvin Dambrot and Normie Mager and Floyd Lane were household
names as familiar and as admired as those of Koufax and Campanella.

It was the very next year that it all blew up in our faces. The CCNY players, or
many of them, confessed to taking bribes from the gamblers and bookies and to
shaving points and managing the spread. There were indictments, "perp walks,"
headlines, indignant editorials. O the shame!

My father was devastated. Although in size he was just a scrappy guard, in
person he was a tower of rectitude, and it was beyond his ken that our guys,
even poor guys who desperately needed cash, would compromise their integrity and
their futures for a few bucks.

My father turned the disgrace into a morality play. Every day, for years it
seems in retrospect, I listened to still another passionate sermon about keeping
to the straight and narrow. (Not that there was anyone in the world who would
pay me to miss a shot; I could miss shots on my own. But I knew what he meant.)

I've now read Charles Rosen's Scandals of '51, how the gamblers almost killed
college basketball [New York, 1971]). It's a shoddy, melodramatic, disheartening
book, but it does help to put things in perspective. Rosen makes it clear that
there was more than a little American nativist glee about taking CCNY and its
upstart culture down a peg. It was sad to read that players from many other
colleges were also indicted (I hadn't remembered), but discouraging to learn
that their defenders were happy to extol heartland values and to scapegoat the
corruption onto big city immigrant depravity. It was also sad to be reminded
that the only basketball player who served hard time was Sherman White, the
biggest, the best, and the blackest of all the athletes. Nor was it pleasant
to discover that although there were apparently point-shavers at St. Johns, a
Catholic college, DA Frank Hogan brought no indictments because the evidence
against the Red Men was "inadvertently" destroyed.

The events were a blight on my basketball-loving childhood. And still a great
sadness after all these years. But I must say that we, as a family, engineered
a strong comeback. It was only a few years after the scandals that one of those
13" black and white TVs with the rabbit ears made its first appearance in our
home. And along with the Zenith came the NBA. I think that my father was on
perpetual alert for signs of malfeasance, but our faith in the game and in
humanity was restored by a new set of New York heroes: Harry Gallatin, Connie
Simmons, Carl Braun, Dick McGuire, Bud Palmer, Vince Boryla, Sweetwater Clifton,
Max Zaslofsky.

Source: 2008/05/yesterday-in-a

Title: Family Matters
Date: May 21, 2008

Yesterday, in a long-buried collection of file folders, I found some papers of
my father's that were written during those last painful years when he was a
widower. Some of the pages comprise a "commonplace" book, the theme of which is,
'why am I still alive when my wife is dead?'  In addition to the lamentations,
there are two anomalous paragraphs of reminiscence  -- constituting the sum of
my father's known autobiographical writings. For the benefit and edification of
my own children and grandchildren and family, I now put these writings on the
record.

My father writes:  "My maternal grandmother was a thin, almost gaunt  woman
about 5 ft 5 inches tall. Although I am sure she loved all her children &
grandchildren, I cannot remember her ever showing any overt sign of affection.
We children always knew when grandma was to visit us. My mother would go into
a frenzy of housecleaning. All the curtains would be washed and re-hung; the
kitchen floors scrubbed and the silverware washed and polished. Her [i.e. my
father's grandmother's] face was unwrinkled, the skin drawn tightly. Her most
dominant feature was her eyes, piercing, direct, demanding. There would be
Grandma, wearing a little hat, glancing around the room while she slowly took
off her gloves. If she was satisfied with what she saw, she would give a little
nod as if to say, 'well done.' We would all relax."

A historical footnote:  my grandparents came to this continent in about 1895
and the events that my father remembers are all turn-of-the-century and pre-WWI.

Until I uncovered this paragraph, I thought my grandparents came to North
America on their own.  I did not know that they were accompanied by this
formidable great-grandmother. Although she herself was long gone when I came on
the stage, I certainly encountered those piercing black eyes in other faces, my
father's in particular.  I wonder why my father (who was born in 1904) never
mentioned his grandmother to me -- she certainly made an impression that lasted
to the end of his life. Come to think of it, why the heck was my family so
entirely tight-lipped about their ancestry?

But wait.  There's more.

"My grandparents (that would be the ferocious grandmother and her equally
unknown-to-me husband), had 5 children, 4 daughters and one son. There were
born to their children in a space of 10 years, 18 grandchildren.  Each one of
these children were delivered at home. My grandmother attended every one of
these births.  About 2 weeks before the expected date of birth, my grandmother
would appear wearing her little hat and gloves & carrying a small satchel; she
immediately took charge of the household. The expectant mother would be freed of
all household obligations."

From this evidence it would appear that in addition to his three siblings (Max,
Sol, and Molly), my father had fourteen cousins on his mother's side of the
family.  Why didn't I know about them?  Why did I never meet a single one? Or
even hear their names?  Or the names of their progeny, if there were any?

Also in my father's hand, scribbled in a corner of the paper, is a
calculation:  Mom - 4, Manya - 6, Nadya - 3, Mary - 2, Maris (or Saris, or
Norris) -3.  And then the sum:  18.

So, children and children's children and collateral descendants, you now
understand a piece of the family history.

And readers:  if there's anyone out there in internetland who had a strong,
perhaps dictatorial great or great-great or great-great-great grandmother who
came to assist at births armed with a satchel, a little hat and memorable black
eyes (first name unknown but surnamed Hessel), and who knows that his or her
ancestry includes a woman whose maiden name was Mary Hessel or Manya Hessel or
Nadya Hessel, or if there's someone who's descended from Noris or Moris or Saris
Hessel, hey, cuz, take a moment and add a comment to this entry and I'll get
right back to you.

Source: 2008/05/embarrassment-i

Title: Embarrassment is Forever
Date: May 28, 2008

One of my childhood friends confesses to me that his otherwise peaceful early
years were marred by a perfectly unnecessary bit of fighting -- which he
himself initiated. "We were in the middle of a softball game in the P. S. 217
schoolyard and I struck out with two or three men on base. One of my teammates
said something uncomplimentary to me and started to walk away. Humiliated and
frustrated, I charged after him and jumped on his back. I'm not sure what I
intended to do (my fighting skills were even worse than my softball skills)."

This less-than-earthshaking softballmachia occurred somewhere between fifty-five
and sixty years ago. It is impossible that anyone in the known universe
remembers either the score, the sides, the game, the strikeout, or one boy's
vault onto the back of another -- no one, that is, except the perpetrator
himself, who goes on to confess that he is "embarrassed and ashamed even now." 
I do not doubt for an instant that he's telling the exact truth, because even
though glaciers have receded and oceans of water have passed under the bridge,
embarrassment is forever.

Like my friend, and like many another poor suffering mortal, I too retain
ancient memories that make me cringe.  A few of these acts, I'm sorry to say,
are, like my friend's, instances of unjustified and petty violence. A larger
category: the recollection of saying something stupid at a party or over dinner.
Or a lame, feeble, failed witticism. An irony that was misunderstood and taken
to be serious. A mispronounced word. The realization that my presence was
unwelcome or that I had overstayed my welcome. The largest category of all:
something that I did or said that was vain or pretentious or self-aggrandizing.

My Better Half, who knows that often, half-asleep, I will suddenly recall
an embarrassing moment and will vent a profound sigh or pound my fist into
"Everyone who heard what you said has been dead for years. Go back to sleep."
It's a good protocol and is moderately effective. But the hallmark of authentic
embarrassment is that even though the offending act was performed in public,
it will be recollected in solitude years later to disorder our tranquility and
to disturb our rest. Whether the witnesses have long since forgotten the event
(if they noticed it in the first place) or even if they've been underground for
decades doesn't seem to moderate self-flagellation.

In point of fact, embarrassment is the only natural phenomenon that has tempted
me to believe, even slightly, in an afterlife. If anything is eternal, it's
embarrassment.

It is sometimes said that Western society has evolved from a shame culture
to a guilt culture. In earlier ages, social disapproval kept the lid on our
transgressive impulses. Nowadays, the theory goes, we've been psychologically
transformed and have learned to internalize shame as guilt, so that we regulate
ourselves without our fellow tribesman crying tut-tut and shame, shame, shame.
Perhaps there's a bit of truth to this formula, but it's simplistic. In my own
fragile ego, guilt has not supplanted shame; both emotions are thriving rather
nicely, thank you very much.

Embarrassment is neither guilt nor shame, but a third thing that combines the
two emotions -- as for example in the case of Joey Valachi, mafia hit man and
stool pigeon, who once told an investigating committee, and I quote verbatim,
"you can imagine my embarrassment when I killed the wrong guy." An awkward
moment for Joey V., but whether its memory would be sufficient to disturb his
pleasant dreams is not for me to guess. It is certainly embarrassing to all
concerned that he would classify a murder as an embarrassment. Compare Macbeth
in the same situation:  "O full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife."

I guess I should be happy that my sleep is troubled by social gaffes rather than
by crimes. Mini-scorpions, so to speak.

Source: 2008/05/another-novel-b

Title: Another Novel by John Hassler
Date: May 29, 2008

Last month, I reported that I had read The Dean's List and that I was not
sufficiently impressed to enroll myself in the John Hassler fan club.  But
inasmuch as Hassler had been so celebrated upon his death, and I felt negligent,
I thought it only fair to give him a second try. Now I've done so: I've read
The Staggerford Flood (2002). It's a congenial satire that concerns itself with
an aging group of small-town Minnesota Catholics. It's intermittently witty,
but either too subtle or too fey for me. Hassler has been praised as a great
regionalist, but in my view can't hold a candle to the upper New York state
chronicles of Richard Russo and isn't even in the same league with the inventive
and often very beautiful Baltimore novels of Anne Tyler.

Source: 2008/05/what-is-a-cut-1

Title: What is a Cutter?
Date: May 31, 2008

Regular readers of this blague should be able to anticipate Dr. Metablog's best
and favorite answer to the important question, "What is a cutter?"

Familiar with Dr. M's lifelong passion for baseball, the king of all sports,
an informed reader might be tempted to say that a "cutter" is short for a "cut
fastball" -- a variation, baseballophiles know, of the two-seamer -- perfected
by the likes of Mariano Rivera. Or one might think to guess that a "cutter" is
a skilled craftsman in the garment trades. Good answers both, but not the echt
metablogian answer.

How about a utility knife or box cutter, prominent in the new world of
terrorism?  Or a small fore-and-aft rigged sailing vessel, junior to the
sloop?  Or one of those self-destructive teens who inflicts injury upon
himself?  A shaper of gems?  An unlicensed, underworld surgeon?  A film
editor? A queue- jumper? A quarry worker from Bloomington, Indiana?  A mohel?

Good answers all. But Dr. M, in a moment of ultra-metablogism, is proud to
announce that the properest answer can be found in William Dean Howells' 1882
novel, A Modern Instance:

"On a Saturday evening in February, a cutter, gay with red-lined robes, dashed
away and came musically clashing down the street under the naked elms. The young
man slackened the pace of his horse, as if to still the bells.  The girl took
the hand he offered her when he dismounted at the gate, and as she jumped from
the cutter, 'Wont you come in?', she asked.  'I guess I can blanket my horse
and stand him under the wood-shed,' answered the young man, going round to the
animal's head, and leading him away."

The answer: a cutter is a nineteenth-century horse drawn vehicle.

Howells doesn't bother to mention whether it runs on wheels or on runners. He
assumes that his readers will know.

Source: 2008/06/flagrant-greenw

Title: Flagrant Greenwashing
Date: June 02, 2008

A new and useful word is "greenwash," which is what happens when a can of ozone-
destroying chemicals comes to be decorated with cute bunnies. Corporations have
perfected this kind of propaganda: it's cheaper to portray the company as green
than to cap that smokestack.

The Bushies have brought greenwashing to politics and given us Clear Skies
(which clears the skies of birds) and Healthy Forests (which would more
accurately be called Healthy Seedlings, because that's all that remains after
the forest has been clearcut).

Anti-environmental candidates frequently cover themselves in greenwash. Here's
a particularly flagrant example. Former U. S. representative Republican Bob
Shaffer, who scored just 5% on the League of Conservation Voters' scale and has
been targeted as one of 2008's "dirty dozen," is running for an open Senate seat
in Colorado. In addition to being in Jack Abramoff's pocket, Shaffer supported
the Cheney-led initiative that gave $33 billion in tax breaks to big oil. He
opposed incentives for developing alternative fuels and dug in his heels against
fuel efficiency standards for automobiles.

Schaffer was Vice President of an oil company, Aspect Energy.  Here's his brief
biography on Aspect's website.

"Bob Shaffer is Vice President for business development at CHx Capital,
LLC, where he is involved with a variety of energy, mining and education
projects. Additionally, Bob is actively involved in international business
development activities for Aspect Energy, including sourcing and development of
international oil and gas exploration opportunities for the Company."

Hold on.  That WAS his biography until a couple of days ago. Now that he's been
nominated for the Senate, his history has been greened up. Here's the substitute
paragraph:

"Bob was involved in a variety of wind power investments, international energy
opportunities, and education projects. Bob worked to improve the US Wind
Industry. Specifically, he worked to increase entrepreneurial opportunities
for small business owners by ensuring that wind-specific tax credits could be
utilized indirectly by wind developers classified as small business owners. Bob
helped educate Congress about the benefits of wind power including its positive
impact on the environment, job creation, and its importance in making the United
States less dependent on foreign sources of oil."

Truly amazing. One day he's prospecting for foreign oil;  the next day he's a
fanatical supporter of windpower.

Ooh, ooh, ooh, what a little greenwash can do.

Source: 2008/06/news-from-nebra

Title: News from Nebraska
Date: June 09, 2008

Today we covered 200 miles or so of Route 34 of western Nebraska, the reddest
part of one of our reddest states.  We started in the high steppes and
finished in fertile (when irrigated) farmland.  Here are some of the roadside
highlights.  Nine reassuringly green John Deere dealerships, evenly spaced
along the route.  A number of llama farms, producing either wool or llamchops,
I don't know which.  Outside Benkelman, a large roadside sign:  "Birthplace
of Ward Bond."  Entering Funk, Nebraska (pop. 204), a sign, "Welcome to
Funk."  The curious slogan of the small community of Minden:  "The Christmas
City"  (for which act of arrogance Minden should be rechristened "The Chutzpah
City").  Just west of McCook, a giant billboard:  "In God we trust, not
Hillary."  A challenge to logic, I think.  Or perhaps, a challenge to divine
exactly what the billboardist was thinking.  Are we supposed to imagine that
Hillary Clinton is conceived of in McCook as the anti-Christ?  And finally,
just east of Hastings, for some years the residence of Willa Cather, the largest
of billboards, viewable for miles:  "Don't Beat Your Kids -- God."   An
admirable sentiment to be sure, and one to which we can all subscribe.  Alas,
the words that God put on the record are these:  "He who spareth the rod hateth
his son: but he that loveth him correcteth him betimes (Proverbs 13:24) and also
"Withhold not correction from a child:  for if thou strike him with the rod,
he shall not die.  Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from
hell" (Proverbs 23: 13-14).  The amateur theologican who composed the words on
the billboard offers a paraphrase of God's words which is, how shall I say this
kindly, somewhat loose.  Revisionist even.

Source: 2008/06/its-not-just-se

Title: An American "Victorian" Novel
Date: June 09, 2008

It's not just sexual prudery that makes a novel "Victorian."  The more of these
novels I read (and trust me, I've read my share), the more clear it is that the
heart of the matter is that hero and heroine are kept apart not by Mrs. Grundy
but by paralyzing social constraints.

To demonstrate my point, I will now invent the plot of a generic "Victorian"
novel.

Lydia Armstrong, who is charming and rich and has been greatly improved by her
singing and drawing lessons, loves handsome, intelligent Reginald Cockerell,
but she can't hint that she does so for fear of appearing forward. Besides,
her parson father looks down on the upstart Cockerells, who made their small
fortune in trade.  Meanwhile, young Cockerell feels that his first enthusiastic
courting of Lydia was awkward and unwelcome;  moreover, he's been informed
that she loves Bentley Rayburn, an empty-headed aristocrat who drives a mean
barouche.  As a result, Cockerell emigrates to Australia, and although presumed
to have been shipwrecked, returns after nine years and 650 pages to discover,
quite inadvertently, that Lydia has been pining for him all the while she has
sat patiently sewing and providing French lessons for her numerous adoring
nieces and nephews.  After a few more chapters and much agonizing, he at last,
awkwardly, affirms his longstanding affection.  Much glee; as W. S. says, "the
more delayed, delighted."

Why the heck didn't Lyddie and Reg sit down and talk things out before he left
for the Antipodes?

Because frankness is impermissible;  it's insufficiently "Victorian."  The
rules don't allow it.

Although there must be a quarter of a zillion variations on the theme, the
essence remains constant.  All those Lydias and all those Reginalds are kept
apart by the social artifices that exalt and fetichize propriety and inhibit
self-realization and pleasure.

I've been indulging these sour thoughts because I've just finished reading
William Dean Howells' high-Victorian (1882) domestic novel, A Modern Instance.
Howells is often described as a "realist" novelist.  I suppose he is, if by
realist is meant that in A Modern Instance the central figure, Bartley Hubbard,
is a rotter, a gambler, and an opportunist, the hero Ben Halleck limps, and
the heroine, Marcia Gaylord has a foul, jealous temper.  But take away these
flaws and the so-called realist novel looks typically Victorian.  The crux
(here come spoilers) is that the scamp Bartley marries Marcia and then deserts
her.  A divorce follows.  Our upstanding friend Ben Halleck has loved Marcia
unselfishly for many years, but he can't propose to her because he has violated
the rules by loving her even in the years when she was married.  Will the
sanctity of wedding vows and all of western civilization come crashing down if
he marries a previously-loved divorcee?  Howells even goes so far as to kill
off Bartley, but he still can't see his way clear to allowing any happiness to
Ben and Marcia.  How does the novel end?  Well, it doesn't end;  it just
stops, with Marcia rusting in Equity, Maine, and Ben puzzling and paralyzed down
in Boston.

Howells, though an American, a "realist" and an excellent craftsman, cannot
resolve the dilemma he has created.  He is incapable of bringing his novel to
satisfying close because he is as deeply Victorian as the characters to whom he
has given life.

Victorians are often called Puritans, but it was the most radical of the
Puritans, John Milton, who, in the 1640s, two hundred and fifty years before
Howells, first advanced the thesis that divorce should be legal and that
marriages should be based not on sacrament or law but on mutual love.  And
although he doesn't say so, I'm sure that Milton would have been perfectly at
ease if Ben Halleck and Marcia Gaylord had talked about the divorce, found their
way to bed, and lit out for the territories.

Source: 2008/06/my-new-career-

Title: My New Career - II
Date: June 11, 2008

Regular readers of this blague will remember that last year I made myself
available for the NBA draft.  I'm sorry to report that not a single one of the
general managers was daring enough to gamble on me.  It was disappointing and
inexplicable.  I would have suspected that at least one or two of the teams
would have read my official statement.   And jumped at the chance of adding me
to their roster.  I was depressed for a couple of weeks, but now, every day for
eleven months, I've been working on my inside moves.  Baby hook with both the
right and left hands.  My basketball is worn smooth from the concrete driveway.

I now believe that I have discovered the reason that I was not snatched by the
Lakers or the Celtics or another one of the elite teams (frankly, I'm not all
that enthusiastic of starting my pro career in an off-brand situation like
Memphis or Denver).

Last year, I was scrupulously honest about listing my height.  It was exactly
"five feet ten and one-quarter (formerly five feet ten and three-quarter)
inches." How naive I was!  Apparently, guys are exaggerating their credentials,
and I now discover that chicanery and bloviation are rife in the hallowed halls
of the basketball-draft world.  For example, Michael Beasley of Kansas State,
supposedly 6' 10", measured only 6' 7" even wearing sneakers.  Derrick Rose of
Memphis dropped from 6' 4" to 6' 1".  You see what's happening -- I'm playing
the draft game fair and square and so I don't get the same kind of publicity
that the guys do who tweak their credentials.

So there will be some changes on my application this year.  a) I'm taking
out all references to my atrial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy -- it hasn't
bothered me for months and certainly doesn't stop me from playing at my peak
for periods of 3 or 4 minutes at a stretch.  So that's gone.  b) I'm also
going to list my height at 6' 2 1/2".  A slight exaggeration but I doubt
anyone will notice because I play big.  Also, I'm wearing thick soles. c) In
the interest of absolute truth, I'm going to admit that I've put on a couple
of pounds during the last year.  Not a deficit -- an asset.  I'm getting to
the point that I could be described as a "widebody"  -- very rare in the NBA
--and much coveted.  Also, my cataracts are stable and, though I take the
prostate medicine every other day, there's no sign yet that it will compromise
my ferocious aggressiveness.  And let me be perfectly clear -- there's not the
slightest bit of truth to the rumor that I will have to frequently leave the
field of play to make use of the restroom facilities.

Source: 2008/06/stepping-eastwa

Title: Stepping Eastward
Date: June 14, 2008

It's just about 2000 miles from our residence in Colorado to our summer quarters
in Vermont.  Early this week I made my 33rd drive from the one to the other. 
We were lucky -- we sidestepped both floods and tornadoes, though fields were
flooded throughout Iowa and there was impressive and nasty twister damage in
Aurora, Nebraska.  There were the remnants of dwellings and big hunks of metal
roofing lying on the side of the road.  Nevertheless, it was one of our easier
trips:  four solid ten- to twelve-hour days of driving.  As usual, I was
impatient for the first hour  -- It takes a while to get into the swing. 
But after a while I went into a "zone"  -- otherworldly, attentive, resigned,
content.  It's another state of being.

It was only at the end of the trip, along narrow and undulating Route 4 from
Rutland to Woodstock, when for twenty miles I trailed the Executive Director of
the Slow Drivers of America, that I lost my equanimity.  I was just about to
metamorphose into the Incredible Hulk, vault from my vehicle and toss the guy
and his Plymouth into the Ottaquechee River, when I found an opening to drop
into third, floor it, and zoom by him.  Ah, what satisfaction!

It's an amazing trip -- an ever-changing and fascinating landscape.  Some
people claim that the mid West, with its astonishingly large cornfields, is
boring, but those who think so are just not paying attention.  It's a long
book, to be sure, but every page is different.  Despite the pleasure of it all,
I'm relieved to get out of the vehicle, stretch the old legs, and get going on
the gardens.   With nothing on the driving horizon except an occasional trip
to town for supplies.

Source: 2008/06/something-of-a

Title: Something of a Fairy Tale
Date: June 19, 2008

My granddaughter Ella, who is pushing six, is here for a brief visit. 
Yesterday, after catching four salamanders, kicking the soccer ball, planting
the yellow snap beans, and running in exuberant circles, she asked me to tell
her a story.  I'll report only the gist of my long, detailed, but uninspired
narrative.

A young princess is born with a birthmark on her back in the shape of a red
heart.  Her parents consult a wizard, who tells them that their daughter is
destined to marry a powerful, handsome prince.  The parents are elated and the
princess grows up with the guarantee of a blissful marriage.  However, one day,
when the princess is in high school and trying out for the swimming team, one of
her friends notices the birthmark and asks her why she has a birthmark on her
back in the shape of a diamond.  "A diamond?" says the princess.  She consults
the wizard who tells her that she's not going to marry a prince after all; 
instead, she's going to have to carve out her own career.  She'll have to study
her French, take her piano lessons seriously, learn arithmetic and work very
hard in school.  So the princess takes the advice and becomes a very diligent
and hard-working young girl and has many successes.

I was now putting myself to sleep with this highly moral and improbable tale,
so I asked Ella whether she would finish the story.  "Sure," she said, " one
day the diamond turned back into a heart and she married the prince and lived
happily ever after."

So much for contemporary, enlightened fairy tales.

Source: 2008/06/bone-in-the-ear

Title: Bone in the Ear
Date: June 20, 2008

The new clerk at the local Aubuchon has a green Mohawk.  The non-Mohawk part of
his head is clean-shaven.  The clerk looks to be about twenty years old.   He
couldn't tell me in which aisle to find a S-hook.

I'm surprised but not offended by the Mohawk.  I wonder, though, how the would-
be clerk dressed for his interview?  Did he come in full war paint, or did he
secure the job looking like Joe HighSchool and then later switch to the foppish
hairstyle?  Or was the regional manager, or whoever pulled the trigger on the
hiring, more tolerant than your run-of-the-mill mid-level corporate executive. 
Hey, maybe green Mohawks don't cut into profits?  I'd guess so, but perhaps I'm
wrong.  Vermont's a tolerant state.

Unlike tattoos, Mohawks can be ephemeral.  In six week, green Mohawk guy could
revert to being plain old Thurston Sleeper.  But a green Mohawk is a curious,
labor-intensive affectation.  it takes work to keep it erect and keep it
green.  To me it says that the clerk is far more interested in making a fashion
statement than in doing his job.  He's in the epater le bourgeois business --
but it's M. Bourgeois who's going to come to the hardware store searching for
just the right kind of wood chisel.

When we first came to this town, back in 1968, Aubuchon was the second-line
hardware store.  Everyone who wasn't just passing through shopped at locally-
owned Gove and Morrill, which carried three or four times the number of items
as Aubuchon, including all the hard-to-find stuff that nowadays you can only
locate on the Internet.  Moreover, Bart Morrill and Lester Wakefield knew how
to fix everything.  Not only would they gladly learn and gladly teach, but they
had a bit of a machine shop in the basement and would whip up the odd part when
necessary.  Now they're both long gone and so is their store and the new guys
at the Aubuchon don't know nothing  -- although they're gussied up in ways that
Bart and Lester could never have dreamed.

The new waitress at The Perfect Pear sports the usual nose ring but she also
displays a hefty piece of bone in her left ear lobe.  It looks, to the
unsophisticated eye, like the tooth of a small shark.

Source: 2008/06/my-facebook-f-1

Title: My Facebook Friends
Date: June 25, 2008

My Internet consultant, who is forty-something years old, signed me up on
Facebook.  He said that I needed to understand how communication takes place
between young folk in the modern era.  He also thought that I should assemble
some Facebook friends.

He himself concedes that in Facebook years he is an oldster.  "You're on
Facebook?" say his astonished junior colleagues and employees, not shy to hint
that he's a bit long in the tooth for an activity so totally 'with it' as social
networking.  Hey, what about ancient me?  A generation and an electronic
revolution older, I allow my pre-Cambrian self to be Facebookized.

It's a new world.  A "Facebook Friend" is not to be confused with a real
friend.  In the traditional universe (mine), relationships were either intense
or diffuse.  You can enjoy a few important relationships or spread yourself
over many -- say, twenty or thirty -- that are superficial.  It's taken me
a lifetime to acquire and sustain a very small number of genuine, intense
friendships.  But young people seem to diffuse their emotional attachments,
as I discovered by browsing the Facebook site.  They form networks of three
or four hundred or eight hundred fellow Facebookers.  No doubt but that these
young folks possess memories far more retentive and perspicuous than mine -- but
what can it mean to have relationships that number in the hundreds?  "Facebook
Friend" can signify nothing more than someone whose path has crossed your own
sometime, somewhere.

Nevertheless, it's intriguing to be in instant communication with a more-or-less
compatible cohort.  I must say, however, that there are practical limits to
the grandparental Facebookish experience.  Real friends of my own years not
only suffer from limited computer literacy but are natively grumpy and therefore
indifferent to social networking.  They're basically Internet hermits.  When I
stumble upon the page of coevals who are Facebookers (perhaps, like me, because
a young friend or grand-daughter took pity on their Facebooklessness), what
generally appears -- along with a generic subsitution for an actual photograph,
which they don't have the skills to post -- is a dispiriting message such
as "Frank has no friends."  As a result, almost all of my "Friends" are a
generation or two younger than I -- which makes me feel pseudo-youthful but also
as though I've crashed the party but I'm not dancing.

I tried an experiment.  I solicited (is that the word?) Friendship with Zoe,
just entering our local university and whose father I've known since 1969. 
She has not "confirmed me."  I also approached, timidly, Sam K., who's in high
school abroad.  I've been good friends with his grandparents for most of a
lifetime.  Sam also declined to confirm me.  ("Confirm" -- the proper Facebook
locution -- seems both too religious and too 'rite of passage' for me.)  I also
tried Rebecca M., a junior in college -- no confirmation.  Is it possible that
these young people don't want one of Gramp's friends to know who's writing what
on whose Wall?

There seems to be some sort of competition among Facebookers to acquire the most
Friends.  I'm as competitive as the next guy, but, handicapped by my years,
I'm stuck at thirty-five Friends, which is absolutely zip zilch in the galaxy
of Facebook amical achievement.  Moreover, I must confess that one of those
thirty- five Friends is a 6" foam donkey named Lefty who is the miniature mascot
of a Democratic consulting firm.  Zooming ahead, Lefty has left me to choke on
his donkey-dust.  The  donkey has one hundred and twenty-four Friends, all of
them, no doubt, intimate.

Source: 2008/06/vivian-de-st-vr

Title: Vivian de St. Vrain is now Vivian Hussein de St. Vrain
Date: June 30, 2008

Hatemongering right-wingers have been using Obama's name to attack him.  It's
only-slightly-disguised bigotry.  Obama sounds like Osama, Hussein is the late,
unlamented  dictator, while Barack is strangely foreign and rhymes with Iraq. 
It's primitive tribalism --a way of calling Barack "foreign" or "un-American"
without actually using the words.  Although Obama generally calls himself
"Barack Obama," foxnewsistas and McCain surrogates like to chant, "Barack
Hussein Obama."  You can hear them waiting for the audience to hiss.

In response, supporters of Obama have adopted Hussein as their own middle
name. There's a good article in The New York Times:  (June 29, 2008: "Obama
Supporters Take his Name as their Own").  "I am sick. of Republicans
pronouncing Barack Obama’s name like it was some sort of cuss word,” one
commentator  wrote in a manifesto titled “We Are All Hussein.”

So today, Vivian de St. Vrain joins the movement and proudly announces that
henceforth the proper designation is "Vivian Hussein de St. Vrain."  It has a
nice lilt, doesn't it?

Go Blue!  Go Dems!  Go Barack!  Yes we can! Yes we can!

Source: 2008/06/my-brother-jona

Title: Wheel-man, I Salute You!
Date: June 30, 2008

My brother Jonathan says, "The wheel.  I could have invented the wheel." 
Meaning, I think, that he understands the advanced scientific principle -- a
wheel turns round and round.  Unlike, say, the refrigerator or the radio,
which he doesn't understand and will concede that he couldn't possibly have
invented.  As for myself, I don't think that  I could possibly have conceived
of something so elegant as the wheel.  The chair.  I could have invented the
chair.  No moving parts.

And yet the wheel, history tells us, was anything but obvious.  Homo sapiens
sapiens had been on the planet for half a million years before some Mesopotamian
genius, or series of geniuses, figured out the fine art of rolling (in fact, the
wheel was apparently used for pottery for centuries before it was adapted for
transport).  In the Americas, both the Mayans and the Incas domesticated plants
and animals, perfected smelting and weaving, carved out roads and aqueducts, but
never hit upon the wheel.

If my brother had been born near the Olduvai rift in East Africa in the minus
four hundred thousands, would he have been smart enough to come up with the
wheel?  Would he even have had the opportunity?  Wouldn't he, like the rest of
us, have spent his time cowering in the cave, occasionally rushing out to grab
a hunk of dead gazelle whenever the lions turned their backs?  And employing
every bit of his brain power learning how better to knap the flint.

And besides, even if you figure out that a tree trunk can be made to rotate, you
still have to invent the axle.  And the spoke.

The lever?  Yes, I think so.  Put a hunk of wood or a piece of bone under a
rock and pry it up.  I could have done that.  But how about the pliers -- a
double lever, now in use for about 4000 years.  I think I could have stared at
a three pieces of metal for a zillion years and not invented the pliers.

I'll make a prediction.  One day, when the aliens come to visit us from their
infinitely more advanced civilization, they will marvel at us the way we marvel
at the Incas.  How astonishing, they're going to say, they got as far as
they did but they never figured out the glugg.  The glugg will be something
as elementary and as obvious and as useful as the wheel or the lever or the
inclined plane.  Some simple machine that we've completely overlooked.

So wheel-man, whoever you are, I celebrate you.

Hey Jon, why don't you go invent the glugg?

Could I in actual fact have invented the chair?  Well, perhaps I would have
been smart enough to think of sitting on a rock or on a tree stump. But a chair
with legs?  Or with legs strengthened with stretchers?  Not very likely that
I would have been smart enough to invent a chair.  If it had been left to me,
we'd still be squatting on tree stumps.

Source: 2008/07/garden-news

Title: Garden News
Date: July 04, 2008

Last fall, I purchased two bottlebrush buckeyes by mail order and set them
temporarily in the kitchen garden.  Yesterday, I finally picked out the right
spot.  I cleared some weeds, carted over a generous supply of the well-dried, 
and transplanted the buckeyes into their permanent location on a slope that's
been difficult to maintain, just at the edge of the sheep pasture.  It's an
experiment;  I've never seen a bottlebrush buckeye this far north.  But hey,
they made it through their first winter with flying colors and the climate is
warming up.

The bottlebrush buckeye is one of those magnificent flowering shrubs that I
first encountered years ago in the Brooklyn Botanical Garden.    It's a plant
that will take three years to flower and a decade to mature, so it's touch-and-
go whether I'll see it in its glory -- assuming that it survives when we have
one of those snowless frigid winters that turn nominal Zone 4 into actual Zone
2.

In addition, I planted a four foot tall bur oak (also new to the norhern
neighborhood). I like to plant an oak tree even though it will be a decade
and a half before it makes an impact on the landscape.  Oaks are for the
grandchildren and the great-grandchildren,  should there be any.  And for the
planet.  Although this part of Vermont is rich in oaks, our particular property
was oakless when we arrived.  We now have many northern reds, a swamp white and
a bur.  I'm on the lookout for other varieties that can tolerate the winters.

Not everything's going up.  Coming down, yesterday, a huge mature balsam fir,
which was in the wrong place and needed to go.  We finally bit the bullet
yesterday.  It took my neighbor Ed's big chainsaw and his Massey-Ferguson
tractor, along with chains and cables to fell it.  It will take a whole day to
cut it up and prepare for the big bonfire.  On the way down, the fir took some
limbs of a beech and made quite a mess of the front lawn.  We've replaced the
divots and re-seeded and mulched the hard-hit areas.  The beech will recover
eventually, but it will take a couple of years. It can now see the light.

Source: 2008/07/my-cardiologist

Title: My cardiologist treats a new patient
Date: July 05, 2008

Nurse, how good is the anaesthetist?

Does Medicare cover this procedure?

Pass me the scalpel.  I mean, the scimitar.

What kind of steriods is this fellow on?

Let's not ignore the 800-pound gorilla in the room.

He says that his name is Dr. Bruce Banner.

Doctor, wait until you see your next patient.

That's the loudest murmur I've ever heard.

Can you move it along, Doc?  The family is in the waiting room and they're
getting impatient.

Source: 2008/07/european-grass

Title: "He Got the Witch Grass out of his Garden"
Date: July 09, 2008

Last summer, planning to extend a flower garden, I covered a weed-choked area
of about 4 feet by 10 feet with a foot high pile of dense lawn clippings.  The
plan was to kill the sod by excluding the light of the sun. It's an effective,
proven method  -- most people use black plastic for the same purpose. What sort
of weed was I combating?  The population endemic to this part of Vermont:  a
mixed stand of goldenrod, milkweed, plantain, dandelion, blackberry, bindweed,
dogbane, Indian paint-brush, buttercup, bracken fern. Yesterday I inspected
the results. The sod is dead, but it's been replaced by a nearly pure stand of
witch grass, which not not only survived but prospered. Every other plant was
door nail dead. I spent the day pulling up and digging out forty square feet of
tenacious witch grass.

Witch grass is the most noxious of the weeds with which I daily contend. It's
invasive, almost indestructible, powerful. If you dig it out and leave behind
the merest shred of root (underground stem, actually), the plant immediately
regenerates. It finds its way through wooden barriers and under metal barriers.
It grows rapidly in almost all soils.

Witch grass has forced me to stop growing bearded iris. It so surrounds and
overwhelms the irises that they can't be weeded without dislodging the shallow
corms. I've occasionally dug up an iris where the witch grass didn't even bother
to go around the corm -- just dug a hole and bored right through it. On the
other hand, Siberian irises compete well with witch grass.  Siberians make
such a dense deep cluster of roots that they squeeze the witch grass to death.
Strangles it. Does my heart good.

There's some pleasure in weeding witch grass, especially when you can get a
good grab and drag out a long root. In good soil, after a rain, I've pulled
out pieces three or four feet long.  But you have to dispose of it properly.
It takes the sun a week to kill the root, and should you accidentally cover it
with other weeds, it will come to life even even though it's not even under the
ground.

I used to say that I wanted my gravestone to read: "He got the witch grass out
of his garden." But now I know that it was mere vanity to think that I could win
the battle of the witch grass.  Here's a prediction: there will come a day when
witch grass will grow over and under and around my marble marker.

Witch grass (agropyron repens) is not even native to the New World. It's come to
us from Europe. Along with the dandelion, the starling and Dutch elm disease.

Source: 2008/07/what-is-the-abs

Title: Vote Here on the Bush Years
Date: July 13, 2008

What is the absolute worst catastrophe of the Bush presidency? Choose one (or
more, I guess, if you can't make up your mind) or append your very own disaster.

1.  The completely botched New Orleans mess (incompetent Bushies in critical offices, carelessness, implicit racism).

2.  The attorney-general scandal (incompetent immature Bushies in critical office, subversion of the constitution, elevation of party loyalty above loyalty to the country).

3.  Compromising of the civil service (appointments based on ideology rather than merit, suppression of informed opinion).

4.  War on the environment (incompetent Bushies in high places, suppression of scientific evidence, politicization of science).

5.  Torture -- or "enhanced interrogation techniques" -- of suspects (subversion of the constitution, illegal legal memos, clandestine government).

6.  Collapse of housing market (under regulation, false optimism, indifference, atavistic economic policies).

7.  Skyrocketing of national debt (tax policy favorable to the very rich, war on the cheap).

8.  Medical policy that rewards insurance companies, penalizes patients and doctors.

9.  Collapse of the dollar.

10  Energy policy (secret, favorable to big oil, indifference to conservation).

11. Iraq war (endless, fraudulent, expensive in treasure and lives, counter-productive).

12.  Failure to capture Bin Laden (stupidity, obsession with Iraq).

13.  Compromising of the judiciary (appointment of loyal Bushies, extreme right-wingers, ideologues).

That's my top thirteen,  but I've drawn it up without much thought, off the top
of my head.  I'm sure that I've left out some big ones.

Source: 2008/07/firlik-bezoars

Title: Firlik, Bezoars
Date: July 16, 2008

I don't like gore. I’m the kind of person who won’t recklessly channel-surf
for fear that the changer gizmo will maliciously lock onto our 24/7 surgery
channel, where some poor soul's innards will be on garish hi-def display.
 And yet, despite my squeamishness, I steeled myself and read right through
to the end of Katrina Firlik's Another Day in the Frontal Lobe, which is a
young neurosurgeon’s bildungs-autobiography. Of course, I allowed myself the
indulgence of zooming through some of the more gruesome parts. How much do I
need to know about maggot infestations in the living brain?

I’m grateful to Firlik for her vivid stories, for the occasional moment of
black humor and also for offering a forthright glimpse into an alternative
world. Nevertheless, I'm sorry to report, Another Day is not a good book. It's
too transparently a package shaped by agent and editor for short-term commercial
appeal. The author is so anxious to be cute and to be loved – she must have
been one of those front-row, admiring-eyes-glued-to-the-professor straight-A
pupils -- that whenever she comes up against a controversial topic, such as the
irrational funding of our medical system or the egomania of surgeons or the
morality of expensive, hopeless surgical interventions, she hints at concern but
then swerves and punts. She doesn't want to offend a single potential buyer.

Not a courageous writer, she is not an admirable being either: what can one say
about a highly-skilled professional who turns down job after job in the American
hinterland and elects to live in New Canaan, Connecticut, because, she admits,
it would be impossible to find a good Japanese restaurant in the sticks,  and
who in one sentence notes that her rich town has more neurosurgeons than all of
sub-Sahara Africa and in another reveals that she works on spines rather than
brains nowadays because spines are more lucrative.

Hey, Katrina, the next time you publish something, sacrifice some of that
royalty money and write directly from your heart (even though it's one cold and
stony organ).

Readers of this blague will not be surprised to learn that Dr. M. was much
intrigued by the book's medical vocabulary. Another Day serves up a feast of
beautiful and exotic words:  venous infarct, dura, spicule, rongeur, neuroma,
glioma, glioblastoma (you don’t want one!), bone dust, debulk, pachygyria. The
ugliest of all: intubated. My personal favorite, and a word that I've now put
in the running for Word of the Year: bezoar.

How could I have lived all these years without knowing the word bezoar?  Could
there be a surer index of my ignorance of medicine?  A bezoar, as everyone but
me seems to know, is a concretion of indigestible stuff stuck somewhere in the
digestive tract – hairballs, medicines, bits of food. Sometimes they can be
dissolved, but on occasions they can only be removed by surgery. A bezoar was
formerly thought to be a magical antidote for poisons –- so score another
couple of strikes against our ignorant superstitious ancestors. The most common
kind of bezoar is the phytobezoar, which is a collection of lignin, cellulose,
or tannin of food fibers. Common sources: celery, grapes, raisins, prunes,
pumpkins, all of which, if you’re like me, you’ve probably unwittingly eaten
without having given a thought to their bezoar-potential and therefore neglected
a splendid opportunity for hypochondria.

A bezoar caused by eating persimmons (an especially dangerous fruit,
bezoarwise), earns its very own word-- diospyrobezoar -- an odd amalgam of
Greek and Persian linguistic roots and a word which, just as soon as a suitable
opening arises, I intend to insinuate into the conversation.

Source: 2008/07/the-wave

Title: The Wave
Date: July 20, 2008

When we arrived in West Bradford forty years ago, there were lots of cows but
very few people. The main road was unpaved and aside from morning-and-evening
milk trucks and the tractors pulling hay wagons, there were very few vehicles.
Now, they've run electricity out Welch's old road and must have built forty new
homes and as a result there are a ton more folks who commute south. (In the
1960s, the nearest exit off the interestate was thirty-five miles away; now, the
interstate is just five miles away.) Very few milking cows are left nowadays --
some horses, some sheep, some heifers raised for beef. Hobby farms, mostly. Inch
by inch we've been surburbanized. Or more properly, exurbanized.

In the 1960s, when two cars passed on the road, the drivers would often stop
to chat, knowing that it wasn't likely that another vehicle would pass by for
a half an hour. If they didn't stop to talk, they'd at least wave. It was bad
manners not to acknowledge an oncoming vehicle. I remember that Ron Jepson, now
long dead, who made a living off twelve acres and a handful of cows, complained
to me once about one of our neighborhood grumps. "He doesn't even wave when he
goes by." Not waving was an intolerable breach of road etiquette.

What's happened to the custom? The wave is in steep decline and only survives as
a vestige of an older way of life. When we take our morning walk on South Road
or on Hackett Hill Road, I make a point of waving at the oncoming drivers. The
response is inconsistent. There's a rare enthusiastic open palm wrist-waggle,
an occasional mock salute, and sometimes a big windshield wiper wave, but more
often merely a perfunctory palm lift off the steering wheel. Sometimes the palm
lift is reduced even further, to a right index finger lift -- a feeble gesture
to antiquity.  Half the drivers don't wave at all; they are recent immigrants
who don't know that the wave has a history. They're in a hurry to get where
they're going, wherever that may be.

Clearly, the great age of waving has passed. But not for all of us. That will
be me out there on the side of the road, elbow raised and wrist oscillating,
clinging to the customs of our forefathers.

Source: 2008/08/its-the-verse-s

Title: "The verse is not/ So long as we can say 'This be the verse'"
Date: August 01, 2008

The most widely-known as well as the most notorious poem of the second half
of the twentieth century is Philip Larkin's "This Be the Verse." For those of
you who don't know the poem by heart, here it is in its brief and startling
entirety.

They fuck you up, your mum and dad.

They may not mean to, but they do.

They fill you with the faults they had

And add some extra, just for you.

But they were fucked up in the turn

By fools in old style hats and coats,

Who half the time were soppy-stern,

And half at one another's throats.

Man adds on misery to man.

It deepens like a coastal shelf.

Get out as early as you can,

And don't have any kids yourself.

Pessimistic? Jaded? Angry?  Yes, I think it's fair to call it so. And let's
also add, unsubtle with a vengeance.

Larkin is hyperbolically illogical. It can't be that every generation is
more deranged than the one that preceded it. When were the good times? A few
generations ago?  In the medieval period?  In antiquity?  In Larkin's view,
it's been all downhill, all the time. No doubt those early primates were already
fucking up their kids when they came down from the trees and started to walk
upright on the savannah. "There's only one piece of roasted rhinoceros left. You
take it. I don't mind being hungry."

Despite its dyspepsia and illogicality, "This Be the Verse" is a curiously
lovable poem. Whenever I've heard it read or recited, audiences react not
with horror but with amusement. The poem's misanthropy is so absolute and its
language so blunt that it can't help but provoke tittering.

The laughter arises because the poem doesn't earn its pessimism. It's too
fluent and too easy. Unlike, say, King Lear, where the sublunary world is rank
with incest, betrayal, and murder.  After three thousand lines and five full
horrific acts, Shakespeare acquires the standing to conclude that life is
miserable and that "humanity must perforce/ Prey on itself, like monsters of the
deep."

The events in Oedipus lend credibility to the difficult apercu that it's best
not to be born at all, next best to die very young.

While Shakespeare and Sophocles are philosophically serious, Larkin is merely
flip. There's a monumental disproportion between his gloom and the light-verse
vessel in which his gloom is contained. And as a consequence, the off-kilter
comedy. It's a whiny poem. "Poor poor pitiful me. I had a difficult mommy."

If "This Be the Verse" is in fact the most popular poem of the last fifty years,
it supersedes Frost's "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." What a remarkable
devolution! While Frost endures, Larkin abhors.

I doubt whether Larkin had "Stopping by Woods" in mind, but he certainly glosses
Robert Louis Stevenson's "Requiem" -- the poem from which he drew his title.
Stevenson's performance is charming, gentle, self-effacing, and modest.

Under the wide and starry sky,

Dig the grave and let me lie.

Glad did I live and gladly die.

And laid me down with a will.

This be the verse you grave for me:

Here he lies where he longed to be.

Home is the sailor, home from the sea,

And the hunter home from the hill.

Stevenson praises the adventurous life lived well and brought to completion.
Death may end it all but it also closes the circle. No completion, no circles
in Larkin, where natural processes are crudely truncated: "don't have any kids
yourself."

"This Be the Verse" is a hilarious and wonderful piece of joking, but it's
victimology is unsettling. It's tempting to claim that it satirizes its own
pessimism, but, sorry, it doesn't. Larkin loves his own gloom.

Here's another Victorian variation on the thema Larkiniana.

Is life a thorn?

Then count it not a whit.

Man is well done with it.

As soon as he's born,

He should all means assay

To put the plague away.

Pessimistic, yes.  But Colonel Fairfax, even-handed, also entertains the
possibility that life might be a boon (which, as we all know, is true for at
least part of the time).

Source: 2008/08/a-semi-mystical

Title: A Non-Mystical Experience
Date: August 03, 2008

It was the evening of a cloudy day and I had my face in among the clumps
of blooming day lilies, which I was trying to protect from the constant
encroachment of witch grass. It's a minor art -- to lie on the ground and reach
arm's length into the forest of leaves, careful not to knock the fragile buds
off the scapes, and identify and remove the underground stems of the witch grass
by feel alone. I had pulled out a heap of noxious weeds and was lost, absolutely
lost, in the project, when suddenly, from behind my back the about-to-set sun
emerged and illuminated the scene   For no more than thirty seconds the day
lily spectrum was on full display: apricot, pink, a range of yellows, each
slightly different from its neighbor, a near white, along with a few fully
saturated, shimmering crimsons, plus some bi-colors with their cute contrasting
throats. For a glorious moment, everything leaped at me. It was truly theatrical
to be surrounded by such brilliant colors and shapes and fragrances -- a rare
and memorable instance of transcendent aesthetic bliss.

The next day, on he telephone, I tried to convey my rapture to The Daughter.
She was concerned. One of her friends had had a similar moment. Her friend
was walking in the Colorado mountains and came upon a magnificent field of
wild flowers. The experience was powerful and life-changing, and she's now,
after years of study, an Episcopal priest. "You're not going to tell me that it
was a religious experience, are you?" I could hear the worry in her voice. My
response: "I would have thought you'd have known me better than that."

Some people conflate beauty with spirituality and religion. I'm not one of those
people. Beauty is transcendent, yes, but it's also material and explicable.

No question but that the profusion of day lily colors is glorious. For a
hundred years now, careful hybridizers have worked on the homely fulvous lily,
a roadside weed sometimes inelegantly called the "outhouse lily", and have
transformed it into the bearer of the rainbow colors in which it now sparkles. 
Thank you, clever day lily breeders, for your generations of imaginative work.
Thanks also to the parcel post driver who every year brings me three or four
more new varieties from Oakes in Tennessee. And while I'm at it, I would also
like to thank the people who designed and built that brown truck and its rubber
tires and constructed the roads and refined the gasoline -- no border of day
lilies without their help. Nor without the designers and manufacturers of my
spade and my favorite dibble and my all-purpose dandelion puller. I could add
other equally essential people -- go right back to the first practitioners of
smelting -- but I think I've made my point.  The day lilies do not declare the
glory of god; they declare the glory of human civilization and human enterprise.

I  grow a single wild fulvous lily on the grounds, just as a reminder.

It's drab.

Source: 2008/08/on-praise

Title: On Praise
Date: August 06, 2008

Praise for what is not praiseworthy is mere flattery. All the more so, if
fair words gain advantage. Praise even of the dead is suspect if it flatters
survivors. Persons in authority must be wary of false praise: be mindful
that for every man who praises you, ninety-nine hold their peace or mutter
imprecations aside.  A friend of long standing said to me, "You are the
hardest person to praise of anyone I've ever known," by which words he meant to
tax me, but which I took as compliment. I offer praise generously when it is
merited, but not for ordinary deeds. Of a churlish man, it was justly said at
his funeral, that he was a good speller; of a sloven, that his fingernails had
never been so clean. Praise need not be effusive and is most sincere if simply
couched. I was once most happy to be praised, when a discreet man, looking over
a landscape of which I am vain, said to a friend who marveled, "He works on
it."  Of all virtues, I am most apt to praise diligence, the want of which I
deplore in myself. Children are most easy to praise as they know not irony.

Source: 2008/08/the-sculpin-sli

Title: The Sculpin.  Slimy or Mottled?
Date: August 14, 2008

Knowing little of the finny tribe, I borrowed the Bradford Public Library's
copy of Langdon's introductory Fishes of Vermont (2006). It's an excellent,
informative, helpful guide. With Langdon's help, I can now declare that it's
undeniably the brown bullhead, a species of catfish, that has been multiplying
in our pond, The bullhead, a villainous omnivore, is one of the causes of the
steep decline of our population of frogs. The butt-ugly, scaleless, bebarbelled
brute gobbles frogs' eggs.

Readers of this blague will not be astonished to learn that Dr. M .has fallen
deeply in love with fish names. Take the brown bullhead, for example. It's
also known by such evocative and lunatic denominations as the horned pout, the
mudcat, and the minister. Minister?  To whom, and under what circumstances,
would a brown bullhead minister?

My favorite Vermont fish, nomenclature-wise, is the slimy sculpin, also
performing under such titles as the blob, the chucklehead, the rock cusk, the
stargazer, and the cockatouch. The slimy sculpin should not be confused with its
near cousin, the mottled sculpin -- which can also be addressed as the slowfish
or gudgeon.

Many of the common Vermont fishes have lost their colorful historic names. The
bowfin was once called the John A. Gindle, the stonecat was the doogler, the
lake trout was the togue or longue, the burbot was variously ling or lawyer
(lawyer? minister?  why not accountant? or dentist?), the quillback was the
buffalo, and the gar was the needlenose. On the other hand, the blandly-named
pond perch of olden days is trending in the reverse direction: it's now called
the pumpkinseed -- a name which seems curiously vegetarian for a denizen of the
deep.

If I had known that there was a fish called the cisco (known on jolly days as
the tollibee and on prosaic days as the sand herring), I would long ago have
promoted Galen Cisco to my all-time-great Baseball-Fish Team, adding him to such
piscine luminaries as Catfish Hunter, Dizzy Trout, Chico Salmon, Sid Bream,
Bobby Sturgeon, Art "Red" Herring, and Shad Roe. And Mudcat Grant.

No Sculpins in MLB that I can recall, but In a more poetic universe, "Slimy"
Sculpin would have been a spitball pitcher, or perhaps even a team owner.

Source: 2008/08/if-someone-had

Title: Crime, Punishment, Oblivion
Date: August 20, 2008

If someone had asked me, a month, ago, whether I'd read Crime and Punishment,
I'd have sworn up, down, sideways, and seven ways from Sunday that I had done
so.  And I would confidently have specified the date: during the early 1950s,
when anyone who read anything at all knew that "existence preceded essence" and
that the grandfather of existentialism was Fyodor Dostoevsky.  Who, in those
days, would have confessed to ignorance about Raskolnikov, his heady jumbled
philosophy, the murder, the remorse?  We were all striving to be Alienated
Youth, and Raskolnikov was the king of alienation -- a hundred times more
alienated than the runner-up, James Dean.

I've just finished reading Crime and Punishment, and I have a confession to
make.  I didn't remember the plot, the characters, or the outcome.  Not the
picture of louche, impoverished, oppressive St. Petersburg.  Nothing except the
mellifluous name:  Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov. Come to think of it, I didn't
remember the Rodion or the Romanovich either.  Just the Raskolnikov part.

Did I read the novel back there in the fifties?  If I did, is my memory now
so flimsy and porous that I've lost everything?   Did I pretend to have read
the novel?  Or was it so much spoken of that I absorbed it without effort. 
Whatever the facts, I certainly managed to fool myself.

Crime and Punishment is an exceedingly vivid piece of writing.  I think
that the trampling of Marmeladov and the suicide of Svidraigalov are such
brilliantly written scenes that they could not possibly slip my mind. How
could I lose track of the pathetic waif Sonya, her dreadful occuption, or her
lunatic stepmother?  The grand generous gestures, the poverty, the overwrought
emotions, the flaunting of propriety.

It's a thrilling, iconoclastic novel -- painful, and not fun for the morally
squeamish.  It's absolutely unforgettable.

Source: 2008/08/duke-duke-duke

Title: Duke, Duke, Duke
Date: August 20, 2008

Ain't it shocking that Gene Chandler's excellent song is now almost half a
century old?  Seems like just yesterday.

This be the verse in its full splendor.

Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke,
Duke, Dukeof Earl

As I walk through this world Nothing can stop the Duke of Earl And you, you are
my girl And no one can hurt you, oh no Yes, I'm gonna love you Come on let me
hold you darlin' 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

And when I hold you You will be my Duchess, Duchess of Earl We'll walk through
my dukedom And the paradise we will share.

Yes, oh, I I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of
Earl.

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

1)  "Duke of Earl" is classic, though late, doo-wop. It's lineally descended
from songs in which a supporting male quartet sang meaningless syllables: doo
wop, wop, wop. In this revisiting of the genre, nonsense doo doo doo de wop
has been superseded by words that carry meaning of a sort: duke duke duke of
earl. Return we now to the pages of history: in their turn, doo wop quartets
were themselves secular offspring of gospel quartets, where a reverent foursome
would sing do lord do lord, do lordy lord (a good example: the unnamed quartet
supporting Georgia Peach in "Do Lord Send Me").

2)  It's a fascinating process: Gene Chandler's replacement of doo doo with
duke duke is in fact a return to the roots, except that the previous and
inherent religious content has undergone secularization. "Lord" has become
"Duke," while the heaven of gospel has become the "dukedom" of doo-wop.

3.  It's easy to deride the naive aristocratic title "Duke of Earl"; but would the song preserve its meaning if it were "Duke of Buckingham?" "Earl" may sound silly, but because it's a generic title rather than a specific one it carries allegorical significance."Duke of Earl" is no one and therefore everyone.

4.  It's entirely likely that the word "earl" was chosen because of it echoes "lord": liquids "r" and 'l" and unemphatic vowel.

5.  The first line of the lyric --"As I walk through this world"-- introduces a secularized religious motif (an inheritance from the song's gospel forbears). Some will recall the opening sentence of the most famous of all religious allegories, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1672): "As I walked through the wilderness of this world."  Gene Chandler, walking through this world, is reborn just as Christian was reborn in the classic allegory. Not religiously, but in a worldly way. He is not saved;  he is duked.

6.  What is the significance of aggressive "nothing can stop me now?" What obstacles stopped the Duke of Earl in the past, before his duking?  The triumphalist language is highly developed but the obstacles remain vague and unarticulated. Audiences find their own meaning in the lacuna, but indignities historically suffered by the black underclass lurk only slightly below the surface of the lyric.

7.  The transformation from a previous but unknown and unarticulated existence to an aristocratic, unstoppable Duke of Earl takes place offstage, nor is any explanation offered for the metamorphosis. It's entirely magical.

8.  Because it's magic, it's pure fantasy. Pastoral fantasy in fact, which, curiously, is simultaneously primitive ("paradise") and sophisticated ("dukedom").

9. But it's a shared paradise: the duke along with his duchess. The retreat to domesticity is almost Victorian: "ah love, let us be true/ To one another...."  This particular Duke does not know that "Two paradises were in one/ To live in paradise alone."

10.  The Duke retreats to domesticity and ayet he seems to stake out ("nothing can stop me now") new territory to conquer, in which regard the spacious lyric seems to embody contradictory or even incoherent vectors of thought. However, the enthusiasm of the singing obliterates the ambiguity of the lyric; in sum, the song is remarkably optimistic -- which is just one reason for its continued popularity.

Source: 2008/08/lebanon-puccini

Title: Lebanon, Puccini
Date: August 23, 2008

I'm just back from Lebanon (that would be Lebanon, New Hampshire) where I
heard a performance of Puccini's Madame Butterfly.  If you pay no mind to the
ridiculous racist orientalist anti-American story, it's a pretty good opera. 
The orchestra, though small, was excellent and the singers top-notch.  The
music is a little on the overwrought side, and the garish emotional display
makes Dostoevsky seem in comparison like drawing-room comedy.  It's a sad,
dated story.  While Emma Bovary found the solution to her problem in arsenic,
Anna Karenina in the locomotive and Edna Pontellier in the water, Cio-cio-san
elects the knife -- more evidence, if more is needed, for women's paucity of
choices in the grand old days.  But great melodies, no question.  The opera
crowd was, as usual, a little on the geriatric side -- and as a consequence I
felt quite youthful bounding up to the balcony.  At breakfast the next day, a
friend admitted to being moved by Cio-cio-san's suffering.  "Did you cry," I
asked.  His reply:  "I'm not saying."

Source: 2008/08/smoking-smokers

Title: Smoking, Smokers
Date: August 25, 2008

My father smoked cigars and later a pipe;  my mother smoked Lucky Strikes --
lots of them.  When I was a boy, the air in our house was a blue-gray haze. I
believe that my mother smoked throughout her four pregnancies. Why shouldn't
she have?  The tobacco industry advertised that smoking was good for you. 
There wasn't "a cough in a carload."  Doctors smoked Camels and were paid to
testify that smoking was harmless all the while corporate leaders knew about
but suppressed evidence of fetal damage, heart disease, and lung cancer. 
Cigarettes were the perfect product:  "make it for a penny, sell it for a
dollar, and it's addictive as hell."

I tried to smoke -- I stole my mother's cigarettes and lit up in the cellar. 
It was horrible, nasty, and disgusting.  I couldn't do it.

Smoking was omnipresent in those days.  Foul odors and brimful ashtrays were
the norm.  In my first year in college, I was assigned a roommate who smoked
constantly.  I hated it, but there was no recourse.  Professors smoked
while lecturing and students, naturally, followed suit, so classrooms were
distractingly polluted.  Smokers had everything their way and dissenters were
a prissy minority.  At dinner parties, guests would bring their cigarettes to
the table.  Is there anything more odious than a tray of smelly ashes at the
festive board?

In the 70s, I got up the courage to place a modest, hesitant sign on our
front door:  "Please no tobacco."  But sometimes guests would smoke anyway,
unwilling to believe  that a hospitable person would try to restrict a commonly
accepted right.  I was regularly outraged by the insensitivity of my friends.

But little by little, customs and laws began to change.  It took lots of hard
work by anti-smoking lobbyists and organizers.  Many lawsuits. Now it's hard to
remember that until recently airplanes had smoking and non-smoking sections --
although in fact, the air stunk no matter where you sat.  As did restaurants,
buses, arenas, theaters, offices.

Nowadays, no one that I know would dream of smoking indoors; certainly not in
someone's home.  Cigarette smoking has become a shameful addiction.  The
change in attitude toward tobacco has been one of the few unequivocal social
betterments of my lifetime  -- but too late for those dear friends and family
members who died far too painfully and far too early.

And what about those knots of poor proud deluded newly-addicted teen-agers? 
The increase in tobacco use world-wide?  And those fat pompous corporate execs,
still lying through their shiny teeth, who deserve to be strung up by their
thumbs?

Source: 2008/08/nanny-state-nan

Title: Nanny State!  Nanny State!
Date: August 29, 2008

According to Charles Dickens, who visited the United States in 1842, American
men were constantly masticating tobacco.  He was thoroughly shocked by the "two
odious practices of chewing and expectorating" -- a habit that he found to be
both "offensive and sickening."

"In all the public places of America," wrote the novelist, "this filthy custom
is recognized.  In the courts of law the judge has his spittoon, the crier his,
the witness his, and the prisoner his."  They all spit "incessantly."  Worse
still, In the hospitals the students of medicine are requested, by notices upon
the wall, to eject there tobacco juice into the boxes provided for that purpose,
and not to discolor the stairs."  A further horror:  "in public buildings
visitors are implored ... to squirt the essence of their plugs... into the
national spittoons, and not about the bases of the marble columns.  This custom
is inseparably mixed up with every meal and morning call, and with all the
transactions of social life.  The stranger will find it in its full bloom and
glory, luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness."

It must have been horrible.  Dickens says that every floor, staircase, carpet
was disfigured with traces of "tinctured saliva."  It's hard to imagine that
our revered ancestors lived in such a foul, smelly, slippery environment or that
your doc would have a spittoon at his feet while he discussed your symptoms.

Eventually, there was a movement to ban public spitting, but it took almost
a century before the odious custom was conquered (except on the baseball
field, where it flourishes today in all its ancient glory).  There were those
who resisted change, of course.  To prohibit spitting was to regulate and
ultimately to deny a human freedom.  If the catchword had been invented, the
right-wingers of the day would have been shouting, the way they do now when it's
not the spitting but the smoking of tobacco that's in question:  "Spitters'
rights!  Spitters' rights!  Nanny state!  Nanny state!"

When Sir Simonds d'Ewes visited Paris two centuries before Dickens toured
America, he was shocked to find the steps of the Louvre littered with "a
thousand ordures."  Defecating in public was the French custom and a human
freedom.  Eventually, however, laws and customs changed.  But I'm absolutely
positive that 1640s libertarians were out there on the barricades, screaming
"Shitters' rights!  Shitters' rights!  Nanny state! Nanny state!"

Source: 2008/09/what-is-a-dra-1

Title: What is a Drag?
Date: September 05, 2008

What, exactly, is a drag?  Here's a sentence from Kate Chopin's edgy (in a
Victorian way) 1899 novel, The Awakening.  "Alcee Arobin and Mrs. Highcamp
called for Mrs. Pontellier one bright afternoon in Arobin's drag."  A drag? 
Could it be "a large four-horse coach with seats inside and on top."  O my
gosh!  It's still another nineteenth-century horse-drawn vehicle!  Along with
a cutter and a kibitka.   Memo to self: add to list.

I didn't know of the existence of The Awakening, a novel which had dropped
completely off the map, until sometime in the 1980s, when it re-established
itself in courses in AmLit.  It was a banned book for a while, not, I would
guess, because of the adultery itself, but because Edna Pontellier acknowledges
and acts on sexual desire.  Alcee Arobin, drag-owner, senses her vulnerability,
but I don't think that in this case the vehicle figures in the seduction.  It's
a fine, liberating book, the prose a little on the hothouse-gardenia side, but
well worth the re-reading.

Source: 2008/09/the-black-cochi

Title: The Black Cochin
Date: September 06, 2008

Cathy: "We have a Cochin.  She's beautiful.  Her feathers are an iridescent
black.  With Cochins, the feathers cover the entire leg.  She's a pet, part
of the family.  She's four years old and must weigh seven pounds.  But just
lately she developed some sort of neurological disease.  She would quiver,
shake, sometimes her wings, sometimes all over.  Faint.  We took her to the
vet.  We thought she had eaten something bad.  It's such a wet year, there
are mushrooms all over the place.  Perhaps she ate mushrooms or some poisonous
berries.  The vet took an x-ray.  It cost $400."

Dr. M. (flabbergasted):  "You spent $400 on a ten-dollar chicken?!

Cathy:  "Actually, she was given to us.  Free."

Dr. M.:  "What did the x-ray show?"

Cathy:  "An egg.  You could see it clearly."

Dr. M.:  "I mean about the disease."

Cathy:  "Nothing in particular.  The shaking stopped after a while,  But a
few days later she developed bumblefoot because she couldn't perch correctly.

Dr. M.:  "Bumblefoot?"

Cathy:   "Bumblefoot is an infection.  It distorts the shape of the foot. 
So we've been giving her antibiotics.  One of us holds her in a towel, then the
other pries open her beak.  You insert a mixture of applesauce and antibiotic
into her beak. She doesn't like it."

Dr. M.:  "Is it working?"

Cathy:  "It's not clear.  She may have to have surgery. The doctor recommends
it."

Dr. M. (in a state of shock):  "Surgery?  On a chicken?  How much is that
going to cost."

Cathy:  "The vet says $700.  He's an avian specialist.

Dr. M (astounded):  "Are you going to do it?"

Cathy:  "We don't know.  We're thinking about it."

Dr. M.:  "Have you considered physical therapy?  Massage.  Perhaps
acupuncture?

Cathy: "First we're going to try echinacea or goldenseal."

Source: 2008/09/palin-observati

Title: Citizen Dentist
Date: September 09, 2008

Sarah Palin is like Jesse Ventura; she's a "novelty" governor.  Every once
in a while, Americans like to stick it to the pols by electing an amateur. 
It shakes things up for a while.  Sarah Palin is a joke, but now McCain has
endangered our beloved nation by taking her seriously. Here's a scenario: 
McCain is elected, he dies or is taken out by a conspiratorial maniac, and
there's a dangerous small-minded, uneducated, right-wing fringe religious-bigot
demagogue in charge of the nuclear stockpile.

Governing is the most difficult of all arts, and yet Americans seem to think
it's a snap.  When you take your car in to be fixed, you want an experienced,
knowledgeable mechanic, not, not an actor or an athlete.  I'm yet to meet a
person who wants his impacted wisdom tooth treated by a citizen dentist.  But
to run the government -- let's just hire anyone at all.

I'm reading Milan Kundera's excellent novel, The Joke.  It's set in 1950s
Czechoslovakia, and like all novels of the communist era, portrays a world in
which the government is in the hands of mediocre people chosen and promoted not
for brains, wisdom, or talent but for ideological orthodoxy.  t's a system
that's doomed to failure, but it's exactly the system that has now been imposed
on this country by the Bush administration, which regularly hired graduates
of Patrick Henry and Liberty --ideologically pure right-wing colleges -- over
applicants of genuine distinction.

Republicans oppose affirmative action when it works to the advantage of the
underrepresented, but they are its greatest proponents when it comes to
political correctness.  Major examples (there are zillion minor ones) are such
disasters as Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, Justice Clarence Thomas, and now
likely Vice President Sarah Palin.

Source: 2008/09/expertise-by-pr

Title: Expertise by Proximity
Date: September 15, 2008

Regular correspondent Otis Jefferson Brown inquires whether, in lieu of the
precedent by which Sarah Palin claims expertise in foreign affairs because
she can almost see Russian from Alaska, he is now a rocket scientist because,
through his bedroom window, he can, on starry nights, see the moon.

Otis, I'm sorry to say,  does not grasp the precedent.  Of course he's not
a rocket scientist, because he's not educated or practiced in that difficult
field.  However, he is certainly qualified, by the principle of expertise
by proximity, to become the head of NASA, for which position I urge him to
immediately apply, especially if he attended high school with Sarah.

Is each and every Alaskan equally qualified to be Vice President?  Of
course they are, but with a caveat.  Those who live in the western part
of the state are obviously more knowledgeable and are to be preferred to
dwellers in the Alaskan interior.  Eastern Alaskans have not achieved more
significant expertise by proximity than what would prepare them to serve as
trade representative to the Yukon, or perhaps, ambassador to Canada.

Source: 2008/09/what-i-learned

Title: What I Learned in Frackville
Date: September 19, 2008

TV-free for more than three months, we stayed last night at a motel in
Frackville, Pennsylvania and couldn't resist taking a gander at the tube.  I
was shocked to see how artificial and contrived it all seemed.  The actors were
not real people, nor were they actors pretending to be real people.  They were
actors trying but failing to act like real people.  They were, at least to me
last night, no more convincingl than those archaic Egyptian sculptures.

Try this experiment.  Switch on the TV and then surf from channel to channel. 
I guarantee that you'll be able to tell within ten seconds whether the
person you see on the screen is acting in a "daytime drama," a TV series, a
documentary, or a movie.  The style of performance in each of these genres is
so heavily conventionalized that the cues become immediately obvious to the
TV-literate.  (By the word "convention." I mean "an agreed-upon departure from
reality").  Good actors have assimilated these conventions.  When they appear
on screen, they gesture and smile and speak in agreed-upon but unnatural ways.

My new perspective was an artifact of the three-month hiatus.  Temporarily
unfamiliar with the style, all I could see were the conventions at work.  Of
course actors are always faking, but I had stopped seeing it.  In Frackville,
it all became transparent, offensively transparent.  And because it was so
transparent, it wasn't worth my time, especially when a little clicking brought
me to baseball.

I wonder how long my resistance will continue.  Not very many days, I
Iimagine.  'll forget.

Source: 2008/09/road-to-hanniba

Title: Road to Hannibal
Date: September 23, 2008

Stepping westward, we left St. Louis behind and detoured northward to enjoy
scenic Route 79 to Hannibal. Well worth it --lovely, well-cultivated bottom land
and wonderful vistas from the bluffs overlooking the Mississippi.  We toured
Louisiana, an old river town where a handful of century-old mercantile buildings
are hanging on precariously, waiting to be redeployed for modern uses.  I
recommend if, especially for those who are not fazed by a seventy-five mile add-
on to a twenty-four hundred mile jaunt.

While I'm dispensing advice, let me also commend Route 50 between and Bridgeport
and Parkersburg in West Virginia -- another less-well-traveled and very
beautiful highway.

Louisiana, Missouri (unknown to me until today) now enters that small but
distinguished category of cities that are named according to an unusual
template.  Others include Washington, Vermont (and many other states),
Delaware, Ohio  and Delaware, Wyoming and Indiana, Pennsylvania. Related but
Impure:  Kansas City, Missouri; Michigan City, Indiana.

Source: 2008/09/a-scary-flashba

Title: A Scary Flashback
Date: September 26, 2008

I watched a part of the Couric-Palin interview (all I could stand).  For me, it
was a deja vu experience.  Took me back to the days when I examined students
who had missed most of the classes and hadn't done much of the reading but had
the effrontery to see if they could bullshit their way through.  It was all
there:  the repetition of a handful of memorized phrases, the circumlocutions,
the volley of words when an occasional thought entered  the otherwise vacant
brain, the telltale fumbling, the sheer unadulterated bluff.  But as for
Palin's level of analysis -- it wouldn't have earned a C in any class that I
ever taught.  At best, it's at the level required to run for vice president of
the student body in a mediocre high school.

Source: 2008/09/left-right-conf

Title: Left-right Confusion
Date: September 29, 2008

As far as I know, there have been exactly zero scientific studies of directional
dyslexia.  As a consequence, all of our knowledge is anecdotal.  No one can
say for certain whether the condition is inherited or acquired, or whether it's
more (or less) common among women, southpaws, redheads, eastern Europeans,
bad spellers, or chocoholics.  "Common sense" suggests that it might be
associated with right-left confusion, and indeed, a number of the individuals
who've commented on ""People who Lose their Way" indicate that they have
severe problems telling the one hand from the other.  For example:  one
commentator reports that a lifelong problem is that "I've been completely
unable to instinctively tell left from right."  The emphasis on the word
"instinctively" is meaningful.  Without conscious effort, most unaffected
people intuitively and easily understand the difference between right and
left;  for another class, some of them DDers, it's something that must be
learned by effort, as in the case of the reader who thinks her DD is related
to the fact that she "had lots of trouble as a child learning right and left,"
or of another who, learning to dance, can't consistently raise "right hand and
left leg -- or vice versa."  Another non-instinctive person "still doesn't know
my left from my right (I have to put my hands out and see which one makes an
'L).'"  A high school student plaintively confesses that her mom "threatened to
write the words left and right on the back of my hands before I had to take the
test for my driver's license."  It's a frequent complaint:  "I was almost 20
years old before I stopped having to think 'I write with my left hand...  if I
were to pick up a pencil which hand would I hold it in.'"

Is there, then, an association between right-left confusion and directional
dyslexia?

I don't think that the evidence allows us to conclude so.

Most of the people who commented do not mention any such condition.

Perhaps they take it for granted that everyone in the DD community shares the
trait -- but we don't.  Even though I'm among the world's most frequently lost
souls, I have not the slightest bit of trouble with left and right.  In fact,
I'd say that I'm hyperconscious of my handedness as well as the handedness of
others.  I always observe and remember which of my acquaintances are right or
left-handed.  And if someone says, "turn left," I turn left.  Unerringly and
instinctively.

Pending further investigation, the evidence suggests that left-right confusion
is independent of directional dyslexia.  It's a separate problem (and one which
may further disorient those of us who are chronically lost).

Coming soon:  east/west/north/south.

Source: 2008/10/lessons-from-r

Title: Lessons from R. B. Hayes
Date: October 04, 2008

Rutherford B. Hayes, whose biography (by Hans J. Trefousse) I have just read,
was a an intelligent, well-meaning, but not very imaginative president.  It's
a blemish on his record that he compromised his principles and allowed ex-
Confederate leaders in the southern states to install Jim Crow policies that
would take a hundred years to undo.  He should have fought much harder.

Hayes' most famous sentence dates from his 1877 inaugural address: "He serves
his party best who serves his country best."  It's an admirable principle --
and one that that has been thoroughly violated by Mr. Bush and the pack of
clowns and schmegeggies that he has installed to ruin our government.

After Hayes left office, he wandered to the political left.  Although as
president he had intervened to crush the railroad strikes, he later came to
believe (according to Trefousse) that "the taxation system was unfair, taking
a much smaller share of the estates of millionaires than of ordinary people."
"The real difficulty," Hayes wrote, "is that vast wealth and power reside in
the hands of the few and unscrupulous.  Hundreds of laws are in the interest
of these men and against the interest of the workingmen.  Lincoln was for
government of the people.  The new tendency is for government 'of the rich, by
the rich, and for the rich.'"

These are words of remarkable pertinence.  It woult appear that we haven't
moved very far from the mark -- the more shame to us.  If Hayes had said these
same words today, he would not doubt have been accused of fomenting "class
warfare."  (Class warfare: redistributing money from rich to poor.  Normal
state of affair (not class warfare):  taking money from the poor to give to the
rich.)

Source: 2008/10/in-bruges-dont

Title: In Bruges/ Don't Look Now
Date: October 08, 2008

We enjoyed In Bruges for its black humor, its witty profanity, and the
unpredictability of its plot (that is, until the mandatory chase scene).  And
especially for the lovely views of medieval Bruges, an old Hanseatic town.

In Bruges contains a film-within-a-film which is described by Chloe, the
handsome drug dealer and thief, as an imitation or a homage or a 'nod of the
head' toward Don't Look Now, Nicholas Roeg's scary-as-hell Julie Christie-Donald
Sutherland masterpiece.  I've been racking my poor brains, trying to decide
whether there's a meaningful connection between the two films -- or whether the
writer-director Martin McDonagh is just planting red herrings.

Bruges and Venice (where the earlier film is set) are old, architecturally rich,
becanalled towns and both directors make much of their warm civic atmosphere. 
The plots of both films are initiated by the deaths of young children.  In each
film, an important character is a dwarf who is, one case, the perpetrator of
violence and in the other its victim.  That's all that I can come up with at
the moment, so I'm leaning to the red-herring theory. But I'd be interested in
other people's views.

Source: 2008/10/a-while-back-we

Title: Non-Existent Republican Friends
Date: October 10, 2008

Although I'm not a particularly sociable individual, I have friends all over
the U.S and a few in other parts of the planet.  I have friends of various
interests and complexions and ethnicities and ages and of both (or all) the
genders.  Although religion is said to be great divider, and I'm not in any
sense a believer, I have maintained rewarding and intimate relationships with
people who are regular churchgoers -- even with some who are devout beyond
ordinary devotion.  But there's one class of people with whom I share no
friendships -- I have not a single friend who is a Republican.

I don't that think it's merely a question of opportunity or proximity.  I
think that there are such fundamental differences between the way Republicans
and Democrats see the world that it's nearly impossible to create a basis for
friendship between the two groups.  A while back, we traveled to Bulgaria. 
There were some thirty people in the group, who, within a day or two, had
sorted themselves into two distinct clans. In the bus: Repubs together, Dems
together.  In the restaurants, same thing.  Walking, talking, visiting the
museums and archaeological sites -- the same.  It was a clear case of mutual
affinity and mutual repulsion.

There were no overt political discussions, no debates on the issues. What, then,
were the cues to which we (and everyone else) responded?

At heart, I think, It's the difference between those who see the world as
necessarily competitive and those who think that it can be cooperative.  The
crucial sign is the way that people think of money and taxes.  As soon as
someone started to talk about his money, I became wary.  When the same person
complained about his taxes, I knew that he was never going to be my friend.

A Republican responds positively to a candidate who announces that he's going to
let people "keep more of their own money in their own pockets."   The phrase
"your own money" gives me the willies.  I don't think that anyone makes money
on his own -- he makes it because there's an enormous public investment over
many hundreds of years that has created  the opportunity to "make money." 
Our taxes have supported this titanic effort.  I think that the  standard
of living of many Americans -- certainly of those who can afford to travel
to Bulgaria -- is high enough that they can think about improving the living
standard of others,  and stop thinking first of their own pockets.  People who
have enough and yet continue to prioritize their pockets are simply selfish.

It's the difference between a Hobbesian universe -- a war of all against
all -- and a universe in which competition is no more real than altruism. 
 Republican electioneering is designed to appeal to the worser side of human
nature, not the better, the more community-minded side.

Hobbes believed that men were so depraved and competitive that they required
authoritarian government to keep them in check.  Is that why Republicans are
so tolerant of government intrusion into their personal lives?  And why they
profess liberty but continue to fall in love with simplistic heavy-handed
nationalists?

Source: 2008/10/the-libertarian

Title: The Libertarian Universe
Date: October 12, 2008

Out here in the west, social services are administered by the county
commissioners.  At a candidate forum last night, libertarians running for
commissioner opposed a .05% (i.e. a penny on a $20 purchase) extension of
a sales tax that would go to support battered women, the alcohol recovery
facility, mental health, walk-in clinics for the poor, etc.   The libertarian
argument: "charity" should be voluntary.  When the government collects taxes,
it will be elected officials not "the people" who decide which "charity" to
support.

It's a truly grotesque argument.  Of course elected officials (democratically-
elected officials) decide.  Its their job;  we've delegated it to them.  We
elect officials to to decide how to spend all public revenue.  What exactly is
the problem?

Moreover, I know of not a single instance in which a complex society such as
ours has been able to support the less able and less fortunate with strictly
private charity.  It hasn't happened and it's certainly not going to happen
soon.

Is private giving morally superior to public intervention, as the libertarians
assert?  I don't know that it is.  Most of us express our commitment to the
general welfare by paying our share of the burden.

I can only conclude that the libertarians, at least the ones that I heard last
night, live in an alternative and wholly theoretical universe.  They're in
thrall to a foolish and impractical ideology -- one that renders their actions
unintentionally hard-hearted and cruel.

And what makes them so damn angry, intolerant and insulting?

Source: 2008/10/reading-trollop

Title: Reading Trollope
Date: October 19, 2008

I would have thought that there wasn't a novel by Anthony Trollope that I hadn't
read, but browsing the library shelves, I found one that was unfamiliar to
me.  It's a short, late novel called An Eye for an Eye. It dates from 1878
(Trollope, born in 1815, died in 1882.

Trollope wrote forty-seven fluent novels and thoroughly mastered his craft. An
Eye for an Eye reprises familiar motifs, most notably Trollope's favorite
situation of the weak hero torn between private and public callings. Shall it
be love, this time, or shall it be duty? In this particular case, the hero is
young, uncommonly simple Fred Neville, who promises himself to the Irish beauty
Kate O'Hara but also agrees that he will never dishonor the Scroope name (he's
the heir to the Earl of Scroope) by marrying beneath his station. It's a typical
Trollope situation but daring for its time, because Fred impregnates Kate
(when?  between chapters?Although I thought I was reading attentively, I missed
the moment).

Trollope creates an awkward situation, but I'm sorry to say, gets himself and
Fred off the hook by throwing one of the major characters under the metaphorical
bus, so to speak. I don't like it when novelists sidestep the dilemmas that
they create. Trollope clearly admires the aristocratic Scroopes, but either
volitionally or unconsciously (it's hard to say which) manages to persuade his
readers that they're better off giving the upper classes a wide berth.

Trollope was not a learned or innovative thinker, like his greater contemporary
George Eliot, but in his later novels he pushed, a little, against Victorian
prudery.  His last novel, Dr. Wortle's School, which I've recently re-read,
deals with the potentially shocking question of bigamy.

I often wonder why I'm such a Trollope fan. There's so much about him to
dislike: his crude anti-feminism, his condescension to people of other colors
and to non-English nations, his obsessions with class and cash, his disgust
with Jews, his ridiculous worship of horses and hunting, etc. And yet, he tells
a great story, he loves his characters, and his dialogue is always bright and
witty.

Although he is not an author who transcends time and place, Trollope is still
the best writer to investigate of you want to learn about both the strengths and
the weaknesses of nineteenth-century England.

Source: 2008/10/undergraduate-s

Title: Undergraduate Squalor
Date: October 21, 2008

An "orphan precinct" is one that lacks a regular committee and chair. We have
one nearby, and I've been recruited to walk the neighborhood and deliver GOTV
flyers to registered Dems. I'm natively shy and I hate knocking on doors, but
there are votes to be had and lordy-mercy don't we need every single one. The
neighborhood in question is near to the university, high-density, undergraduates
mostly -- 98% of the people on my lists are under 25 years old. But the squalor!
Here are these beautiful old 1910s and 1920s arts and crafts bungalows, or the
remnants of them, and they've been allowed to go to seed, or way past seed --
bricks unpointed, wood unpainted, porches sagging, screen doors ripped and
hanging off.  And then the beer cans, the cigarette butts, the newspapers that
have been decaying in their plastic sleeves for half a year. Garbage strewn
everywhere, foul odors. It's disgusting, an affront to the decent citizenry. Who
are these children?  How can they live in such cisterns of filth?

I was working myself up into quite a fit until I started to think about the
conditions in which I lived when I was in college, back there in the just-
barely-post-diluvian 1950s. I didn't drink alcohol, even then, or smoke
cigarettes, but I lived amongst as much dirt and disorder as any modern
undergraduate could manage. When I concentrate my mind, I remember the floor
of my room littered with every garment I possessed. Every sock and every shirt
grey with dirt, sweat, food droppings. I remember an ancient tattered rug that
was not swept or vacuumed a single time in two consecutive semesters. I remember
a bathtub that was so foul that it was shunned by the roaches. And am I right
(my apartment mate Otis J. Brown might be able to confirm this) that we found
two hundred empty Coke bottles strewn around Terry Cannon's room after he had
cleaned up and moved out. And also that our back stairs were littered with a
thousand dog droppings, around which we maneuvered in and out, not thinking that
such pollution was a circumstance that we might think to remedy.

Is it possible that these degenerate kids are no filthier than their venerable
grandfathers? Gives one pause. Well, who cares, really, just so long as they get
their pathetic drunken butts in gear and vote for Obama.

Incidentally, for anyone who cares: I'm now compulsively neat and cleanly.

Source: 2008/11/an-obsession

Title: An Obsession
Date: November 01, 2008

These last few weeks, I've been reading political news obsessively.  Not
just the NYTimes and the WaPo, but the left-wing blogs as well:  Politico
and Daily Kos and HuffPo and TPM.  I follow the local political gossip on
ColoraoPols.  I check the latest polls on Pollster and 538, searching for
trends and differentials.  Worse still, I'm up in the middle of the night
almost every night:  what's the latest news from North Dakota, Montana,
Florida?  I keep up to date on senatorial and house races all over the country
especially where the red candidate is a horror or is running a particularly
loathsome campaign:  Dole, McConnell, Bachmann, Sununu, etc.  My days (and my
nights) are no longer my own.

I'm not the only one.  Many of my friends are doing the same thing.

Not without reason.  I believe that the republic is at stake.  If McCain/Palin
is elected, I fear for the century and for the country and for the planet.

On days when I do something for the Dems (knock on doors, deliver those flyers
that they presume to call "literature," fold-and-stuff) I sleep better.  But I
won't be at peace until Virginia is in the Democratic column.  Only then will I
breathe easy.  Who knows, maybe I'll be able to get through the night without
logging on to the internet to learn exactly how many points Obama is ahead in PA
according to Gallup and Rasmussen and Harstad and CBS.

I ran into my friend Mike S. a few days ago.  He had just been to the doctor
about his high blood pressure.  While he was all wired up he started chatting
with the nurse about Sarah Palin.  His blood pressure shot up 40 points.

I wonder what's going on with mine.

Source: 2008/11/takacs-geezers

Title: Takacs Geezers
Date: November 04, 2008

At Grusin Music Hall last night to hear the Takacs play Beethoven and Schumann,
always a delight, and also a quartet by Bartok, which is, I'm sorry to say, even
after many exposures is still screechingly hard on my tender ears (except for
the very amusing pizzicato 4th movement).  Perhaps some day I'll "get" Bartok,
but it's been forty years of hard listening and frankly, I'm not there yet. 
I'm still hopelessly stranded in melody, harmony, and rhythm.

Meanwhile the chamber music crowd get older and older.  Anyone with the least
amount of pigment in his/her hair is young;  in fact, anyone without a wheel-
chair, a walker, an oxygen bottle, or a "minder" is young.  Grusin is the place
I take my septuagenarian self in order to feel youthful and vigorous.  I admit
that it's a strategy that doesn't have much of a future, but I'm not thinking
long term.

I think Ed and the Takacses should accommodate to their elderly audience.  For
example, when it comes time for the violin to play solo parts in the highest
register, the notes are barely audible.  It can't just be me having this
problem because half of the geezers in the auditorium have sprouted hearing
aids.  I think that Ed should make an effort to play the high notes a lot
louder.  Or possibly, plug in that near-Strad that he wields so well.  I'm
sure that there's a electronic program designed to amplify the top of the
register.

On the other hand, If the Takacs wants to attract a younger audience, there
are some changes they might make.  For one thing, it's time to give up on the
all- black tuxes.  Why must they all dress like Johnny Cash?  Sequins would
be good, or anything glittery.  And those shiny black shoes in an age when
footwear has become plastic and colorful?  What's with that?  And how about a
little chest hair (or in the case of Gerri the violist, a little bosom)? Bring
that Broncos/Buffs/Coors crowd to Grusin!! A new generation of Brahmsophiles. 
And why must they just sit there like lumps when they could move around the
stage a bit.  An occasional dance step.  Slap that cello, swing those violins
from side to side.

Lots of room for exciting innovations in the world of the classical string
quartet.

Source: 2008/11/my-day

Title: My Day
Date: November 05, 2008

My election day was much like that of many Americans, I betcha. In the morning,
out walking the neighboring precincts, to knock on doors and rouse up the
occasional procrastinator. I was greeted for the most part by enthusiastic
thumbs-up Obama voters but also by apologetic laggards whom I forced to swear
holy oaths that they would hustle down to the polling place "right now." I
encountered one sour young woman who told me that she was so tired of being
urged to vote that she was sorry that she had voted. I was on good behavior and
did not respond that there was a lot more at stake than her convenience. Later
in the day, after the mandatory septuagenarian nap, I talked with a candidate
for county commissioner and together we made a last check of the polls. Then
to a downtown restaurant where partisans had gathered to await the results. I
was nervous as a cat when at first Virginia showed up in the red column and
I couldn't relax until Ohio came in blue. Then, moderately joyful, off to a
friend's house to watch the long parade of blue states. Lots of shouting and
applause. At last the polls closed on the California coast and the US was once
gain in the care of a person with brains, education, and values that I could
recognize. Then home to watch McCain gracefully concede and Obama accept. Broken
sleep, but this morning up early to search the archives for the flag and the
flagpole. Right now Old Glory, looking might relieved and cheerful, is flying
above all the Obama/Biden and Dem yard signs. A great lift to the world's
spirits, and to mine.

Source: 2008/11/latter-day-conf

Title: Latter-Day Confederacy
Date: November 06, 2008

The Republicans have voluntarily transformed themselves into a regional and
agrarian party. If the Democrats play it as it lays, they have the opportunity
to create a permanent Democratic majority -- permanent into the foreseeable
future, that is.

McCain was the candidate of a geographical region, not of the nation. How
many votes did the Arizona Jekyll/Hyde senator win that were outside of the
old Confederacy (reminder: the Confederate States of America were, in order
of their secession, South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, North Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee. The "border
states" of Missouri and Kentucky did not legally secede but were allied with
the Confederacy)? These states constitute the heart of McCain's support. Of his
162 electoral votes, 113 came from the southern pocket.  he rest came from the
otherworldly Mormon states of Utah and Idaho (9 votes) and from impoverished
agrarian states, many of them suffering from declining populations, such as the
Dakotas, Nebraska, Kansas, and Montana. In the entire country, the only areas
where McCain in 2008 ran ahead of Bush in 2004 were some of the all-white rural
counties in the old confederacy and Oklahoma and an occasional retrograde county
in undeveloped western Pennsylvania and West Virginia. If anyone in America
found Palinity appealing, it was people in the poorest, least educated parts of
the continent  -- and also in the atypical Alaskan kleptocracy.

The Democrats made inroads into the new old south because northern Virginia's
Washington suburbs and the research triangle area of North Carolina have joined
the new century, and because Florida is a haven for northeastern migrants.

The Democrats are the party of the future: multicultural, educated,
international, young, high-tech, entrepreneurial, secular. The Republicans are
the part of the past:  geriatric, racist, melanin-deprived, Bible-thumping,
rural, poor, less well educated. Their day is over and gone.

The "pundints" (as McCain calls them) want Obama to govern from the middle. I
agree, except that I think that he should govern from the middle of New York,
New England, the upper middle west, and the far west -- not a middle somewhere
between Virginia and Mississippi. Obama should make an effort to educate the
denizens of the American backwater, but if it's necessary to drag them kicking
and screaming into the 21st century, then so  be it. But the United States
of America can no longer allow itself to be shackled to a mean, recalcitrant,
atavistic, pre-Darwinian southland.

It's not longer red state versus blue state. It's all blue except where it's all
white.

Source: 2008/11/obama-and-numbe

Title: Number 44 and Number 42
Date: November 10, 2008

I'm jubilant that, come January 20, we'll once again have a president whose
brain waves are dancing, who can bring an English sentence to completion, and
who understands that America consists of much more than the Bushian roster of
Fortune 500 executives, evangelicals, know-nothings, high school dropouts,
gay- bashers, neocon imperialists, dittoheads, gun nuts, military contractors,
upward redistributionists, fetus-worshipers and health insurance profiteers.
The new president will abandon the present system of government (trust the
market -- capitalism is always right!) and return us to the world of evidence
and reason. Quite the revolution, isn't it?  And speaking of revolutions,
the new president, if you haven't heard, is black (or to be more accurate,
black-and-white, which is this country still means, in defiance of all logic,
black). How splendid to bury a long-standing racial taboo. Nothing makes me
prouder than that we've elected an African-American, Kenyan-Kansan president.
With a brain.

The election of Barack Obama brought me back to hometown Brooklyn of sixty-one
years ago. I was eight years old on April 15, 1947, when Jackie Robinson "broke
the color barrier." It was Jackie on first or Jackie running the bases that
alerted me to the idea that I lived in a conflict-riven society. We (family,
friends, neighbors, writers for the Brooklyn Eagle) were enthusiastic about
Jackie, but there were those reactionaries and bigots in other cities who were
convinced that their world had just come to an end. No question but that the
advent of Jackie Robinson was the major formative political experience of my
early childhood -- even though it was decades before I could fully appreciate
its cosmic significance.

In my mind, and I think in the minds of others of my generation, there's a
direct line from Jack Roosevelt Robinson to Barack Hussein Obama. Two smart,
skilled performers; two ferocious but very cool competitors. Two very courageous
gentlemen.Two barriers busted all to smithereens.Two milestones in American
history. Never the latter if hadn't hadn't been for the former.

Jackie's fabulously athletic body fell apart early and he died young of
diabetes. He was born in 1918, and if he had been blessed with longevity, he
would have been ninety years old today.

Wouldn't that have been a pretty picture -- Jackie Robinson, frail, gray,
stooped, leaning on his cane, but still in possession of that marvelous knowing
glint in his coal black eyes, sitting right there on the platform in front of
the United States Capitol, a tear on his cheek while Barack Obama holds up his
hand and swears to protect and defend the constitution of the United States of
America. I see it oh so clearly in my mind's eye. It gladdens my fond old heart.

Source: 2008/11/up-in-the-sky-e

Title: Up in the Sky, Ever So High
Date: November 16, 2008

Today's essaylet is being composed thirty thousand miles above ground, somewhere
over, it appears from up here, Utah. I'm flying on Southwest Airlines, the
Trailways of the sky -- no frills, no food, no nothing. No passengers to speak
of, either. Big ol' three-quarter-empty jet plane. "Nobody's flying nowadays," a
stewardess told me. Chalk up another one for W.

Air travel was in its florid adolescence when I was a boy. Propeller-driven
planes flew over Flatbush every two minutes on their way to Idlewild (latterly
JFK). But not with me or anyone I knew on board. I can't imagine who traveled
by plane in those days -- probably only the Filthy Rich, certainly no one
from the old neighborhood. In the late 1950s, I remember hearing rumors that
there were Cornell undergraduates so wealthy that they regularly made the
journey from NYC to Ithaca in the air (while I crawled upstate on a smelly
Greyhound that left the Port Authority at midnight and made "rest stops" at East
Stroudsburg, Scranton and somewhere in the southern tier before arriving on
Aurora Street at 8 in the morning). My very first airline flight (it was on an
expense account) took place in 1960 on a 12-passenger Mohawk from Ithaca to NYC.
I was one wide- eyed gawker, let me tell you. There were very few flights for
me during the 60s but by the 70s, I was more prosperous and air travel became
semi-routine. Airlines had once been an upper-class preserve, and there was
still some leftover graciousness, especially on the long haul to Europe. Menus
and decent food and complimentary wine. But little by little, flights became
more expensive and less elegant. Is it my imagination or have they magically
shrunk the size of the seat? I recall a particularly bad run of luck when I was
routinely placed in a middle seat, surrounded on both sides by plump widestance
armrest-hogging smokers.

The extinction of the cigarette is a plus, but it's hard to think of another
improvement. Nothing to look forward to air-travel-wise but "consolidation,"
fewer flights, smaller seats, negative frills, and grubbier planes. The great
age of the airplane has gone the way of the steamship and the railroad. No more
dress up, no more glamor. Just as well, I think, or would be if the decline of
service were reflected in a decline of prices.

There's no first class on Southwest  -- although what would it matter to me?
I never once sat in a first-class seat -- not a single time. In fact, in all
honesty I must admit that I indulge a bit of class resentment that there should
be any distinction of classes. Although I wouldn't mind if someone offered
me something more gracious than one of those nasty mini-bags of over-salted
pretzels -- the kind  you have to be an experienced safe cracker to break into.

Source: 2008/11/my-henry-james

Title: My Henry James Problem
Date: November 20, 2008

I'm reading, or re-reading (what does it matter when it's been fifty years
since the last go-around) Henry James' The Wings of the Dove. Once again, I'm
variously stimulated, frustrated and infuriated. Has there ever been a writer
who cries out to be parodied more than does Hank the J? Try to resist the
impulse to make fun house mirrors of this representative, convoluted sentence.

"Her welcome, her frankness, sweetness, sadness, brightness, her disconcerting
poetry, as he made shift at moments to call it, helped as it was by the beauty
of her whole setting and by the perception at the same time, on the observer's
part, that this element gained from her, in a manner, for effect and harmony,
as much as it gave -- her whole attitude had, to his imagination, meanings that
hung about it, waiting upon her, hovering dropping and quavering forth again,
like vague faint snatches, mere ghosts of sound, of old-fashioned melancholy
music."

Let me guess that most of Dr. M.'s loyal readers did not finish reading the
quoted bit. They made a good faith attempt at the first few words, then
whistled, threw up their metaphorical hands, and surrendered. Or if they did
get all the way to the end of the sentence, they were certainly puzzled as to
whether they had fully deciphered the Jamesian code. It's not that the sentence
has no meaning, but is it worth a reader's time to parse and disentangle its
many syntactic knots? Now, dear friends, just Imagine 539 small-print pages
of prose, every paragraph on every page loaded with similar abstractions,
assertions, modifications, withdrawals, subordinations, and equivocations. It's
taxing. James takes it out of you, wears you down.

And therefore let me confess that a big chunk of my Henry James problem is that
it's so damn hard to keep the ol' eye on the ball when every sentence is so
laborious to construe. In most novels, readers are pulled along by the plot.
You might have trouble "getting into it," but once you do, your attention is
galvanized and you start to sail. In the case of HJ, there's very little plot,
very little in the way of story. It's all hyper-subtle character analysis and
teasing conversation. I can't speak for every reader, but I must admit that,
while reading Wings, my mind frequently took flight. I regularly had to forcibly
snap myself back to attention. It's anything but effortless to stay with the
Jamester.

But let me return to the exemplary sentence that I quoted above. The two key
words are "poetry' (line 1) and "meanings" (line 5).  To paraphrase: she (i.e.
James's character Millie Theale) has "poetry" and the situation has "meanings."
Underneath all the wobbly circumlocutions, that's kind of it.

But neither of these two crucial nouns gives much away. What sort of poetry
does Millie 'have,' you might ask?' What particular 'meanings' inhere in the
situation? I myself want --crave, in fact -- further definition and explication.
That's the novelist's job. If he wants to keep me happy and focused, he has to
provide considerably more specificity that HJames deigns to supply. Words such
as "poetry" and "meanings" don't constrain a reader;  rather, they are empty
vessels into which I, or any other reader, can pour a variety of significations.
The reader, i.e. me, is simply asked to do far too much of the work. I resent
it, some of the time.

Which takes me back to where I came in, in the 50s and 60s, when James was the
king of the American canon -- or at least he was very much the boss in the Large
Eastern University where I was a graduate student in literature. I don't know
how my ever-so-civilized teachers managed it, but to appreciate and understand
Henry James was framed not as a test of the author's creative skill, but as
a test of the reader's sensitivity. James, it was confidently and regularly
asserted, was subtle, delicate, loaded to the gills with the most exquisite
sensibility. Did I, a kid from Coney Island Avenue, possess the sophistication,
the tact, the sensitivity to grasp James superfine insights and his characters'
inclinations and velleities?

You know what? I didn't.I failed the test.

James portrays a world to which I could not easily relate. No one in Wings of
a Dove works for living.The characters all live off their incomes, derived who
knows how? When HJ has to bring two characters together, he has two choices and
two choices only -- a dinner party or a chance encounter at a museum. Action? 
Yes, the characters travel from one resort city to another. I'm exaggerating
just the tiniest bit. There is one character in Wings who has an occupation.
Although we never see him at work, Merton Densher is a journalist. Which is
precisely his problem. How can he be a suitable mate for Kate Croy if he has a
job? How shockingly vulgar!

It was a chore to take James seriously, especially in 1960 and especially
for someone of my background. But then, not to take James seriously, not to
understand him, was presumed to disqualify a guy from the serious study of
literature. Which turned out not to be the case.

But I'm glad to say that I persevered with Wings. If I hadn't, I never would
have re-read the infinitely splendid, magnificently tawdry piece of dialogue
between Densher and Croy that brings Book 8 to a conclusion -- a conversation
that's as well done as anything in English since WS lay down his quill in 1613.

Coming soon to these pages: my Marcel Proust problem. Hint: way worse than my
James problem.

Source: 2008/11/overheard-conve

Title: Overheard Conversation
Date: November 30, 2008

A long weekend in Santa Fe, New Mexico -- a handsome small city. I don't know
of another place in the nation in which the principal economic engine is the
making and selling of arts and crafts.  I myself am in the familiar situation:
anything I can afford, I don't want, and anything I want, I can't afford.
Besides, we're in de-accessioning mode -- a condition which doesn't prevent
us from appreciating the astonishingly high level of artistic achievement on
display here. Fortunately, there's no cost to hiking in the nearby mountains
-- we went to Bandelier National Monument to gasp at the spectacular rock
formations and marvel at the Anasazi cliff dwellings. A most enjoyable and
worthwhile expedition. The guidebook says that Santa Fe is the product of the
melding of three cultures: Native American, Hispanic, and Anglo. I guess, by
default, I must be an "Anglo." It's odd to be an Anglo, but not as disorienting
as my experience in Salt Lake City, where, as a non-Mormon, I was considered to
be a "gentile."

At breakfast in the hotel, a man at the table next to me told the following
story to his friends (I was alone at the moment, pretending to inspect the
complimentary USA Today).  "A Hindu, a Jew, and a Republican are driving in a
storm. The car breaks down, they walk to an isolated farmhouse and ask the owner
if they can stay the night. 'Sure,' he says, 'but I have only two beds. One of
you will have to sleep in the barn.' "'No problem,' says the Hindu, 'I don't
mind sleeping in the barn.'  But after a half hour, there's knock on the door,
and the Hindu says, 'There's a cow in the barn. Cows are sacred. I can't sleep
with a cow.' So the Jew says, "Don't worry. I'll sleep in the barn." But after a
half hour, there's a knock on the door, and the Jew says, 'There's a pig in the
barn. I can't sleep with a pig.' So the Republican says, 'Don't worry, I'll go
sleep in the barn.' But after a half hour, there's a knock on the door. It's the
cow and the pig."

Actual dialog, captured in the wild.

Source: 2008/12/basketball-an-4

Title: BASKETBALL ANNOUNCER EXHIBITS PROFOUND IGNORANCE OF BIBLE
Date: December 04, 2008

I watched the Nuggets beat the living whatchamacallit out of the Toronto
Raptors. Actually, I didn't watch the entire game -- it was a gruesome mismatch.
I can endure only so much garbage time at a single sitting. The high point,
for me, was a comment by one of our home team announcers (I'll not reveal his
name). Toronto has a reserve point guard named Willie Solomon, who acquired the
nickname "King Solomon" when he played for Maccabi Tel Aviv in 2005. "Must be a
reference to the movie," suggested our announcer.

I'm guessing that he means King Solomon's Mines.

Well, no one ever suggested that we consult TV announcers for knowledge of
scripture.

Source: 2008/12/its-been-a-long

Title: It's Been a Long Time Coming
Date: December 08, 2008

I'm enchanted that our new president chose to cite -- or "sample" as they say
in the world of pop music -- one of my favorite, and one of the most important
of the songs of the 1960s. Here's the borrowed sentiment, delivered in Chicago
on November 4, just after Obama cleared the electoral hurdle: "It's been a long
time coming, but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in this election,
at this defining moment, change has come to America." The big O's citation is to
the refrain of Sam Cooke's great anthem, "A Change is Gonna Come": "It's been a
long time coming/ But I know a change gonna come, oh yes it will."

Those who know their Sam Cooke will appreciate Obama's sentence. To the Cooke-
innocent, the "change" is a new administration and new policies. To the Cooke-
knowledgeable, the "change" to which Obama refers is a tectonic shift in
American racial politics.

So I'm reproducing Sam Cooke's lyric right here.  If you're one of my coevals,
you probably know the song by heart. If you don't know it, you should. If you're
curious, you can see and hear Sam and Otis Redding and a host of others sing the
song on You Tube. Here's the lyric.  It's one great, inspiring song.

"I was born by the river in a little tent

And just like the river I've been running ever since.

It's been a long time coming.

But I know a change is gonna come.

It's been too hard living, and I'm afraid to die.

I don't know what's up there, beyond the sky.

(refrain)

I go to the movie and I go downtown

Somebody keep telling me, don't hang around.

(refrain)

I go to my brother, I say help me please,

But he winds up knocking me down on my bended knees.

(refrain)

There's been times that I thought I couldn't last long,

But now I think I'm able to carry on.

It's been a long time coming,

But I know a change is gonna come, o yes it will."

Talk about the ability to say a lot in a little.  O yeah!

Source: 2008/12/more-on-sam-coo

Title: More on Sam Cooke
Date: December 08, 2008

Sam Cooke's "A Change is Gonna Come" condenses centuries of tangled racial
strife into a brief lyric. The song begins in rural, impoverished, perhaps
southern, America: "I was born by the river, in a little tent."  Then, with
a glance at the old man river who just keeps rolling, it alludes to African-
Americans as on-the-lam outsiders: "Just like the river, I've been running
ever since."  The third stanza, now shifted to an urban location, refers
specifically to the insult of segregation (shortly before writing the song,
Cooke had been barred from a Shreveport hotel): "I go to the movies and I go
downtown;/ Somebody keep telling me, don't hang around." The second stanza
is surprisingly confessional for a man who had started his career in gospel
and had sung lead for the Soul Stirrers;  it's about loss of faith. "I don't
know what's up there, beyond the sky." Nevertheless, despite all the reasons
for losing heart, including the lack of support from brothers of different
political factions, Sam retains an uncompromisIng optimism: he will "carry on,
yes I will." The song is a miniature allegory of a triumph over separation and
persecution. It celebrates endurance, perseverance, fortitude in the face of
long odds.No wonder that Barack Obama adapted Cooke's affirmative "Yes I will"
into "Yes we can."

Sam Cooke himself didn't get to the promised land; he was shot, under
"mysterious circumstances" in December of 1964. "A Change is Gonna Come" was
released posthumously.

Source: 2008/12/i-dream-of-geor

Title: "I Dream of Georgie with a Whole Lot of Shoes."
Date: December 15, 2008

Just before pulling the blankets over me, I watched (via You Tube) the Iraqi
journalist wing not one but both his shoes at the Duck Most Lame. Not much of an
arm, I thought, but a symbolic act of courage nevertheless. A few hours later,
waking from troubled sleep, I realized that my dreamatorium had been working
overtime. I had imagined a White House press conference where at a signal all
the correspondents, led by Helen Thomas herself, unzip, untie, unvelcro and hurl
whatever was on their feet at the Great Incompetent. He weaves and bobs, takes
one on the shoulder.  Everyone is on board but Fox, whose "correspondents" lace
up even tighter. Next  thing you know, regular citizens start packaging pairs
of old shoes and mailing them to "W, The White House, 1600 Pennsylvania." Huge
mounds of shoes fill a nearby warehouse; the secret service refuses to estimate
the total but reporters guess fifty cubic yards. Someone creates a Facebook
application "One Million Strong to Hurl Shoes at George W."  Everyone visiting
El Lamo is now asked to remove shoes before meeting with him; but then, what
do you know, people start throwing their smelly socks. I dreamed of political
buttons: "I'm Shoeless for George." And songs: "I Threw A Shoe at You Know
Who."  A website springs into existence: send ten dollars from anywhere in the
world and we'll leave a pair of old shoes at the front gate of the White House.
It's a democratic movement: all shoes are equal. Sneakers, loafers, Blahniks,
boots, moccasins, babouches, buskins, pattens, galoshes, scarpines, clogs, air
georges. A protest movement with real soul.

Source: 2008/12/carrots-etc

Title: Carrots, etc.
Date: December 18, 2008

I've experimented a bit in with flowers but in my choice of vegetables I've been
quite conservative. My garden has always relied upon the standards: black-seeded
Simpson lettuce, Detroit red beets, Danvers carrots, Waltham 29 broccoli.
But now I've decided to take a walk on the wild side  In today's mail came
my brand- new heirloom and rare seed catalog. (Is there anything that more
brightens a cold December morn than the colorful garden catalog that arrives
in the mailbox at winter solstice?)  Consider the lowly carrot, for example.
Here are some of the possible choices for next year's adventure garden: the
12" long red-orange St. Valery, dating from the 19th century; Lunar Whites --
"white carrots were grown during the Middle Ages but now rare";  Cosmic Purple
-- a dark variety, loaded with lycopene; Parisienne -- "small round carrots
popular in France"; Chantenay Red Core -- "a large stump-rooted carrot with a
deep red-orange center" dating from 1929; the "mild and sweet" Shin Kuroda,
a Japanese variety. And twenty other equally entrancing varieties. How to
choose?  I have room for twenty feet of carrots. Just enough for one variety,
or possibly, if I push it, two.

What about tomatoes, the king of all summer vegetables, but an uncontrollable
plant that turns itself into a jungle come August. Nine pages of varieties --
greens, yellows, pinks, reds, purples in various sizes from cherry to plum to
2-pounders; some of them mottled, others striped, round, cylindrical, and every
one of  them claiming to offer old-fashioned sweet/acid tomato taste. How many
can I possibly plant?  However few, I know I'll be imploring my friends take
some, please, with you when you leave. Old Vermont saying:  "always keep your
car locked in August, otherwise someone will open your door and throw in a bunch
of zucchinis." Or tomatoes.Which brings me to the nine pages of exciting squash,
including the Hopi Cushaw and the Pink Banana and the... well, you can see my
dilemma.

Source: 2008/12/mynewcareeriii

Title: My New Career - III
Date: December 21, 2008

This blague's enthusiastic readers are well aware that each year for the
last two, Dr. M. has made himself available for the NBA draft, but that not
a single team has selected him, even the lowly, strife-ridden Knicks. It's
incomprehensible, but true. Why are these GMs so unadventurous?

As a consequence of being overlooked, I'm developing an entirely new marketing
strategy this year. I'm no longer going to sit at home waiting for the telephone
to ring. Heck, no!  I'm going to advertise my skills by competing in the
dunking contest.

I've developed three imaginative new dunks, any one of which could carry the
day and get me the attention I require.

The first is a variation of "making change." I drive to the basket, leap into
the air with a basketball in my left hand. With the right hand,  I leave
a quarter on the top of the backboard and take down the dime that's been
previously placed there.With the left hand, I gracefully drop the ball through
the net.

My second dunk. I have a ball in each hand and put another one under my shirt.
I spring, dunk both basketballs authoritatively and successively, then grab the
third one and throw it high into the air. I land right under the backboard, and
then, without pause, immediately spring into the air again and power that third
one through just as it comes down into the cylinder.

I've perfected these two moves, which, I can say without bragging, are far more
interesting than anything I saw in the contest last year. To be absolutely
honest, so far I've only done them with six-foot rim and with those mini-
basketballs that they sometime distribute free during the second half timeouts.
Not to worry -- I'm working on it every day and in a couple of weeks I'll be
ready for the standard rim and full-sized basketball. There's still plenty of
time before All-Star Weekend.

My third dunk is even more extraordinary. I start at the far basket and do a
series of back handsprings and back flips across the floor. Then, as I approach
the target basket, I pick up a basketball between my ankles, and with one final
back flip -- in which my feet are actually above the level of the rim -- I slam
that sucker home. It's going to be something spectacular to watch, I guarantee,
just a soon as I work out a few kinks in the execution.

Source: 2008/12/nightmare-made-worse-by-critique

Title: Nightmare Made Worse by Critique
Date: December 27, 2008

Last night -- another horrible dream. I was riding in the passenger car of an
old-fashioned railroad and there was this big puffy guy, a smaller version of
Oliver Hardy, who was brandishing a pistol. He was about to take hostages and
shoot us folks. I grabbed his gun arm and wrestled him to the floor, but he was
mighty strong. I called out to the other passengers, "Help me!"  Eventually, a
couple of people came to my aid and started to twist his arm. Then I yelled out,
"Hit him!" and a couple of people started to bang his head with books. Heavy
books. Then I shouted "Kick him!" and a crowd gathered and started in with their
feet. After a while, I realized that the gangster/terrorist/kidnapper was dead,
but I continued to punch to and kick him. I woke up with my heart beating 180 or
so.

It took a while to regain my equanimity, but it wasn't long before I returned to
sleep. I dreamed that I was reporting the dream to my daughter and son-in-law
and that they were totally uninterested and bored by my story. Which I took to
be a critique of my ability with narrative.

So if I tell any more dreams, I'll abbreviate (as I did above, where I left out
all sorts of interesting details) for fear of alienating my audience.

Source: 2008/12/can-you-believe-it

Title: Can You Believe It?
Date: December 29, 2008

And now a brief quiz for Metablogian readers who are familiar
with nineteenth- century fiction. I will describe the situation and quote a
short excerpt, and you will be required to identify the novelist. Ready? 
Let's go. Here's the story: a clergyman considers whether to commit a
murder.  Although he takes no concrete action, he's overcome with guilt about
what might have been. Here's a sample of his extensive, tortured musings.

He struggled to drive from his mind and from his eyes the phantom of the
terrible deed but that he did not succeed was made evident to himself by the hot
clammy drops of sweat which came out upon his brow, by his wakefulness through
the livelong night, by the care with which his ears watched for the sound of
the young man's coming as though it were necessary that he should be assured
that the murder had in truth not been done.  Before that hour had come he found
himself to be shaking even in his bed; to be drawing the clothes around him to
dispel the icy cold, though the sweat did still stand upon his brow;  to be
hiding his eyes under the bedclothes in order that he might not see something
which seemed to be visible to him through the utmost darkness of the chamber.
Why then, could he not sleep?  Why should he be hot and shiver with cold by
turns? Why should horrid phantoms perplex him in the dark?

And the correct answer is?  Obviously, it's Russian anguish, the novelist is
Fyodor Doestoevsky and the passage is from Crime and Punishment.

Except that it's not. Surprise. It's Anthony Trollope, master of manners,
anthropologist of English civilization. The character who is described is not
Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, but Thomas Greenwood, D. D.; the novel is Marion
Fay and the year is 1882. (Crime and Punishment appeared in Russian in 1866,
in English in 1914).

In Dostoevsky's novel, Raskolnikov does the deed right at the outset. There's
no murder at all in Marion Fay. As is common in Trollope's last novels, there's
a flirtation with boundary-breaking (bigamy in Dr. Wortle's School, premarital
sex in An Eye for an Eye, interclass marriage in this particular novel), but
there's also a withdrawal or hesitation.

Marion Fay would have been quite something if Trollope hadn't lost his nerve
and had let Greenwood pull the trigger.

It would have been an even stronger piece of fiction if Lord Hampstead had
actually married the low-born tubercular Quaker lass and if Hampstead's sister
Frances had married the Post Office clerk George Roden before, not after, it was
discovered that he was an Italian Duke by birth. But Trollope drew back from
the dilemmas he created, alas and alack, and as a result there is no  English
parallel to Dostoevsky's radicalism. More's the pity.

Source: 2009/01/etymology-of-the-word-steerage

Title: Etymology of the Word "Steerage"
Date: January 06, 2009

The origin of "steerage," a word used to describe the part of the vessel
allotted to the poorest of passengers is not fully established. Some say that
"steerage" originally referred to the section nearest the rudder, but for this
theory I can find no confirmation. As far as I know, steerage passengers were as
likely to be housed fore as aft. Another guess is that the cables that ran from
the steering wheel to the rudder passed through this level of the ship. It's
also been ventured that emigrants were located on the same deck that was used
for transporting steers. This suggestion seems inherently unlikely, although it
is certainly true that in pre-refrigeration days, large numbers of livestock
were carried on ships in order to maintain a supply of fresh milk, eggs, and
meat.  Is it possible that the "-age" in "steerage" is used as in "storage" or
baggage?" "Steerage" seems to be unique to English. Other European languages
simply say "between decks"; so German "zwischendeck," Spanish "entrepuente,"
Swedish "mellandaeck," Norwegian "mellomdeck," French "entrepont," etc. Until
the nineteenth century, "steerage" simply meant "steering," as in Romeo's
picturesque "But he that hath the steerage of my course,/ Direct my sail."

Source: 2009/01/extrapolation

Title: Extrapolation
Date: January 11, 2009

When you consider an adult whom you've known from infancy, you're tempted to
think that their traits at maturity were evident from birth. You saw it in them.
Shyness or assertiveness or enterprise or doggedness or volubility or curiosity
-- all there right at the starting gate. "It stands to reason that she would
have entered the field of medicine -- she was always so compassionate." I'm
never convinced when people say such things. I think that it's easy to make
retrospective claims. If a child is interested in fifty things, we look back and
only remember the ones that "foretold" -- so to speak -- her mature interests.
We forget about the traits that didn't develop or which metamorphosized.

As simple as it is to claim that the mature being is a predictable exfoliation
of childhood traits, just so difficult is it to make actual predictions. In my
experience it's almost impossible to look at a two-year-old or a five-year-old
or even a sixteen-year-old and extrapolate to the adult. In fact, it's far
easier to misjudge a child than to get him or her right. No matter how well you
might think you know them, children are hard to read.

These thoughts are prompted by reading Nicholas Murray's skillful new Life of
Matthew Arnold. The poet's father, the famous education reformer 'Arnold of
Rugby,' a man who should have known better, was absolutely wrong about his son.
According to Thomas Arnold, Matt was 'not likely to form intimate friendships;"
"He flitters about from flower to flower but is not apt to fix."  "I do not see
how the sources of deep thought are to be reached in him." " He  does not know
what it is to work because he knows so little what to think."  The best he can
say: "I think he is not so idle as he was."

Idle! and shallow!  Has there ever a been a more colossal misjudgment of a son
by a father? Or did Matthew Arnold live the most of his life with a giant "I'll
show him" chip on his shoulder?

Come to think of it, I'm rather glad that I don't know what judgments or
predictions my father or other adults might have made about me.

Source: 2009/01/actively-dying

Title: "Actively Dying"
Date: January 15, 2009

Grandma is 96+ years old.  She's an accomplished, strong-willed, tough old
lady who has survived just about everything life can throw at a person: polio
in childhood, over two dozen major surgeries, diabetes, and then two times in
the last decade, cancer. Now she's very close to the end.  She has been in
a nursing home for four years, declining almost imperceptibly from day to
day. Until last week, she could carry on a conversation of sorts. But then
something happened. She lost the ability to move, even a little; she became
agitated, her long-term memory collapsed, and she could not, however hard she
tried, complete a thought (though she was able to say, and repeat, "This
dying business doesn't bother me").  She recognized only one person, her
eldest daughter, and it was not clear that she knew her own name.

For the last six months someone at the nursing home has had to help her with
fork and spoon. Last week, we decided that to prop her up, sit her at the table,
feed her cake and then propose that her insulin intake be increased was
a senseless, bizarre procedure.  A compassionate doctor suggested that it
was time for insulin and other non-palliative medicines to be withdrawn. We
readily agreed. We confronted the head nurse at the nursing home; she announced
to us that the home's chief of medicine would reverse the order to withdraw
insulin;  Grandma must be fed ("We're a nursing home," she said, "we nurse").
Last Friday, we moved Grandma from the nursing home to our local hospice. 
Grandma immediately stopped eating and drinking. I would like to think that she
chose to give up food, but there's no way to know. Her eyes have a glazed,
far away look on the rare occasions that she is strong enough to open them. She
fumbles with the sheets.

Nevertheless, on Monday, hospice told us that they couldn't keep her. She's not
"actively dying" -- according to the official Medicare rules -- and is therefore
not eligible for hospice. Where to take her?  Unclear.  We negotiated a
two-week reprieve. Grandma will be allowed to remain in hospice as a private
patient for fourteen days, but unless she starts "actively dying" during that
period, she'll be expelled. We cried.

Yesterday, however, we were told that Grandma had taken a step forward.  She's
"entered her process" --another bit of hospicespeak.  She's experiencing,
we're told, sufficient pain to warrant morphine and her heartbeat has
become rapid and irregular.  She is "less responsive."  Good news for
Grandma, I guess.  Unless she "plateaus" and stops "actively dying," she'll be
allowed to stay to the finish, which, if there's any mercy, will not be very
long.

Here's what Kent says about Lear, at the end.  "O let him pass.  He hates him/
Who would upon the rack of this tough world,/  Stretch him out longer."

January 17.  Grandma died last night, having squeezed the last drop out of life
and sliced through the last shred of bureaucratic red tape.

Source: 2009/01/two-bumper-stickers

Title: Two Recently-Sighted Bumper Stickers
Date: January 21, 2009

A.  "Tattoos Get You Sex."  A forthright, undisguised sentiment.  Here we
have an enormous advertising establishment working indefatigibly to imply
that the car, the beer, the perfume, the toothpaste, the sneakers will get
you laid.  But do they ever come out and say so directly?  No.  It's
all implication and suggestion (except for the commercials for Viagra/Cialis
-- a special case).  But here's a bumper sticker that lays it on the line. 
No sly metaphors or beating around the bush.  But is it true that there's an
alignment between sex and tattoos?  Where's the double-blind evidence?  I'll
wait until I see the utterly unbiased report from the National Association of
Tattoo Artists.

B    "Ann Coulter is a Man."  This one puzzled me a bit because it didn't
say whether Ann was born a man or had recently been surgically tranformed
into one.  In any case, I'm not all skeptical about the accuracy of the
assertion.  What else could account for the fact that Ann (or Andrew, let us
now call him/her) acts and speaks like an ignorant, show-offy, foul-mouthed,
testosterone-fueled teen-age boy?

My evaluation:  A is false in most cases;  B is certainly true.

January 30.  Here's another bumper sticker, encountered yesterday.  NO MORE
DUMB PRESIDENTS.  'Nuff said.

Source: 2009/01/worst-nightmare-yet

Title: Worst Nightmare Yet
Date: January 22, 2009

I was a night game, and I was playing left field,  The batter hit a long fly
my way.  I saw it clearly as it came off the bat, studied the trajectory, and
knew that it was nothing more than a loud foul  --  only to hear the ball
plop down not more than ten feet behind me.  The huge crowd of spectators
broke into wild laughter.  Runners were circling the base paths.  I turned to
run after the ball, but my feet were lead weights, perhaps because I was wearing
hiking boots instead of spikes.  Eventually, I retrieved the ball and tried to
hit the  cut- off man, but the ball skittered out of my hand and carried only
a few feet.  The crowd laughed again, uproariously.

It was horrible. I woke up with a nosebleed.

Source: 2009/01/inauguration-highs-and-lows

Title: Inauguration Highs and Lows
Date: January 26, 2009

I couldn't bear Rick Warren.  I have no tolerance for the unctuosity of
preachers, and Rick busted all standing records for unctuosity.  I thought
he was entirely too Christian -- if there is one event that should be absolutely
ecumenical, it's an inauguration.  Also embarrassing was Elizabeth Alexander's
poem -- poetry by the yard, absolutely prosy, undistinguished, predictable, and
read in such a pretentious I-am-a-poet-all-hail-poetry-and-me voice that I
had to leave the room.  The Perlman-Yo-yo Ma thingy left me cold.  Why not
play some proven piece of celebratory music, especially since Aaron Copland
had already made a major work out of "simple gifts."  Three cultural low
points, as far as I am concerned, but all of them redeemed by Aretha Franklin's
hat. Praise to Luke Song, its designer, and all hail the queen of soul, the
queen of hats, and also the absolute and utter triumph of undiluted,
unparalleled African-American churchladyness. The hat made the whole day
worthwhile.

I also liked Obama's speech and Bush's helicoptering the hell out of there.  
And wheel-chair bound Dick, who hurt his back trying to smuggle out boxes of
top-secret stuff that he should have left behind.

Hey, Barack, do you want my advice for 2012?  In a nutshell: less religion,
more hats.

Source: 2009/02/academic-reminiscence

Title: A Pitiful Reminiscence of Academia
Date: February 01, 2009

In an earlier life, Dr. M. served as chair of a large academic department
at a state university out here in the American west.  On the whole, the
teachers that Dr. M. nominally supervised did their work very well.  They
were responsible, self-motivated, liked their teaching and reading and
writing, and fortunately, did not expect to be lavishly rewarded either in
salary or appreciation or assistance.  But there were a few employees who were
difficult.  There always are.  Ten per cent of the people take 90% of your
time, no matter what the enterprise.

We had very little secretarial staff -- not even enough people to take and
relay telephone messages, So (this was before the advent of sophisticated
electronic communication), innovative chair that I was, I took some scarce
departmental funds and purchased inexpensive, tape-driven answering machines
and attached one to each professorial telephone.  The theory was simple: 
most of the faculty weren't in their office many hours a week (nor were they
paid to be), but the new technology would allow them to come to work, listen
to yesterday's telephone calls, and return messages rapidly and efficiently. 
Ninety-five per cent of the faculty was happy with the new system.  But a
few of them rebelled.  One particularly recalictrant member of the faculty
-- let us call him RR -- categorically refused to touch his new machine. 
His reasoning:  pushing the button and playing back the tape was not a
"professorial responsibilty";  it was mere secretarial work, and in his view 
the new system asked that a professor lower himself to the level of staff. 
It would be "unprofessional" for him to listen to recorded telephone call,
asserted RR..

I should mention that RR was the least distinguished member of our faculty. 
He was a poor teacher and his contributions to scholarship lay somewhere between
non-existent and negligible, depending on the decade.  You might think that his
sense of nobility derived from a ducal or regal grandfather, but not so --he
came from a working-class Kansas background, if I remember correctly.

"Professional" is a word about which I have ambivalent feelings. In its best
incarnation, when it denotes adherence to an internalized set of responsible
and shared values, it's a damn good word and an uplifting concept. But there
are many occasions when "professional" is used to camouflage willfulness,
laziness, and privilege, and then it is a word of which I am ashamed.  I
take the case of RR to be an example of "professional" used in order to
justify indolence.  For the rest of my faculty, it was "professional" to make
ourselves available to the students whom they state paid us to educate and
assist; not for RR.

I think that RR had a peculiar, retrogressive understanding of university
life.  He didn't like students or scholarship, but he did enjoy ceremony.  He
was the parliamentarian at meetings of the university's governing board.  And
every year, at commencement, he was the person who led the procession, bearing
the university's mace (or whatever the heck that strange object was).  Not a
born teacher, he was a born presider at rituals.  A large, ponderous fellow,
he was a terrific mace-bearer -- and a truly crappy colleague.

I never did find a way to make him use his answering machine.  If I owned
the company, I would have fired him in a flash.  But the university likes
to separate responsibility from authority, so all I could do was cajole
and beseech and shame -- a procedure that proved in his case to be totally
without effect.  You can't shame the shameless.

Source: 2009/02/what-the-heck-is-an-elfskin

Title: What the Heck is an Elfskin?
Date: February 05, 2009

In one modern edition of Shakespeare's The First Part of King Henry the Fourth,
Falstaff, in a fit of exuberant swearing, describes Hal as an "eel-skin." 
But in another edition, the word is "elfskin."  What's going on?  Only one of
these curious words can be "correct."

Paunchy Falstaff attacks Prince Hal with a string of half-comic, half-offensive
epithets:  "you starveling, you elfskin (or eel-skin), you dried neat's tongue,
you bulls-pizzle, you stockfish...."  A "starveling" is a person emaciated
by hunger, "stockfish" is desiccated cod, and a "bull's pizzle," which an
Elizabethan might dry to use as a whip, is self-explanatory.  But "elfskin"
or "eelskin?"  "Elfskin" is the original reading, although in actual fact the
earliest quarto prints not "elfskin" but "elsskin" where the first "s" is
the old-fashioned "long s."  "Elsskin" was as incomprehensible then as now
and someone who participated in the making of the 1623 Folio changed the word
to "elfskin" on the grounds, it is easy to imagine, that the first of the two
long s's properly signified an "f."  If "elfskin" is a word, then it's a
Shakespearean coinage -- the word being otherwise unknown and the skin of elves
not a subject of speculation even in an era that took such imaginary beings
more seriously than does ours. Is it possible that, considering the context,
"elfskin" could carry the meaning "as thin as fairy skin" -- even though elves
were generally described as small and stunted rather than diaphonous?

The alternative, "eel-skin" is the inspiration of Sir Thomas Hanmer, whose
edition of Shakespeare's works appeared in 1744.  "Eel-skin" jibes with
"stockfish" and "neat's tongue" as an example of Falstaff's fixation on edibles,
although it was the eel itself rather than its skin that was the delicacy.  As
Hanmer well knew, Shakespeare had used the word "eel-skin" in a not dissimilar
context in King John, when Philip the Bastard described his feeble half-
brother's skinny arms as "two eel-skins stuffed."

"Elfskin" is therefore the earlier reading, closer by 150 years to William S.
himself, but "eel-skin," though it dates only to the mid-eighteenth century, is
much more colorful and apposite. It's therefore entirely possible that Hanmer
restored Shakespeare's original intention.  Possible, but not proven.

Source: 2009/02/sursum-corda-brain-surgery

Title: Sursum Corda;  Brain Surgery
Date: February 08, 2009

Last night I awoke from troubled sleep with a mysterious and
inexplicable Latin phrase drumming on my agitated brain. As best I can
remember the dream, I had taken a razor to an essay I was writing and had
cut out the two words--and I mean "cut out" as in scissored, not merely
deleted--"sursum corda."  And then there I was with a slip of paper on
which the two words were inscribed -- andnow comes the nightmare part--I
couldn't translate the damn phrase. I went so far (still in the dream!)
as to hypothesize a past participle "*sursus" of the verb "surgere" (to
rise)--although, as everyone knows, the proper form would be "surrectus"--but
I still couldn't parse the phrase (*"sursum" or "risen", would be a singular,
"corda," "hearts," a plural). I forced myself out of sleep, distressed that
I couldn't make sense out of what my dreamatorium was screaming was an
important phrase. So there I was in the middle of the night, checking the
Latin dictionary to discover that "sursum corda" is a versicle in the Roman
mass generally translated "lift up your hearts," but, inasmuch as "sursum,"
I can now attest, is not a participle but an adverb, might more properly come
into English as something like "upward your hearts." OK, now I understand
the phrase, but why in the living bejeesus was I a) dreaming in Latin, b)
dreaming a part of a mass, and c) slicing the phrase out of some papers of my
own composition?

Enough of that. Back to bed, back to sleep and then, holy moly, another weird
dream. No more Latin, at least, but now I'm being held responsible for the low
rate of pollination of apple trees. Whose apple trees?  I can't say.  And
what is the remedy. Brain surgery -- and on my brain. The surgeon announces
to me (somehow we're in a very official looking operating room) that "we're
going to remove the smallest bone in the human body, which is in the hinge to
the top of your head."He takes his scalpel, cuts through my hinge, and flips
opens my skull. Inside the dome (somehow I can observe the interior) right
where my brain should be, is a heap of glowing stuff that looks like orange
Jell-o.

OK, that's enough. Time to wake up once again.

Unanswered questions. a) why am I responsible for the fruiting of apples? 
Blame the lazy bees, for goodness sake. b) Who says the smallest bone in the
body is this imaginary hinge?  The smallest bone is in the inner ear--the
stirpes, I think. c)  what's with the Jell-o? Just because I couldn't translate
"sursum corda," must it therefore follow that my brain is gelatinous?  Some
of your most intelligent Wall Street investors and bank presidents couldn't
translate sursum corda, and they must be the most accomplished people we have,
at least to judge by their annual bonuses.

On the whole, I think that both of these dreams put me in somewhat of a
bad light. Nevertheless, I'm impressed that my unconscious is so gosh-darned
creative. Let's face it - it's a ton more imaginative than my daytime self,
which doesn't much concern itself with either the Latin mass or the pollination
rates of mali domesticae.

Source: 2009/02/oscar-wilde-as-a-replacement-child

Title: Oscar Wilde's Siblings
Date: February 11, 2009

According to Richard Ellman, whose 680-page extremely- detailed Oscar Wilde
(1988) I've now read and enjoyed, Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde
came out of more colorful family situation than is generally known. 
Oscar's father, the famous eye surgeon Sir William Wilde, brought three
children to his marriage with Jane Elgee -- apparently by three different
mothers, none of whom he bothered to marry.  The first child, a boy named
Henry Wilson, was supported by his father and eventually became a partner
in his medical practice.  The girls, Emily and Mary, born two years apart,
were adopted by Sir William's older brother "as his wards" and were also
acknowledged to be part of Oscar's family.  Emily and Mary were not so
fortunate as their older half-brother. "In the course of showing off their
ball dresses before a party, one went too close to an open fire, caught her
crinoline in the flames, and was terribly burned.  So was her sister, who
tried frantically to rescue her.  Their gravestone records that they both
died on the same day, 10 November, 1871. Sir Williams's grief was intense,
and his groans could be heard outside the house."  The girls were twenty-four
and twenty-two years old.  Oscar, born in 1854. was just seventeen at their
deaths.  Although he wrote voluminously about his own life, Oscar nowhere
records this horrific event. But was he affected? Certainly the knowledge that
his father lived a second, darker life seems to have made a contribution to
the plot of Dorian Gray -- a novel in which Dorian is in love with a woman
of questionable birth.  Matters of legitimacy are raised in two of Wilde's
best known plays.  Nevertheless, it seems extraordinary that the tragic deaths
of two half-sisters should have left no mark either on Wilde's public or private
personality. It might be argued that Wilde's lifelong aim was self-destruction
and that his sister's deaths served as a template for his own tragedy -- but
such an argument would be weak in evidentiary support.  The sisters and the
fire is a terrible tale that may signifiy nothing beyond its own horror.

Source: 2009/02/life-lessons-from-f-p-schubert

Title: Life Lessons from F. P Schubert
Date: February 15, 2009

Our local chamber players, the Takacs, performed the Schubert Quintet (D.956).
It's a glorious work -- one of the finest in the entire chamber repertoire --
and was brilliantly performed.  It's a turbulent, nervous, tense piece of
music. With the last notes, the entire audience rose simultaneously to cheer. 
There were fist-pumpings, whistles, "bravos," "yesses," and other spontaneous
shouts of pleasure from the octogenarian listeners.  It was a rock and roll
moment at Grusin Hall.

I cheered too, but not so much for the Takacs as for Schubert.  It's so often
the case that the interpreters are rewarded while the creator is neglected. 
Here's Schubert, dead of poverty and syphilis and mercury poisoning at age
31, never having made a nickel out of his many compositions.  In desperate
straits, with only two months to live, Schubert sent his new quintet to the
Leipzig publisher H. A. Probst. Probst rejected it, asking instead for something
"easily understandable."  The world "does not yet sufficiently and generally
understand the peculiar, often ingenious, but perhaps now and then somewhat
curious precedures of your mind's creations."  The quintet was first performed
in 1850, twenty-two years after Schubert breathed his last.

Is there a moral?  Yes, I think there is.  If you're in the composing or
painting or novel-writing business, do it your own way -- not the easy way.  If
you lose, you lose.  So what?  If you win, you win big.

Source: 2009/02/another-crack-at-moby-dick

Title: Another Crack at Moby Dick
Date: February 16, 2009

I read this great so-called classic of American literature once in the '50s and
twice in the '60s and I just didn't get it.  I've now re-read it and, after
forty-something years of seasoning and experience, I'm still a dissenter. Moby
Dick is like opera or ballet -- it's so highly stylized that either you buy into
it or you don't, and I don't. To me, Melville is a quite ordinary GrubStreet
quill-driver whose every sentence screams at the very top of its lungs, "Look
at me, I'm Shakespearean."  I resent Melville's attempt to draft using WS as
puller. Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between
me and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

Ultimately, there's a deep  incompatibility of sensibility between me
and HM.  I'm not a big Romantic guy. Baring the soul isn't enough to
keep me happy, certainly not  for the length of so elongated and dense a
novel. Perhaps for a brief lyric.  I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the
thinnest plot in the history of 800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds
whale, and (last ten pages) whale wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the
long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them laugh, make them cry, make them
wait."  Melville neglects the first two of these maxims.  There's nothing
either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but I'm here to tell you that
Melville totally mastered the "make them wait" part.  Totally.

I like stories.  Moby Dick must have the thinnest plot in the history of
800-page novels. Man hunts whale, man finds whale, and (last ten pages) whale
wins.  Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make
them laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first
two of these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby
Dick but I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them
wait" part.  Totally.

Charles Reade's formula for the long nineteenth-century novel was "Make them
laugh, make them cry, make them wait."  Melville neglects the first two of
these maxims.  There's nothing either amusing or pathetic about Moby Dick but
I'm here to tell you that Melville totally mastered the "make them wait"
part.  Totally.

Source: 2009/02/actual-dialogue-captured-in-the-wild

Title: Actual Dialogue Captured in the Wild
Date: February 22, 2009

Telephone conversation with an eighty-two year old cousin.

"Evreryone down here, all they ever talk about is their pains, their doctors,
their diets, their diseases.  Now I have something to talk about.  For
years I went to this doctor, maybe forty years, he's almost as old as I am 
Every time I go into see him, with a sore knee or pains in the chest or
whatever, he'd look at it, and he'd say, 'what can you expect at your age? 
You're lucky to be alive.'  I'd go in with a sore throat.  He'd say, 'Can you
swallow. So what it hurts. You're too old to worry.'  If I had a headache,
he'd say, 'whatever happens, happens.  You're old, enjoy the day.'  Finally
he retired.  He took a job as a dance instructor on a cruise ship. I'm not
kidding. He leads exercises or something.  So I went to a younger doctor.  He
listens to me breathe, pokes around a bit, puts me in the hospital, and now I
have three stents."

Source: 2009/02/what-we-should-have-read-in-the-fifties-two-years-before-the-mast

Title: What We Should Have Read in the Fifties:  Two Years Before the Mast
Date: February 23, 2009

It's been a long time since I enjoyed a book as much as Richard Henry Dana's Two
Years Before the Mast, which describes events of 1834-36 and was first published
in 1840. It's a great piece of writing. I've heard about it since I was a
child, but just got around to reading it this week. It's a book that alters my
understanding of the early nineteenth century.

Why did I like it so much.  Let me count the ways.

1.  It's a sensitive work. Dana's a Boston patrician but instead of going to sea as a junior officer, which he could easily have done, he enlists as a common seaman. He describes life on board the ship from the seaman's point of view. I don't know another book that's so honest, so real, and so uncomplaining. Dana later put what he learned to work, becoming an advocate for sailors' rights. His is not a modern sensibility, but on the whole there's far less of the deplorable racist and sexist assumptions that disfigure the earlier literature and make us cringe for our ancestors.

2. I've always loved sea stories. Wasn't I transfixed, as a child, by the Bounty and Hornblower stories?  But Dana is leagues ahead. Two Years  is non-fiction that is more compelling reading than most fiction. I couldn't put it down. Besides, I had just read Moby-Dick, a thoroughly romanticized version of life on sea. Melville is poetic; Dana is gritty and detailed. I'm sorry, but I'm almost always happier in the world of the enlightenment than the world of nineteenth-century romanticism.  Something in the mitochondria, perhaps.

3.  A large hunk of the book takes place in California, when it was still part of Mexico and there was a shack or two where there's now Santa Barbara or San Diego or Monterey.  It's an invaluable record of California before the gold rush, both picturesque and enlightening

4.  It has great characters:  ship captains both competent and cruel, sailors brave and cowardly, as well as the occasional onboard eccentric.  A good account of naval camaraderie.

5.  Language. Some of us enjoy specialized vocabulary of any sort.  This book is a treasure trove of words unfamiliar to a landlubber like me.  "It was clew up and haul down, reef and furl, until we had got her down to close-reefed topsails, double-reefed trysail, and reefed forepenser."  "I threw the downhaul over the windlass, and jumped between the knight-heads out upon the bowsprit.  The crew stood abaft the windlass and hauled the jib down, while we got out upon the weather-side of the jib-boom... the great jib boom flying out to leeward and slatting." "The cook made us a mess of scouse." "Dessert was duff." Sometimes Dana lays it on a bit thick, but it's worth it.  What is a martingale anyway?   Well, "it comprises the parts of the standing rigging which strengthen the bowsprit and jib boom against the force of the head stays"  Clears that up.  Who's up for a great big helping of scouse?

Source: 2009/03/aunt-harriets-story

Title: Aunt Harriet's Story
Date: March 02, 2009

"I was born in 1920 in Bayonne. I had four older sisters. When I was eleven,
my mother died and my father disappeared. I was taken in by my sister Jennie
and her husband Jack. She was eighteen, he was nineteen. They raised me. I
graduated from Bayonne High School in 1938. For years I worked for an
insurance company in New York City. I started at $5 a week. I lived with
Jack and Jennie in Bergenfield. I took the bus and then a train and then a
subway. One of my girlfriends was seeing a guy, I can't remember his name, but
he had a friend named Dave. I married Dave in 1942. He was sent overseas, I
didn't see him for three years. In Oman, he was coming off a ship, they were
shooting at them, he was wounded right here, if it had been an inch this way I
wouldn't have any children. Dave's father had a business, Broadway Arcade on
Broadway and 53rd Street. Dave took over the business. He was a good mechanic.
We had Madame Esmerelda the fortune teller. Pinball, skiball. In the basement
were pool tables, we sublet the space. It was a good business. We were famous
for our nuts. We had two boys, Steve and Mark.  Steve ran the Arcade after
we moved to Florida, Mark is a food chemist. The Arcade is closed now -- the
landlord kept raising the rent. If we had bought the building I'd be rolling
in it. Dave died at 68 in 1987. I play mah-jong once a week. I go bowling
once a week. My team is in first place. I take my sister Sophie with me but
she can't see well enough to bowl. She's ninety-six. So I've been married, it's
sixty-seven years.  Hard to believe."

Source: 2009/03/the-big-sevenoh

Title: The Big Seven-Oh
Date: March 13, 2009

In the course of the Great Downsizing, a long-buried letter emerged from the
"archives."  It's from my long-gone father, and was written in December of 1974
on the occasion of his seventieth birthday.  A most fortuitous discovery --
inasmuch as I am now exactly the age that Pop was on the day that he wrote to
me.  In his letter, Pop reports that he is taken aback by the person whom he
has become.  Who is this guy with the gray hair and the "little paunch" who
"takes a day or two to recover from any physical activity" and who "finds events
repeating themselves."

"In my mind," he says, "there is another me, a real me," who looks upon this
present self as a "stranger and an interloper."

It appears as though my father's self-image was lagging behind the reality of
things

I hadn't remembered reading the letter -- it sat in a box for thirty-five
years -- but I'm not surprised by its content.  My father was a strong,
athletic, handsome man who didn't easily accept the inevitable changes that
come with septuagenarianism.  I vividly remembering him saying, at eighty, "I
hate my body."

I'm with him, but only a part of the way. Of course I'm dismayed by the
decline. The gray hair, the thickened figure, yes.  The deterioration
of memory, certainly.  But I don't share Pop's sense that my real or
better self is somewhere in the past. True that I can't jump as high -- yet,
paradoxically, I feel more like myself, more comfortable being me now
than ever before.  I'm also more cheerful, on the whole -- although not at
nighttime, when i sleep just as badly as ever my father did). When I look in
the mirror, I don't see a face ravaged by age -- I see a face that now looks
like it was always destined to look and finally got there.  I have become more
like myself, so to speak, every year. But how long until the me-ness starts
to plummet? It must happen eventually. Time will tell.

My father used to say, "You're entitled to your biblical three score and
ten.  But after seventy, you're in extra innings."  o which I would respond,
"In some sports, extra innings is known as sudden death."

But hey, let's not forget that the extra innings are frequently the most
exciting part of the game.

Source: 2009/03/a-merchant-mystery

Title: A Merchant Mystery
Date: March 24, 2009

In the middle of The Merchant of Venice, right out of the blue, without warning,
the audience is suddenly told that Launcelot the clown has gotten a "Negro"
pregnant. Who is this 'Negro'? Why haven't we heard of her before?  Why does
Shakespeare introduce her into his play?  And why, having invented her, does
he precipitously drop her? A loose end, to be sure.

The pregnancy seems to be unplanned, both by the characters and the author. It
occurs at the point in the play when Shylock's runaway daughter Jessica, newly
married and newly converted to Christianity, engages her bridegroom Lorenzo
and their clown/servant Launcelot in a bit of superficial banter. Launcelot
puts forward the barren jest that Lorenzo is "no good member of the
commonwealth," for "in converting Jews to Christianity, [he] raises the price
of pork." Lorenzo veers from the context to reply sharply. "I shall answer
that better to the commonwealth that you can the getting up of the Negro's
belly. The Moor is with child by you, Launcelot."  Up until this very moment,
there had been no mention of a "Moor" or "Negro" (north Africans and sub-Saharan
Africans were not always distinguished in the Elizabethan imagination). It's
a sensational, unanticipated accusation and one that Launcelot does not
deny. Instead, he attempts to deflect Lorenzo's indignation with clownish
wordplay. The subject is abandoned as precipitously as it was raised and the
pregnant Moor vanishes from the play.  Neither Launcelot nor any other
character has alluded to a "Negro" before, nor had there even been the
slightest hint that Launcelot has been wooing a lady  A perplexed editor simply
shrugs his shoulders: "This passage has not been explained."

But where there is no explanation, there is room for conjecture.

The fleeting and mysterious black woman reminds us that The Merchant
of Venice explores questions of exogamy. Jewish Jessica elopes with
Christian Lorenzo, while the heiress Portia, a native Venetian, is pursued
unsuccessfully by Morocco, a "tawny Moor." When Morocco fails the test that
might have won him Portia for his bride, Portia expresses pleasure in words
that were acceptable then but are unpleasant now: "Let all of his complexion
(i.e. race) choose me so." So it would seem that one possible explanation for
Launcelot's insemination of the Moor is that Shakespeare started a hare that he
didn't bother to pursue; he was sufficiently intrigued by interracial sexual
doings to provide Launcelot with a non-white lover, supplementing comedy with
farce -- but he lacked either the inclination or the space to develop the
relationship more fully. (The fertile subject of love between the races was one
that Shakespeare had previously engaged in Titus Andronicus -- in which Aaron
the Moor fathers a child upon Tamora, the queen of the Goths -- and would become
the tragic motif of Othello.

There's a second possible explanation for the presence of the pregnant Moor. 
It's known that as originally perormed, the part of the clown Launcelot was
played by the much celebrated comedian Will Kemp, whose part Shakespeare might
have wanted to sweeten.  Who now can imagine with what facial expressions or
gestures Kemp, in 1596, responded to Lorenzo's charge.  The visual comedy of
the past is unrecoverable.  Even though Launcelot's quibble on the homonym
Moor/more ("It is much that the Moor should be more than reason...") lies
absolutely limp on the modern page, we can guess that it would have been made
much of (who knows how?) by the great comedian for whom it was composed.

So that while Launcelot's getting the Moor pregnant must remain ultimately
mysterious, its odd and curious introduction at this juncture of the play very
possibly offered its original audience a moment of humor which later readers and
playgoers will never understand or appreciate.

Unsatisfying answers I know. But we must accept the fact that the past is not
always explicable.

Source: 2009/03/another-merchant-mystery

Title: Another Merchant Mystery
Date: March 28, 2009

In The Merchant of Venice, as it appears in one up-to-date modern edition,
Portia's husband-to-be Bassanio is attended by a pair of friends named Solanio
and Salerio. Yet In another equally authoritative edition of the play, the
friends are named Solanio and Salerino -- and moreover, in this edition, a third
and apparently separate character named Salerio enters half-way through the
play. What's going on? Why the inconsistency?

First some onomastic context. Shakespeare could be quite casual about the naming
of his characters. In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, there are two
distinct figures, one named Bardolph and the other, for no good reason, Lord
Bardolph. Two separate and very different Jacques complicate As You Like
It, while in The Taming of the Shrew, easy-to-confuse Gremio and Grumio have
needlessly perplexed generations of readers. Even in The Merchant of Venice,
Shakespeare twice used the name Balthazar -- initially for a servant of
Portia and then a second time, gratuitously, as the pseudonym that Portia
adopts when she poses as a Paduan lawyer. But nowhere is Shakespeare quite
so arbitrary as he is with the names of the two (or is it three?) Sallies.

Solanio, Salarino, and Salerio all inhabited Merchant when it first appeared in
the 1600 quarto edition known to scholars as Q1, but whether Shakespeare meant
there to be two characters or three is a matter of mystery. It's possible, in
fact, that the playwright changed his mind in the course of writing. And what
would be evidence for Shakespeare's indecision? Scholars have now determined
that the first Merchant quarto was set in type by compositors who worked
from a manuscript in Shakespeare's own handwriting -- an "autograph" --
that preserved evidence of the writer, quill in hand, in the very thick of
invention. Shakespeare himself, it appears, vacillated about the names by
which to denote the Sallies and also about how many of them there were to be.
His waffling was reproduced by the compositors who dutifully set what they
had in front of them -- first thoughts, re-thinkings, revisions, errors, and
all. No wonder that modern editors have been baffled.

Here's a brief outline of a complicated textual tangle. In the stage direction
with which the play begins, Shakespeare introduces two of the characters in
question. "Enter... Salaryno, and Salanio."  In terms of personality, the
pair seem to be conceived as twins or doubles. Both are excessively talkative
-- long on enthusiasm and short on common sense. It appears that Shakespeare
not only cast the two characters from the same psychological mold, but that
he also decided to underline their similarity by giving them near-identical
names -- and it is from this initial decision that the confusions springs. The
trouble begins right there in the play's first scene. If Shakespeare had
retained his original names and followed his customary procedure, he would
have assigned Salaryno and Salanio the abbreviated speech headings "Sala." and
"Sala." -- clearly a recipe for disaster. So before he had entered fifty lines
into the scene, the playwright traded in one vowel for another and transformed
Salanio into "Sola." It's a curiosity that in the first scene of The Merchant
of Venice (as it appears in Q1), Salanio enters but Solanio exits. Oddly
enough, the pattern repeats itself when Solanio re-appears in the subsequent
scene in which the Sallies and Lorenzo plan Jessica's elopement. Solanio is
once again Salanio in the initial stage direction and Solanio or "Sola." in the
speech headings. Was Shakespeare irresolute or simply forgetful?

And now Salanio/Solanio's companion, Salarino, also begins to mutate. When
Jessica steals from Shylock's house, she is accompanied by a character who bears
the name Salerino -- that is, Salarino/Salaryno rechristened with a medial
"e."  We're now a third of the way through the play, and readers have already
encountered two characters, one of whom is named Salanio/Solanio and the other
Salarino/Salarynol/Salerino. At this point things become truly messy. Jessica
elopes with Lorenzo and they and their co-conspirators flee Venice for Belmont.
Gratiano, first to arrive at the country retreat, greets Lorenzo and his bride
Jessica and an accompanying friend. "But who comes here?" he inquires. "Lorenzo
and his infidel?/ What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?"  Who, we may ask,
is this Salerio?  Readers who have been paying attention know that Gratiano
doesn't have an "old Venetian friend" Salerio. Instead, he has two old Venetian
friends -- Solanio and Salarino. Is Salerio a new character? Or, given the
whimsicality of Q1's spellings, is he simply a orthographical variant of one of
the Sallies with whom readers are already acquainted?

The action then returns immediately to Venice where a new scene begins with the
following stage direction: "Enter the Iew (i.e. Shylock) and Salerio."  But
Salerio, if he's anything more than a spelling error, can't be in both Venice
and Belmont at the same time (in fact, he's just been commisssioned to carry a
message from country to city). An editor vents her frustration: "Q1's Salerio
cannot be right, as he is on the way back to Venice." Apparently Shakespeare
himself was totally befuddled about whom he had named what and where he had
sent whom. Certainly, the printers themselves were baffled. The three earliest
editions of The Merchant of Venice each assign a different name to the Sally
who remained in Venice in the company of Shylock. In Q1, as we've just noted,
it's Salerio; in the lightly-edited second quarto (dated 1600, but actually a
forgery printed in 1619), he is Salarino, and in the 1623 Folio, it's Solanio.

If Q1 did, as is supposed, follow Shakespeare's manuscript, then the playwright
himself made the muddle, but who can say for certain that the confusion couldn't
have been the fault of one of the various scribes, book holders, compositors,
or editors through whose hands the manuscript might have passed.  In any case,
the snarl wasn't untangled in Shakespeare's time, and it hasn't been sorted out
since. Some editors give two characters, some three;  some name the characters
Solanio and Salarino, and some add a Salerio to the mix.

Why didn't Shakespeare simply create one all-purpose Sally? Because the
duplication makes dramatic sense. When one of the Sallies attacks Shylock
venemously, his bigotry might be dismissed as personal idiosyncrasy, but
when two of them gang up, they speak not as individuals but as a chorus that
expresses the nasty side of Venetian society.

But why didn't Shakespeare himself fix the problem? Did he leave it to his
actors to work it out on the stage, or was he a big-picture guy indifferent to
such details? Perhaps he did sort it all out in a scribal or subsequent version
of the play to which Elizabethan printers never gained access?

In any case, Shakespeare learned a lesson from his adventure with Salerio,
Solanio and Salarino. When he next came to invent characters who were doubles
or twins, he took the precaution to give them names that were impossible to
confound: Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Source: 2009/03/on-aggasiz

Title: On Aggasiz
Date: March 29, 2009

Louis Agassiz was, Darwin aside, the nineteenth century's most acclaimed
naturalist. He was the first to speculate about the ice ages and the first
to suggest that mastodons and other giant quadrupeds had become extinct as a
consequence of the deep freeze in Asia and America. Agassiz was much celebrated
in his lifetime, and at his death, Harvard, where he taught, shut down for a day
for his majestic funeral. James Russell Lowell contributed an eleven-page elegy
to the Atlantic. "Seldom, if ever, has the death of a man of science been so
deeply felt," reported The Nation.

These details are drawn from Barry Werth's Banquet at Delmonico's (2009), an
oddly-titled but informative and accessible history of Darwinism in gilded-age
America.

Here's a striking and crowded sentence about Aggasiz, also drawn from
Werth's book. "The son of a strong-willed assistant pastor to the Protestant
congregation of a lakeside village in French-speaking Switzerland who married
well, he was his parents' fifth child but the first to survive infancy."

Agassiz was a therefore a "replacement child" with a vengeance. He "replaced"
four lost siblings (but whether male or female Werth does not say). Imagine his
parents' pain; imagine how young Louis must have been cherished and protected
but also, possibly, afflicted with the 'guilt of the survivor.' Or how he must
have unconsciously competed with his deceased and therefore perfect brothers and
sisters. And then try to imagine both his mother's suffering and also how his
aspiring and apparently devout father might have responded to such an appalling
succession of family tragedies.

Agassiz was America's foremost opponent of evolution. He rejected natural
selection because, he claimed, "Darwinism" led inevitably to "atheism" -- which
hasn't turned out to be the case, although I personally can't imagine why it
hasn't. Agassiz took his own idiosyncratic route and proselytized for the
curious and retrograde doctrine of "polygenism" -- the idea that the various
races of man were separately -- and hierarchically -- created. Agassiz imagined
eight different kinds of humans, ranked according to their "cranial capacity"
-- Caucasian, Arctic, Mongol, American Indian, Negro, Hottentot, Malay, and
Australian (thereby running afoul of both "monogenists" like Darwin and bible-
worshippers who acknowledged only one creation -- that of Adam and Eve). For
Agassiz, each species was "a thought of God." An odd path for usually observant
scientist. Agassiz was the favorite intellectual of slaveholders and their
apologists.

Agassiz was also a virulent and odious racist. Here's what he wrote to his
mother when he stopped at a hotel in which he was served by black waiters. "It
is impossible to repress the feeling that they are not of the same blood as us.
Seeing their black faces with their fat lips and their grimacing teeth, the
wool on their heads, their bent knees and elongated hands, their large curved
fingernails, and above all the livid colors of their palms, I could not turn
my eyes from their face in order to tell them to keep their distance, and when
they advanced that hideous hand toward my plate to serve me, I wished that I
could leave in order to eat my bread apart rather than dine with such service.
What unhappiness for the white race to have tied its existence so closely with
that of the Negroes. God protect us." And so on, and more, and worse. I can't
remember reading a paragraph that more turned the stomach or that more cried out
for psychological analysis.

I cannot help wondering whether there might not be a connection between
Agassiz's status as a replacement child and his embrace of polygenism. Is it
possible that he unconsciously thought that he was a special and superior
person because he, of all his siblings, was chosen for survival?  And that in
the same way, white people were chosen and superior among all the "races" of
humankind. His deeply-held resistance to the evidence that persuaded almost all
of his fellow naturalists is inexplicable -- unless he clung to the doctrine of
special creation for reasons that were fundamentally irrational. Put it this
way: Agassiz's unusual situation required him to believe that he, and people
with whom he could identify, were marked for distinction -- and that all others
were inferior. One of five among the siblings, one of eight among the races.
How else could he free himself of the guilt that he lived and thrived while his
apparently less deserving siblings had perished?

Broad-brush cheap pop psychologizing, to be sure -- but let's reserve
judgment until we find some time to get ourselves to the library and learn a
little about this brilliant, disgusting man.

Source: 2009/03/this-old-house-

Title: This Old House
Date: March 30, 2009

We've left the old place for a slick new condo.

It was a good ol' house. A 1912 arts and crafts bungalow, probably built
right out of the Sears, Roebuck catalog.  When we arrived, in 1973, she
had been much abused:  some of her fir woodwork painted, some removed; the
stained-glass window and the original prairie-style chandeliers long gone;  the
handsome five- paneled living room window (prominent in the old photographs)
replaced with an Eisenhower-era "picture window," the original fireplace mantle
superseded by a monstrosity in native stone; the brass registers covered with
layers upon layer of paint, all those beautiful, then-fashionable pre-World
War I built-in cabinets carted to a dump; the classic oak floors covered with
wall-to-wall carpets.  Over the years, little by little, we did what we could
for the old lady: insulated her walls and ceilings, replaced the primitive
electrical wiring, stripped and refinished the woodwork and the registers,
fabricated a "new old" mantle and "new old" bookshelves and cabinets, modernized
the heating system, removed the asbestos, and (Boulder is hotter than it was a
hundred years ago) retrofitted it with air-conditioning. We updated the kitchen
-- brought the kitchen into the modern world.

We left the old dear in far better condition than we found her. Trust me on
this.

And let's not forget the backyard garden.  Where there was once an
incoherent jumble of thorny plants, there are now peonies both herbaceous
and tree (Including my favorite, the ever-larger Joseph Rocks), irises
bearded and Siberian, a variety of multiplying day lilies, climbing roses, a
thriving weigela, a Rose of Sharon, an abundance of clematis, and fences draped
with thick healthy ivy. I'm sorry to report that I never did get around to
replacing the sticky, aggressive bear-berries.

Are we sad to leave?  A little, but only a little. We did well by the old
house, and the house did well by us. We leave with a good conscience. But the
time has come to move along. It's only an object, after all; a machine for
living.

So here we are now, in this bright shiny new apartment. Floor-to-celing windows.
Fancy new appliances. A "great room," a "master bedroom."  An elevator.  It
took almost a full month to move, but in that month we progressed from the turn
of the previous century to the turn of the next.

And it feels right. It's OK.

Source: 2009/04/classic-announcerese

Title: Classic Announcerese
Date: April 05, 2009

NBC NCAA announcer to MSU coach Tom Izzo at the end of last night's game: "This
is one of the great atmospheres I've ever been able to watch."

Source: 2009/04/nick-and-the-candlestick

Title: Nick and the Candlestick
Date: April 09, 2009

Sylvia Plath's "Nick and the Candlestick," a scalpel of a poem, is exasperating
in its details but crystal clear in "plot" and feeling. Here it is in its
entirety. Read it through; don't be alarmed if it seems impenetrable or opaque;
it's not. Or not entirely so.

I am a miner. The light burns blue.Waxy stalactitesDrip and thicken, tearsThe
earthen wombExudes from its dead boredom.Black bat airsWrap me, raggy
shawls,Cold homicides.They weld to me like plums.Old cave of calciumIcicles,
old echoer.Even the newts are white,Those holy Joes.And the fish, the fish----
Christ! They are panes of ice,A vice of knives,A piranhaReligion, drinkingIts
first communion out of my live toes.The candleGulps and recovers its small
altitude,Its yellows hearten.O love, how did you get here?O embryoRemembering,
even in sleep,Your crossed position.The blood blooms cleanIn you, ruby.The
painYou wake to is not yours.Love, love,I have hung our cave with roses.With
soft rugs----The last of Victoriana.Let the starsPlummet to their dark
address,Let the mercuricAtoms that cripple dripInto the terrible well,You are
the oneSolid the spaces lean on, envious.You are the baby in the barn.

Here''s the story in simple outline: the candlestick-bearing poet enters a dark
bedroom in which she finds rugs on the wall, an aquarium, and her sleeping
infant -- the "Nick" of  the title. The poem's import: simply that the world
may be dangerous and hostile, but is redeemed by the child. It's a simple tale
in a traditional form ("dramatic monologue") but its language and imagery
are startling, intense, even revolutionary. The poem's governing idea is not
unusual, but it is conveyed with magnificent electric imagery and emotion.

Some lines are clear, others entirely mysterious. A line-by-line commentary
follows.

"I am a miner." For the purposes of the fiction, the poet bluntly transforms
herself into a miner and explorer. The space into which she enters is a
bedroom, which in terms of the metaphor, is cast both as a mine and a
cave. What minerals will the miner extract?  Both the rich and rare (a ruby)
and the poisonous (mercury).

"The light burns blue."  The candle that she carries is nearly extinguished
(or, alternatively, there is a gas heater in the room).

"Waxy stalactites drip and thicken." Candle drippings, in the poet's
imagination, become stalactites; we are in a cave. But she holds a candle as
it would be employed in worship. It is through the agency of the candle that
religion (specifically Roman Catholicism) enters the poem.

"Tears/ The earthen womb/ Exudes from its dead boredom." The room, the
mine, the cave, is now figured as a womb. Tears/womb extends and transforms
candle/cave. The series of terms  "room" (implied) "mine," "cave," "womb") is
the metaphorical center of the poem -- the "spaces" that will be evoked in the
poem's next to last sentence. The womb is the previous home of "Nick," who is
also a babe of larger meaning in the climax of the poem.

The phrase "from its dead boredom" is not clear, at least to me. It's tempting
to say that the poet transfers her own emotion onto the wax/stalactite/tear
-- so that "the womb is crying just as I am" -- but nevertheless the phrase
"dead boredom" is too personal and vague to communicate perspicuously. The
room/cave/womb, at this point in the poem, seems to be infertile ("dead") and
un-engaging. But that will change.

"Black bat airs/ Wrap me, raggy shawls,/ Cold homicides." I understand why the
poet encounters bats in her cave, and it makes sense that she defines her own
clothes as a tattered shawl. It is also clear that the room into which she has
entered is dangerous and inhospitable. The syntax of the sentence is less than
clear. Does the phrase "cold homicides" stand in apposition to "airs?" Who are
these "cold homicides?" A "homicide" can be a murderer or a victim of murder or
even an abstraction. In what sense can a poet be "wrapped" in "cold homicides?"

"They weld to me like plums." The least explicable line in the poem. "They"
seems to refer to "black bat airs" -- but how airs can "weld like plums" is
beyond me. In the same way way that plums weld to me?  What way is that?

"Old cave of calcium/ Icicles, old echoer." Calcium icicles are clearly the
stalactites and a cave is certainly a place of echoes. But "old? Once again,
tired, unproductive, never fertile, but possibly also "old" in the sense of
familiar, as in "old friend."

"Even the newts are white,/ Those holy Joes." The stalactite-dominated cave with
its calcium icicles is drained of color. So too are the newts, or salamanders,
which ought to be red. Newts are traditionally associated with fire, but not
here. In Christian symbolism, they stand for faith, because, in the legends,
they survive the fiery passions of disbelief. Why are they "holy Joes?" The
only meaning of "holy Joe" with which I am familiar is "military chaplain,"
which isn't pertinent. But "Joe" is significant, because Joe or Joseph is the
absent father of the baby in the barn. But why is there a salamander in the
room, unless it lives in some sort of aquarium or terrarium?

"And the fish, the fish---/Christ! They are panes of ice,/ A vice of knives,/A
piranha religion, drinking/ Its first communion out of my live toes." Not just
a newt in this room/cave/womb, but fish as well. Fish, of course, are the pre-
eminent symbol of Christianity -- the Greek word ixthos, fish, signifying Jesus
Christ theos ouk soter (god and savior). But these fish, like the salamander,
are anything but redemptive. On the contrary, they stand for a "piranha
religion" and a sacrament not of communion but consumption -- with the poet
herself, or perhaps only her toes, the sacrifice.

These lines bring to conclusion the first part of the poem, which does not offer
any good news. But then begins the second movement of the poem, which is of a
more optimistic character.

"The candle/ Gulps and recovers its small altitude,/ Its yellows hearten." Well,
that's encouraging. The candle was almost extinguished, and with its return
comes a bit of color, at last. And perhaps some cheer.

"O love, how did you get here?/  O embryo/ Remembering, even in sleep,/Your
crossed position."  How, my child, did you find yourself in such a cold and
inhospitable universe. The baby is newly arrived, his legs still crossed as
they were in the womb -- "crossed," being, of course, an obvious reference to
"the cross."

"The blood blooms clean/ In you, ruby." No original sin in this jewel of a
child.

"The pain/ You wake to is not yours." It is the world's pain to which the
innocent child must gradually accommodate -- but not yet, and not in this
poem.."Love, love,/ I have hung our cave with roses./ With soft rugs----/ The
last of Victoriana."  The room is momentarily figured as a better world -- a
pre-modern world. It's comfortable, blooming; a room in strong contrast to the
colorless, cold cave of the first movement of the poem.

"Let the stars/ Plummet to their dark address,/ Let the mercuric/ Atoms that
cripple drip Into the terrible well," "Let" has the force of "even if." Even if
the world ends, even if the earth is polluted and poisoned, the poet exclaims,

"You are the one/ Solid the spaces lean on, envious." You, Nick, my infant
child who makes the world whole, are the "one solid," the only palpable
reality, which the spaces (vacuities, caves, rooms, emptinesses of all sort)
lean upon. And finally, at last,

."You are the baby in the barn."  You, my own newborn infant, are the baby
in the barn. Which is to say, you, not Him. You, not Jesus, are my savior. As
we've seen, the poem is not traditionally reverent. The baby in the barn is
stripped of religious mystery. The poet has already made clear her feeling about
Christianity -- it's a "piranha religion." But the "baby in the barn" -- Jesus
in the manger -- that's another thing. This barn-born baby (barn, not cave) is
a universal, trans-religious symbol of rebirth, of hope. "You are the baby in
the barn" invests meaning in Everyinfant. It repudiates the claim to special
importance of any particular child, even the god/man of theology. The poet
rejects Christianity in favor of a universal human and natural relationship
(parent-child) that underlies and precedes all religion.

It's a poem that travels a great distance in a handful of lines.  Brilliant,
isn't it?

Source: 2009/04/the-singing-man-of-windsor

Title: The "Singing Man of Windsor"
Date: April 14, 2009

In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, it is reported that Falstaff once
boldly compared the King to a "singing man of Windsor" -- and was assaulted for
doing so. Who, then, is this controversial "singing man?"

The evidence that might solve this mystery is buried in the dark backward and
abysm of time. The throwaway reference to a "singing man of Windsor" may have
tickled Globe audiences, but later playgoers (and scholars) don't have a clue as
to why.

The singing man owes his shadowy existence to Mistress Quickly, who inserts him
into a one of her ungainly rambling narratives, the point of which is to claim
that Falstaff has promised to marry her. "Didst thou not swear to me... when the
Prince broke thy head for liking his father to a singing man of Windsor...," she
complains.

Presumptuous indeed for Falstaff to compare his King to any ordinary mortal --
but what, we may ask, was so offensive about the "singing man" that his mere
mention provoked the prince to violence?  Misshapen, ugly, drunken,
foolish?  There must have been more jeer to the "singing man" than is now
obvious.

The phrase "singing man" was a technical term that described not popular
balladeers but professional choristers, usually priests, who were associated
with a church or college. Shakespeare knew about a priest of Windsor named
Maudelen -- the story is in Holinshed's Chronicles -- who resembled Richard II
and was deployed as a figurehead in a plot to overthrow the king. Is it possible
that Falstaff''s "singing man" referred to Maudelen and therefore challenged the
legitimacy of Henry's kingship?  Maudelen is not known to have been a singer,
and so the theory, weak as it is, seems to founder badly.

More likely is that there was a real, notorious Windsor singer, offensive in
some unknown way, who enjoyed local celebrity in the 1590s. Would Shakespeare
insert a real person into the history play?  Well, yes, he does such things.
This sequence of Henry plays, nominally set in the early decades of the
fifteenth century, is given to anachronism and occasionally introduces one of
Shakespeare's contemporaries into the story, perhaps as some sort of private
joke. A "William Visor of Woncote" who was very likely a member of the Visor
or Vizard family of Woodmancote in Gloucestershire is mentioned by Shallow's
factotum Davy. And then there's "Clement Perkes a' th' Hill," who as been traced
to the Purchas or Perkis family who dwelled on Stinchcombe Hill. And also the
"red-nosed innkeeper of Daventry" (Daventry is a village on the London-Coventry
road that Shakespeare no doubt frequented.)  These imagined beings are
indulgences on Shakespeare's part that might have amused the knowledgeable but
can only puzzle us.

The "singing man of Windsor" stands as another such bafflement. It's a clue to
Shakespeare's temperament, but a clue that leads nowhere.

Source: 2009/04/some-euphemisms

Title: Some Euphemisms
Date: April 24, 2009

"Physical pressure" is entirely too vague -- goodness gracious, it could refer
to something no more serious than a firm handshake -- and as a result it's
impossible even to guess what's being euphemized. "Abuse" is similarly hazy.
Verbal abuse?  Spousal abuse? Gosh, it's hard to say. "Harsh methods" and
"harsh tactics" offer more of a clue, except that nowadays the word "harsh" can
be used semi-comically, as in the teen-age "oh, that's harsh." You don't want
inadvertent comedy when you're inventing prize-winning euphemisms. But "harsh"
has more heft when used in combination with other adjectives, as for example
"harsh interrogation methods" and "harsh interrogation techniques." The three-
word phrases sound as though they've been translated from the original German,
always a plus when language is being corrupted. "Rough treatment" is not very
imaginative. I definitely prefer "abusive treatment," and "abusive techniques."
"Coercive interrogation" has a nice ring -- and it leaves a lot of room for
the imagination. "Brutal treatment" and "brutal methods of interrogation" --
well, what's the point? Once you start using words like "brutal", you might
just as well just abandon euphemism altogether and say "torture," for goodness
sake. "Enhanced interrogations" and  "enhanced interrogation techniques"
effectively combine euphemism and bureaucratese. It's a stroke of genius to
take the word "enhanced," which ordinarily denotes an improvement, and transfer
it to the world of thumbscrew and electric shock. "Enhanced" is much more
effective than its alternative "extreme," as in the widely used but colorless
"extreme interrogation methods." My personal favorite is "advanced interrogation
techniques," in which the word "advanced," customarily employed to describe
progress in civilization, has been thoroughly perverted to refer to primitive,
barbaric practices. "Advanced interrogation techniques." Now that's what I call
a world-class euphemism! Credit another success to our government and to our
compliant journalists.

Source: 2009/04/our-glorious-past

Title: Our Glorious Past
Date: April 24, 2009

William Dean Howells, editor of the Atlantic Monthly and one of the great,
insightful novelists of Victorian America, visited the great Centennial
Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1876.  He toured the pavilion in which native
American crafts were displayed.  Howells' judgment:  "the red man, as he
appears in effigy and in photograph in this collection, is a hideous demon,
whose malign traits cannot inspire any emotion softer than abhorrence."

Am I naive that I continue to be shocked by the barbarities of the past?

Source: 2009/05/modern-radio

Title: Modern Radio
Date: May 04, 2009

For the new downtown apartment, we've purchased a Sonos ZonePlayer. What does
this oddly-named machine do?  It simply allows me to capture the signal of
radio statios all over the world (through the internet connection), pipe them
through the amplifier, and broadcast them on our old but functional speakers.

Quite a step up in standard of living, especially since over-the-air receptio n
in our mountain town is severely compromised by the bumpy terrai               n

With this new device, I can listen to classical music stations from all the
capitols of Europe -- all over the planet, in fact. I can choose from among 5
or 6 crystal-clear stations dedicated entirely to opera, as well as a few that
specialize in the baroque period, or in chamber music, or piano. There are also
five Beatles stations, one of them from Moscow!  Several "big band" stations.
An all Grateful Dead specialist beaming directly to me from Connecticut. An
all Bruce, all the time.

I love the "Paris Chanson" station, twenty-four hours a day of Edith Piaf and
friends, from Tokyo.

But so far my favorite is the all doo-wop station out of Winter Haven,
Florida, which, on demand, has the power to return me to my teen-age
years. Just now I heard the Jacks' plaintive, "Why Don't You Write
Me," a song which functioned, earlier in my life, as a personal anthem
of self-flagellation. And just at this moment, a glorious version (and one
that I didn''t know) of the much-recorded "The Glory of Love."  Aural bliss!

What's missing?  A good American roots (1920s and 1930s) station. A
station specializing in 1940s and 1950s black gospel -- definitely not
"contemporary gospel" -- which, according to AH, the world's expert, is called
contemporary because it is both a "con" and "temporary."  An all Gilbert and
Sullivan station -- but perhaps that would be a gift too precious to imagine?

But if  there can be eight all-Elvis stations, shouldn't there be at least
one that is all-Haydn, all the time?

And yet I've only begun to search.  Who knows what other pleasures are out
there in modern radioland?

Source: 2009/05/etymological-panic

Title: Etymological Panic
Date: May 11, 2009

I can't remember what I was dreaming, but I woke up in a state of
pure etymological panic -- over the revelation that I didn't know the
derivation or meaning of the "welter" part of "welterweight."  How could this
be?  Context was not the least help:  lightweight, welterweight, middleweight,
light- heavyweight, heavyweight.  Why not the more logical, more consistent
"light- middleweight?"

What does "welter" mean?  I was barely awake, but I skimmed my mental
resources.  German "welt" -- world.  "Worldweight." Nonsense.  "Welt" as in
a wound on the skin caused by a punch.  Possible, but, all boxers raise welts
-- that's what boxers do -- not just welterweights.  A possible past tense
of "weld."  No, that won't do. Boxers don't weld, or repair, anything. It
was now time for a quick check of the mental Shakespeare concordance.  Whoops,
a blank.  Mental Milton:  hold on, now, here's something:  the phrase
"welter to the parching wind" in Lycidas.  But that particular "welter" means,
I had always assumed "roll." In what sense would a welterweight "roll" more
than any other size of boxer?  Another dead end.  OK, it's now time to get
out of bed, fire up the computer, and check the on-line etymological dictionary.
"Welterweight    1832, "heavyweight horseman," later "boxer or wrestler of
a certain weight" (1896), from earlier welter "heavyweight horseman or boxer"
(1804), possibly from welt (v.) "beat severely" (c.1400)." Now I'm starting to
relax;  the panic is beginning to fade.  Nothing more calming than to discover
that the internet doesn't have a better answer than I do.

But what the internet knows is intriguing. "Welterweight" used to
mean "heavyweight" and then somehow devolved into something less than
middleweight (147 pounds, to be exact, in American boxing)?  By what
etymological process?  It all sounds arbitrary and inexplicable to me. 
What is the root of "welter" in the sense of "heavy?"  To what words is it
related.  And when and why did it come to be demoted?  Well, there are,
as a well-known epistemologist liked to say, "known unknowns and unknown
unknowns."  The history of "welter" is unknown to a power.

On the other hand, the word "welter" standing all by itself is very
much known: "to roll or twist," c.1300, from M.Du. or M.L.G. welteren "to
roll," from P.Gmc. *waltijanan (cf. O.E. wieltan, O.N. velta, O.H.G. walzan "to
turn, revolve," Ger. wälzen "to roll," Goth. waltjan "to roll"), from PIE base
*wel- "to turn, revolve")."

But hold on here.  The noun meaning "confused mass" is first recorded 1851. 
That's the "welter" in, say, "his mind was a welter of confused etymological
ideas."  Could the welterweight welter and the confused mass welter be
related -- in the sense that a "welterweight" is neither light nor heavy? 
Well, it's a theory, but frankly, not a very good one.

Besides, it's still the middle of the night, and it's time to return to bed. 
The etymology of "welter" remains a mystery, but at least the symptoms of
etymological stress have faded. Will sleep come  -- or will I welter in a
welter of confused thoughts?

Source: 2009/05/ps-217-prosopography

Title: P.S 217 Prosopography
Date: May 15, 2009

After the passage of oh-so-many years, I've become shamelessly curious to
know what happened to the friends and classmates who graduated from P. S. 217
in June of 1952. There were about 175 of these golden lads and lasses, and you
can see their pictures here.

I know just enough to pique my curiousity. Lester Silberman became a
gynecologist, Stephen Lewin an editor, Herman Bressel was career navy, George
Coven an entrepreneur, Fred Litto a professor in Brazil, Buddy Sogluizzo a
librarian, Melvin Polay a CPA.  Allen Guday emigrated to Israel and Stuart
Blickstein to South Carolina.  Nicky Antonucci died in Korea.  But I have
no information on 90% of the boys and 100% of the girls.  Hey, guys and gals,
check out the pictures and help me track down those missing members of the
class of 1952.  Where the heck are you?  What have you been doing since 1952?

We're all 70 years old;  It's now or never.

Am I the only one who's curious?

Source: 2009/05/told-you-so-said-i-did

Title: Told You So, Said I Did
Date: May 18, 2009

A while back, I complained about Allen Iverson.  Here's what I said:  "he
can do everything on the basketball court except win....  When the Nuggets
come down the floor, whether Iverson eventually shoots or not, he clings to
the ball and dribbles around while the rest of the team stand and watch. 
Iverson turns his teammates into spectators....  He isn't going to become a
team player;  he's 31 years old and he's averaged 23 shots a game with a .422
shooting percentage for an entire career."  "The Answer," I said, was not the
answer.  Not even close.

But things have changed for the Nuggets.  They finally unloaded Iverson
-- which would have been blessing enough.  Detroit put him on the shelf
-- didn't even play him at the end of the season.  But in exchange the
Nuggs received Chauncey Billups, who is everything Iverson is not:  a skilled
point guard, an intelligent man, a team player.  A leader, a defender.  It's
marvelous how one player can change the complexion of a team.  The Nuggets are
now a serious contender.  I like their chances against the Lakers.

Was it a brilliant move by the team owners and management?   I'm not privy to
the details, but I'd say, not brilliance -- just plain dumb luck.  I don't
think they knew either how bad Iverson was or how good Billups could be.

Bad planning, in any case.  If management could have guessed that the Nuggets
would make it to the western conference final, would they have let Marcus Camby
and Eduardo Najera slip through their cheapskate fingers a year ago?  No --
they would have made the investment that one makes when a championship is a
possibility. The Lakers can put three seven-footers (Bynum, Gasol, Odom) on the
floor at the same time -- wouldn't we love it if we could bring in Camby (an
all-league defensive player) to help Nene?  And who's going to guard Bryant? 
Dahntay Jones will take a crack at it, but wouldn't it be helpful if Najera
could have given us some minutes as well -- if not to stop Bryant, at least to
bang him around a bit?

And hey, does anyone remember that we gave up not only Andre Miller but two
first-round draft picks for 'The Answer'?  We might have had a dynasty in
the making if we had played our cards right -- and been willing to pay the
freight.  Two first-round picks, I repeat.

So the Nuggs have a chance -- but not the chance they might have had if they'd
been a little smarter, a little more imaginative, a little less tightfisted..

Source: 2009/05/medicarese

Title: Medicarese
Date: May 24, 2009

We're still dealing with the bureaucratic fallout from Grandma's death in
January. One consequence is that we receive impenetrable, inexplicable documents
from Medicare every few days.

Here's an opaque paragraph from the latest missive. Try to judge at what level
-- your choices are sixth grade through twelfth grade remedial -- this entirely
irrelevant and gratuitous advice is written.

"Medicare may pay for services that you get while on board a ship within the
territorial waters of the United States. In rare cases, Medicare may pay for
inpatient hospital, doctor, or ambulance services you get if you are traveling
through the territorial waters of Canada without unreasonable delay by the mos
(sic) direct route between Alaska and another state when a medical emergency
occurs and the Canadian hospital is closer than the nearest American hospital
that can treat the emergency. Medicare won't pay for this service since you
didn't meet these requirements."

It's the transition between the that long snake of a penultimate sentence and
the final injunctive sentence that throws me.  I made no request, so why the
prohibition: "you didn't meet these requirements?"  I never claimed to meet
them; in fact, I've never (nor did Grandma) traveled from Alaska to the lower
forty-eight by waterway. What the heck is Medicare talking about? Yikes! Double
yikes!

And what's with the idiom "get services."  Isn't it "receive services?"  Or
better yet, "receive care?"

There is no word more overused in American English than "get, got, gotten." Can
we agree to ban all forms of the word "get" from our vocabulary for a year. 
Get it out of our collective systems. Except, of course, in classic exchanges
such as, "Get it?" "Got it." "Good."

Is it possible that there are insurance-company moles in the Medicare system?
They've infiltrated the bureaucracy and they cleverly undermine the drive for
socialized medicine by generating cascades of dark, bilious, fearful prose.

Source: 2009/05/de-pecunia

Title: De Pecunia
Date: May 27, 2009

I've never understood money.  It doesn't do you any good until you spend it,
and once you spend it, you don't have it anymore.

I never understood income, either.  I was employed for most of my life at a
frugal, let's call it, state university.  I earned much less money than friends
in the "private sector" or the trades, but it didn't seem to matter much. 
I never missed a meal, I sent my kids to good colleges, and I enjoyed the
security of knowing that I wouldn't be laid off.  Meanwhile, I spent a good
hunk of my life reading books and talking about literature with young people. 
On the whole, it seemed like a good deal.

I did have some resentments, however, one of which was the disparity in salary
between faculty and adminstrators.  If we were all working in the same place,
why should the guy who ran the student union, or who managed "public relations,"
or who lobbied the legislature, or who was in charge of campus parking or
admissions, or who coached the linebackers, or who was second assistant vice
chancellor for this-or-that receive a salary twice or three times as large as
mine?  I never grasped the reason.

But then I discovered that the real money in the University system wasn't
in these areas.  It was in managing the University's portfolio.  A few
years ago, Harvard Magazine reported that the managers of its endowment were
receiving annual salaries of $8,000,000 to $10,000,000 -- or about 100 times
what I was pulling down.

But, it was reported, they earned these phenomenal salaries because they were
such financial geniuses -- and their genius could be judged by the enormous
growth of the endowment.

I have to say that I was sceptical.  I remembered one of my father's
maxims:  "when the stock market is going up, everybody's a genius."

Then I received a letter from Harvard's President, reporting on the steep
decline in the value of the endowment.

In a fit of pique, I wrote to President Faust (her real name).

Dear President Faust:  when the stock market was flying, the managers of
Harvard's endowment were geniuses and were paid astonishingly high salaries. 
Now that the endowment has lost 30% of its value, do you plan to a) lower
the salaries of endowment managers to realistic levels, and b) ask them to
recompense the university for their absurd past overcompensation ?    Yours,
Vivian de St. Vrain  (Ph.D. 1966)

I didn't expect an answer, but after several months, I received the following
letter, which, truth to tell, I regard as rather cold and perfunctory.

Dear Dr. St. Vrain.

Although I cannot comment on matters of employee compensation, I understand and
appreciate your concern for Harvard’s wellbeing.  Please be assured that the
endowment management remains entirely focused on supporting the University’s
most fundamental education and research priorities.Regards,Drew Faust Whoa. 
Back o' the hand to poor Vivian.

OK, that's it.  In retaliation, I'm striking Harvard out of my will. President
Faust will have to find someone else to endow that new administration building.

Source: 2009/05/0h-no-not-again

Title: 0h no, not again!
Date: May 31, 2009

Here's my latest 'personal best.'  It's now seven consecutive airplane trips
in which the person next to me has been an obese hulk. The kind of person who
spreads his (or her) legs, drips his (or her suet) onto and over my armrest
and claims and colonizes territory that I have purchased and which should be
inviolate.

As usual, we've arrived early.  We have the aisle and the middle, and we're
hoping that the window will be unoccupied, but we know that to wish so is
probably hopeless.  I watch the doorway.  Any number of slim - size 2,
size 4 -- young ladies appear, progress down the aisle, glance at my row,
and continue on their way.  Small nine-year-old boys whom I would joyously
welcome emerge from the doorway.  They too pass by.  Elderly grandmothers,
too frail and slight to threaten my space, totter to the rear. Then,
finally, here he is, my destiny.  Just my luck once again!  An enormous
whale, big enough to block the sun, swims and jiggles me-ward.  Clouds
of thick tobacco smoke rise like mist from his clothes.  He pauses. "May
I?" he says, unapologetically, shamelessly.  We stand, exit the row, and
wait in the aisle while he slowly maneuvers his massive bulk into place,
sighs, and crushes his seat. He loosens the seatbelt to maximum girth. By
the time I return, he's already claimed the armrest  and his keachy elbow
has broken the imaginary plane.  Now he spreads his heroic sumo thighs.  In
all fairness, there's no way he could get both legs under his seat, nor any way
that his flabby arms could be confined to the space that he has paid for. I
huddle to one side, forced to list to the left.  I am majorly pissed but too
polite (or inhibited) to utter the vindictive words that form themselves in my
brain:  "Hey, buster, next time buy yourself two seats. Or a whole row."

In my near future:  four-and-a-half hours of undeserved compression. Back ache.
Head                                                                       ache.

Why little old me?

Source: 2009/06/les-tits

Title: Les Tits
Date: June 08, 2009

We drove from DC to Bradford, Vermont. Not desrious of hazarding the I-95
corridor, we veered far to the west, almost to Scranton.  It was a mostly
pleasant ride. Travelers, remember the Taconic State Parkway --  it's
underused, neatly landscaped, truck-free.

Along the way, we encountered a road sign which said, Lititz, Pennsylvania.

Lititz. I know that name. How? Have I been there?  No. Did I have a
Lititzfriend from ?  I searched my mind.  Nope. Some famous person come from
LititzLititz?  No.

It bothered me. Something in my mind connected with Lititz but I couldn't
recall it.

Is it LIT-its?  Luh-TITS?

We at last we arrived here in Bradford, Lititz still puzzling me.  What kind
of word is Lititz? Time to fire up the wikipedia.  OK, here it is. "Lititz
was founded my members of the Moravian Church in 1756, and was named after
a castle in Bohemia named Litice....  For a century, only Moravians were
permitted to live in Lititz, and until the middle 1800s only members of the
congregation could own houses  The lease system was abolished in 1855." Nice
little exclusivist Pennsylvania Dutch town, but still the question lingers  --
how do I know it?

"Lititz is also home to Linden Hall School, the oldest all-girls boarding school
in the United States, founded by the Moravians in 1746."  That's an interesting
piece of news.

Do I know someone who attended Linden Hall?  No, I don't think so.

I went to sleep, puzzled. Why is Lititz, PA so familiar to me?

Next day, we started spring-cleaning the house and ran into distinct signs of
recent mouse habitations.  I got out some mousetraps, the kind with the spring
that I've been baiting with peanut butter at various catless times these last
50 years.  They're Victor mousetraps.  Aha. Printed on each one, in small
letters:  "Woodstream Corporation, Lititz, Pennsylvania."

Mystery solved.  Next time through, perhaps we'll stop at Lititz, check out the
church, the school, and the Moravian mouse-trap factory.

Source: 2009/06/latest-news-from-nightmareville-

Title: Latest News from Nightmareville.
Date: June 16, 2009

I had to dispose of the corpse.

My choice was either to take it to the dump, piece by piece, weekly, or bury
it on the property.  Whose body?  Don't know.  How did it get into the
freezer?  I put it there, in a black plastic bag, after I killed him.  I gave
careful consideration to the pros and cons of each method.  If I took it to
the dump, there might be fingerprints or perhaps pieces of paper with my name
on them.  And it might take weeks to complete the process.  If I buried it on
the land, it would always be here.  Who knows what excavations there might be
in the future.  I started to bury it, but just as I put a shovel in the earth,
a small, yappy dog started pestering me.

Time to wake up.  Hey, good deal.  I didn't murder anyone.  I'm clean.

Source: 2009/06/the-love-song-of-governor-mark-sandford

Title: The Love Song of Gov. Mark Sanford (in his own 'eamailed' [sic] words).
Date: June 29, 2009

-I-

You were basking

in what seems a great spot.

I am most jealous

of  your salad

under the palm trees.

I do not want to raise expectations

about feelings

and things.

You are special

and unique

and fabulous

in a whole host of ways.

I will write you a longer note

with a few more profound thoughts

tomorrow

or

Wednesday.

It won't be worthy of bedside placement.

-II-

I went out and ran the excavator with lights until the sun came up.

There is something wonderful

about listening to country music playing in the cab,

the air conditioner running,

the hum of a huge diesel engine in the background

the tranquility that comes with being in a virtual wilderness

of trees and marsh,

the day breaking

and vibrant pink becoming alive in the morning clouds.

And getting to build something with each scoop

of dirt.

It is admittedly weird.

-III-

Do you really comprehend

how beautiful your smile is?

Have you been told lately

how warm your eyes, and how they softly glow

with the special nature of your soul?

The rarest of all commodities in this world is love.

You already had

a full tank of love

in the emotional bank account.

Since our first meeting there in  the wind-swept

somewhat open air

dance spot in Punta del Este,

I felt that you had that same rare attribute.

You have a level of sophistication that is so

fitting

with your beauty.

You have the ability to give magnificently gentle kisses.

I love the curves of your hips.

I love your tan lines.

You have a particular grace and calm that I adore.

In the faded glow of night's light

that we spoke of

at the steakhouse.

-IV-

This soul-mate feel

I alluded to

is real.

How this lightning strike snuck up on us

I am still not sure.

My heart wants to get on a plane tonight to be in your loving arms.

My head says how do we put the genius back in the bottle

The bottom line is two fold.

----------------------------------------------------

(Words by South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford with the assistance of Maria
Belen Chapur;   poetastical typography by Vivian de St. Vrain.)

Source: 2009/07/our-lady-of-internal-combustion

Title: Our Lady of Internal Combustion
Date: July 07, 2009

I stopped at one of those highway gas-station convenience stores a few weeks
ago, searching for some invigorating M&Ms. I couldn't find them, but I said to
myself, this is America and I'm an American, and if there's one thing I know
it's that there are going to be M&Ms somewhere in this quickstop. I poked around
a little more and sure enough, just a little out of the way, there they were
-- five different kinds of M&Ms. I went for the classic multi-colored ones. Am
I the kind of person who's going to experiment with peanut butter M&Ms?  It
wouldn't be me.

But I'm off the point, which is, that when you're a native of the place, you
know more or less what to expect. You're not likely to be taken by surprise
very often. But every once in a while, something hits you right between the
eyes, and you say, where the heck am I? I had such an experience today when I
read a flyer from the West Fairlee Center Church, which is right over there on
Middlebrook Road, not more than three or four miles from where we live.

I have no quarrel with the "Old Fashioned Community Hymn Sing" on July 12 or
the "Shape Note Singing" on August 2 -- that's exactly what I would expect
from a church in West Fairlee Center. I'm a little puzzled by the "Blessing
of the Animals" on July 19, but then I remembered St. Francis, in some ways my
favorite saint, and I remembered that he preached to the birds and that when he
was dying, he thanked his donkey and (this is a bit hard to believe but what the
heck) his donkey wept. So I'm OK with blessing the animals, although I myself
would feel hypocritical blessing the particular animals that I was preparing
to transubstantiate into lambchops or hamburger.

But what makes me feel like a stranger in a strange land is the event that
is scheduled for August 9 -- the "Blessing of the ATV's" (sic). ATVs,
for those of you who don't know, are "all-terrain vehicles," and are very
useful if you're out on the range in the vast West patrolling miles and miles
of barbed-wire fence, but which in the crowded East are used mostly for
"recreation," which seems to involve tearing up private land (someone else's
private land, that is) or government land, making a whole lot of noise, and
sometimes driving underage and illegally, and much too fast, on our usually
peaceful "unimproved" dirt roads. No mufflers, no insurance, no license.

So what's with "the blessing of the ATVs?"

St. Francis has become the patron saint of environmentalists. Is
"the blessing of the ATVs" supposed to be a rejoinder to St. F and to
ecological thinking? Are we experiencing a Christian sanction of
anti-environmentalism?  Or have these back-country bible churches long been
blessing tractors and balers and pickups and backhoes, and I've just not
noticed?

WTF is going on? Am I in the America I know and understand?  Why am I
feeling vertiginous?

Would St. Francis have thanked his ATV?  And if he did, would his ATV have
wept?

Source: 2009/07/updyke

Title: Updike
Date: July 07, 2009

I've shamefully neglected the writings of John Updike.  I read the first Rabbit
novel when it appeared in 1960 and was struck by its vigor and authenticity. 
A talent to watch, I said to myself -- but then I lost track.  I loved one of
the Bech books, devoured on an airline ride from somewhere to somewhere else
twenty years ago.  I've been dazzled by short stories in various anthologies
and by art criticism in the NYRB.   But for a writer considered an American
master, nominated for a Nobel  -- well, I've been inattentive.  And now Updike
is gone.  I'm late (as usual).  To remedy the personal deficiency, I hastened
to the Bradford Public Library, where, sad to say, the only Updike on the shelf
was one I'd never heard of,Villages, published in 2004.

Villages is billed as an autobiographical novel and appears to be so.  It's
eminently readable, slickly written (sometimes so facilely that it crosses into
self-parody).  But, my-oh-my, what an embarrassingly bad performance.  It's
no more than a sexual history of "Owen Mackenzie" in which the succession of
women Owen encounters are diffentiated only by the size and shapes and degrees
of mucosity and erectility of their reproductive organs.  It's an adolescent
novel written by a seventy-year-old eminence.  What the heck was Updike
thinking?. Why would he waste precious time on such unambitious, indulgent
stuff -- unless he took a long-ago manuscript out of a drawer and fooled around
with it a bit?

Disappointing indeed. A few years ago, I read through the novels of Philip Roth,
who is an exact contemporary of Updike.  My conclusion:  that Roth (see Books
over there on the side of the page) was a writer of arrested development.  Oh
no, not again!

Let's see if the BPL has anything else by Updike today.  Let's hope for the
best.  Villages has got to be an aberration.

Source: 2009/07/updike-ii

Title: Updike- II
Date: July 15, 2009

In Terrorist, Updike takes us inside the head of a young,malleable, soft-spoken
Islamist fanatic.  The protrayal is persuasive, in part because the horror
bigotry is understated and casual.  It's quite a feat of imagination on the
author's part.  It's a good novel -- a page-turner, as they say.  It's
most remarkable feature is that the hero of the novel is a tired and bedraggled
high school guidance counsellor;  What a breakthrough -- the guidance
counsellor, figure of o-so-much contempt and satire, as savio!.  Of course,
the contrived/dramatic ending in which the terrorist and the counsellor square
off is totally unbelievable, but at least it doesn't involve fistfights
or animatrons.  On the whole, Terrorist is a very readable, imaginative and
largely satisfying novel.  It's a bit spare, laconic  -- but perhaps it
only seems so because I'm also reading Doestoevsky.  It's not a novel for the
ages -- it's too obviously occasional.  And I must say, I'm suspicious of
a piece of fiction about the interaction of various ethnicities in which the
only two Afro-Americans are a whore and a pimp named Tylenol.

Off to the Bradford Public to see what else is in their Updike holdings.

Source: 2009/07/pastorale

Title: Pastorale
Date: July 18, 2009

Sharon was here yesterday.  She has a new method to keep the raccoons and the
rats out of the food bins.  "The rats gnaw through the plastic garbage cans,
the raccons open them unless I bungee them real tight. Galvinized works, but
what we do now is buy junk refrigerators or freezers.  The rats can't get into
them.  Of course, what you spill is feast for the mice."  Sharon's husband
is a vet, but at lambing time last winter he was still recuperating from
a hip replacement.  "One of the ewes," Sharon says, "was having a hard
time delivering her lamb.  I went out to help pull.  I pulled out a head
and a leg.  The lamb must have been dead for a long time.  I whipped out the
cell phone.  I said to David, 'I don't care how long it takes to limp down
here, you're in charge.'  He took one look, got the rifle, and shot the ewe."

Source: 2009/07/starlight-dewdrops-etc-

Title: Starlight, Dewdrops, etc.
Date: July 31, 2009

The Stephen Foster songbook was a staple of my childhood. My mother sitting at
the old Hardman baby grand, sang "Camptown Ladies" and "O Susanna" and "Old
Black Joe." But times change and Foster was pushed to the sidelines years ago.
Too racist, too sentimental, too 'soft'. It's undeniable that the lyrics of many
of his songs are reprehensible.

Now we're enjoying a Stephen Collins Foster Revival and Festival in our very
own home. It began with the discovery of the "American Dreamer" cd that Thomas
Hampson recorded in 1992.  Hampson, opera lovers will know, is the world
champion of living baritones, and in this cd, he does Foster proud -- to the
inventive accompaniments of Jay Ungar and Molly Mason. No question but that
Foster was a truly superb melodist -- with a long string of songs that would
have gone double-platinum, if there had been such a thing, in pre-Civil War
America.

Hampson sings the Foster songs as if they're Schubert lieder, but there's
another recent cd, "Beautiful Dreamer" -- a "tribute album" in which Suzy
Bogguss, John Prine, Allison Krauss, Mavis Staples and a bunch of excellent
lesser-known (to me) but wonderful musicians lay into these tunes with
enthusiasm and verve. Who would have guessed the "Beautiful Dreamer" was
country before country was cool? Pure country.

Foster was a better melodist than poet. Often his lines are awkward and time-
bound and mawkish, but occasionally he hits the nail on the head. I like
"beautiful dreamer, queen of my song"; I think that "slumber my darling the
birds are at rest" is fine, but a succeeding line in the same song -- "thy
pillow shall sacred be" -- is bad beyond ordinary bad; "weep no more, my lady"
is positively Shakespearean and "all the world is sad and dreary/ every where
I roam" is well-rooted in the medieval contemptus mundi  tradition; "long
may the daisies dance the field, frolicking far and near" is far too pseudo-
Wordsworthian for my palate. Foster's best lyric, in my view, is "Hard Times
Come Again No More" --  "'Tis the song, the sigh of the weary/ Hard times, hard
times, come again no more/ Many days you have lingered, around my cabin door/
Oh! hard times, come again no more."  It's inspired, heartfelt, and eternally
pertinent -- and also, wedded to an excellent melody. "Hard Times" was not known
to me in the days of my youth -- more's the pity.

Old guy, maybe a bluesman, bottle of hooch in a brown paper bag, sits on a bench
in the middle of the night, downtown, playing air-sax, nodding. Young fellow
comes by, cheerful, asks him, "Crosstown buses run this way?" Blues guy looks
up, pauses for a second, and then drawls, "Doo--dah, doo-dah."

Source: 2009/08/updikeiii

Title: Updike-III
Date: August 01, 2009

Two more Updike novels down the hatch. The first, Seek My Face, published in
2002, is an extended short story rooted in the author's prodigious knowledge of
the contemporary art scene. It's casually written -- as if Updike didn't try
very hard. Should I be insulted that Updike didn't extend himself to invent a
plot?  The second novel is Rabbit at Rest, composed back in 1990 when Updike
was trying harder. Harrry "Rabbit" Angstrom, "hero" of four novels, is a force
in modern fiction. He's nasty, amoral, and crude, but hardly more so that the
gaggle of suburbanite creatures who surround him. Updike mercilessly draws
attention to everything odious in America culture -- he's the poet laureate of
tacky. Rabbit is fascinating but repellent. Whatever happened to "to teach and
to delight?"

Every once in a while Rabbit, always, alas, comprehensible, becomes momentarily
sympathetic. But then Updike allows him to speak -- and Rabbit's words are
invariably aggressive and offensive.  I think that the gap between what Rabbit
thinks and what Rabbit says is a major structural flaw in the novel -- and
one that will eventually push the novels from center to periphery. But time
will tell. For now, the Rabbit books are a guide to our own American kind of
shallowness -- and so here I am, off to the library or to the second-hand
bookstore to hunt down the earlier novels in this series. What does Dickens say
about Uriah Heep -- something about "fascinating in his own repulsion."  Yes, I
think that phrase will serve nicely for Updike's Rabbit.

Source: 2009/08/ligawinitude

Title: Ligawinitude
Date: August 03, 2009

The word "ligaw" in Pilipino, a language of which I am totally ignorant,
apparently means both "totally lost" and "courtship." And therefore the
adjective "ligawin" refers to someone who is both "directionally disabled"
or "directionally dyslexic" and also "attractive to persons of the opposite
sex." What a wonderful correspondence, especially to those of us who regularly
lose the car in the parking lot and to whom a walk in a strange city is
a fearful and daring adventure.  My lexicography is contributed by a
Manila reader whose forthright and thoughtful blog can be accessed at
this address.)  "Directionally dyslexic" is an ugly phrase, filled with
self-loathing; "ligawinitude" trips off the tongue. Well, almost trips; 
it's certainly superior to "ligawinness" -- which sounds like the female of an
extinct predator.

Here are some examples of ligawinitude (fellow sufferers will empathize) which I
have borrowed from Ana in Manila:

"I am so ligawin I still lose my way around the UP campus after 30 years working
there. I am so ligawin I'd enter the main door of an unfamiliar office, transact
my business, and then try to let myself out through the door of a conference
room right smack at a dozen people all gaping at me. I am so ligawin that when
I eat out, I can get lost going back from the comfort room to my table at a
big restaurant till my friends are about ready to page me....  When I am in a
strange place and I wish to explore it, I walk a straight path. When I reach a
fork, I turn back."

Ana claims to be "the most ligawin person in the world."  t's a hard claim to
substantiate. The instances of ligawinitude that she cites -- well, I can match
them with one hand tied behind my back. We won't crown a world ligawin champion
until we tabulate the results of the International Ligawinitude Olympics.
Nevertheless, it is curious to me that the ligawinitudinous often boast of the
severity of their condition.  No one says -- "Oh, I am the most colorblind
person in the world," but we (the ligawinoids) take a perverse pride in topping
our lost friends. "Loster than thou" is our odd claim.

Because the general public and even our closest friends treat us as comic, we
respond by boasting of our affliction. In effect, we identify with those who
laugh at us.

The chronically lost require liberation. We're not clowns;  we're just subject
to ligawinitude.

Which means that we're a) lost and b) sexy.

Source: 2009/08/pond-news

Title: Pond News
Date: August 18, 2009

Last week, we had a great blue heron act in a most unheron-like way. The great
blues are ordinarily skittish birds. We can't get closer than fifty yards before
they're up in the air, beating their slow, graceful, pterodactyl wings. But
this guy kept us company even with the grandchildren floating on the plastic
boats,  squealing and keening. The kids watched as he speared a small fish and
swallowed it whole. I worried:  perhaps he's hurt and can't fly.  But after
a day or so, he rose into the air, wheeled about, and off he went. Was he a
poorly-educated juvenile out on his own for the first time?  We'll never know.

And then, yesterday, a new critter. The pond has become home to a muskrat, which
swims slowly along the opposite bank. Should we be happy about this? Muskrats
eat cattails, of which we have a more-than-adequate supply. But they also eat
small frogs, and we love our frogs. They are philoprogenitive, reproducing like
rabbits. We don't want vast colonies of these lemming-like creatures.  And
they burrow into and undermine banks -- which is not good if they damage the
artificial dike. OK, Mr. Muskrat, here's the deal -- you stay on your side of
the pond, the natural side and we'll be good friends, but don't try to make a
home on the artificial side.

When I was a boy in the unenlightened 40s, women wore fur coats. One of the
common furs was called "Hudson seal." Guess what?  "Muskrat fur that is dyed,
plucked, and sheared to resemble seal."

Two can play the same game. If anyone asks, that rodent over the on the far side
of the pond with the long ratlike tail -- that's a Hudson seal.

Source: 2009/08/zucchini-news

Title: Zucchini News
Date: August 23, 2009

In our part of Vermont, the common wisdom is, "never keep your car unlocked in
August, because someone will open your door and throw in a couple of zucchinis."
Like most local gardeners, I'm drowning  in the  squash. We can't eat our
zucchinis fast enough. And no matter how vigilant I am in picking them, I wake
up in the morning to lift one of those huge hairy leaves and there it is ---
another baseball-bat long, sumptuously fat zucchini, staring its one-eyed stare
at me. To make matters worse, this year I'm growing two kinds of zucchinis --
the standard green supermarket variety and a fancy striped "Romanesco."  Also
another exotic squash, a buttery globe called "Ronde de Nice," most plentifully
produced.

Last week I was weeding in the garden when I had an unexpected visitor --
unusual for our dirt-road, off the beaten track neighborhood.  I can't remember
having to deal with a solicitor since two barely fledged Mormons popped by,
fruitlessly, in 1978. This young man, who arrived noiselessly on bicycle was
from VPIRG, and he came to tell me about the hazards of the Vermont Yankee
atomic power station. I told him right up front that I wasn't going to donate
any money and I told him why -- it all went to Obama.  But he was cordial
nevertheless, and we chatted. He's a Latin major, just graduated from UVM,
off in the fall to join Americacorps. Nice kid, I thought, but an easy mark.
After twenty minutes, he rode off with no donation but with  two substantial
zucchinis and a Ronde de Nice in his backpack. Also a large head of broccoli and
a handful of beets.

Source: 2009/08/sheepdeer-interaction

Title: The Slightness of the Lambs
Date: August 25, 2009

As far as I can tell, the deer generally keep clear of the back field where
the Morgans and the Scottish Blackfaces are pastured. Perhaps it's because
the domestic animals eat down the grass, or perhaps the deer just don't like
company. But a few days ago, I watched four white-tailed deer -- a doe with
three fawns, I believe, though such a group makes an unlikely family -- chase
twenty-two sheep out of the field and back to their fold. Sheep are notoriously
skittish, but then, so are the white tails. It was a battle of cowards. It was
especially painful to watch because one of the sheep was the ram, McCavish,
and it's his job (aside from the annual servicing, at which he performed
brilliantly) is to guard the ewes. McCavish is the "herd sire," new to the
flock. He was recently imported from Wisconsin; his grandfather came from
Scotland in the form of a vial of sperm packed in dry ice. What was Mr. McCavish
thinking when he ran from the field?  I was embarrassed for him and for the
entire flock. Query:  will the sheep stand their ground or will they allow
themselves to be intimidated by the wild turkeys?

Source: 2009/08/richard-poirier-19252009

Title: Richard Poirier (1925-2009)
Date: August 31, 2009

Richard Poirier died last week at age 83. The New York Times paid tribute with
a long obituary and an appreciative essay. Poirier was a "distinguished man of
letters" and also a Professor of English.

In 1960, as the juniorest and least-sophisticated graduate student in the
history of the universe, I enrolled in an AmLit course taught by Poirier. Fifty
years later, I can affirm that it was the single course in my graduate career in
which I performed the absolute worst -- both in the instructor's judgment and
in my own. I'm still embarrassed at the woeful mess of a paper I offered him.
I remember little of it, except its incompetence and the recollection that I
used the phrase "a writer of his ilk" -- I can't remember to which I writer I
referred -- and that Poirier wrote a longish exasperated note explaining to me
that I did not have the standing to treat any American author with disrespect.
However, the honest-to-goodness reason why I did so badly in the course was that
Poirier expected his students to think -- and thinking was not an area in which
I was gifted. I had discovered early in my educational career that my memory
was far superior to most of my contemporaries, that I had an ear for language,
and that I had a moderately fluent prose style. But I never, ever, possessed a
logical, orderly, or penetrating intelligence. (I could remember sentences and
phrases and whole poems, but not arguments or chains of reasoning).  My skills
were sufficient for literary study -- indeed I doubt that I could have managed
an academic career in any other discipline.

In fact, I did rather well in studies with most of my graduate-school
professors -- distinguished and learned gentlemen all of them -- who were so
happy to encounter facility that they didn't notice the want of brain.

It is curious that some of the most profoundly learned of my professors were the
least adventurous of thinkers. I remember, particularly, Douglas Bush, now a
mere trivia question, but a most renowned scholar in his day, whose superficial,
fey, conservative, neoChristianist, pixie observations on Spenser and Milton I
duly recorded. for two endless semesters, learning absolutely nothing of worth
or value.

Poirier was more serious. Only 35 (I was 21), he was thinking deeply about the
qualities that made American literature distinctive (he was formulating the
ideas that came together in A World Elsewhere). He was an intellectual rather
than an academic. It would have been wise for me to have listened carefully to
him. I might have learned something.

It's shocking to me that the young, dashing lecturer whom I remember so clearly
could be so old, so dead -- but there's no denying that half a century has
slipped away since I last listened to his rumbling voice.

Source: 2009/08/late-blight

Title: Late Blight
Date: August 31, 2009

It seems so allegorically named, late blight, especially appropriate to your
septuagenarian gardener. But it's more than symbolic -- late blight is here
and it's real. It's official name is phytophthora infestans. It's a noxious
fungus and it appears just when you're about to start harvesting your abundant
tomatoes. Late blight blackens and putrifies leaves, stems, and the fruits
themselves. It leaves nothing edible, and there's no recourse but to pull out
your plants, and then either burn them or put them in black plastic and take
them to the dump. We're trying to rescue a few of the tomatoes by pulling off
the bad leaves, but it's a losing cause.  All that work -- starting the seeds,
watching and watering, fertilizing and staking and tying up -- all wasted. What
a pity.

Late blight also affects potatoes. In fact, this nasty fungus is responsible for
the great Irish famine of the 1840s. So while we're mournful, we're glad that we
don't depend on our tomatoes for sustenance or income.

Why this year?  Some say that the disease comes to us from the great factory
farms in the south, where tomato plants are started early and then shipped north
in late spring. My neighbors put the blame on Wal-Mart. But in all honesty, I
must admit that all my tomatoes were started locally, by friends and relations.
The fungus can't be transmitted through the seed, so the tomato factories are
off the hook. The real culprit is the weather -- the soggy cold of June and July
was hideous if you're a tomato but just perfect if you're a blight.

I think I'll take a year off from tomatoes -- let the garden go fallow, or just
plant flowers. I couldn't bear to lose another crop. I'll follow the official
advice -- root out every single volunteer tomato and pull every weed in the
nightshade family. No tomatoes until 2011.

Source: 2009/09/new-bird-in-town

Title: New Bird in Town
Date: September 03, 2009

A creature previously unknown to me has appeared in the pond. After a few
moments with the binoculars and a glance at Peterson's classic Field Guide to
the Birds along with some intense internet research, I could make a positive
identification. It's a double-crested cormorant, usually found at the seacoast
but sometimes in rivers and lakes, which has been "recently extending its range"
and which has just now arrived on Hackett Hill Road. Although it's exciting
to encounter a new bird, especially a large graceful swimmer and diver, the
cormorant arrives tarnished by a bad reputation. Cormorants form very large
colonies and over-indulge their voracious appetites -- they gobble fish, frogs,
salamanders, clean out the lakes. Is it after our trout? They've become a pest
on Lake Champlain, where the authorities are "taking measures" to reduce the
population. I don't mind one cormorant, but I certainly don't want to host a
horde of them.

When the first wild turkey arrived, about fifteen years ago, everyone would stop
and stare. Now turkeys are as common as pigeons, but as far as I can tell, do
no damage (unless they get into the garden, which they haven't, so far). They
eat insects, not frogs. Plus they're good eating. I've never heard of anyone
salivating over roast cormorant.

I'd trade the cormorant, and the turkeys for that matter, for some of the birds
that have disappeared over the last forty years. We used to have a symphony
at dawn and dusk -- now there's hardly a peep, except for the robins and the
bluejays. I'd give a lot to hear a white-throated sparrow at daybreak. It's
been years since I've seen a bluebird, a wren, an indigo bunting, an oriole, a
purple martin, a red-wing blackbird, a sandpiper, a tanager, a vireo. Or seen
the swifts overhead. Even our once-abundant swallows have become rare. Where are
they?

[November 9, 2020: the cormorant never returned. Nor did any of his friends or
relatives.]

Source: 2009/09/my-first-racist

Title: My First Racist
Date: September 07, 2009

There was this nasty kid in our class at P. S. 217, back there in the Flatbush
'50s. I'm not going to name names, but if anyone is cares to look, you can
tell him by his superior, know-it-all smirk in the picture of our eighth
grade graduating class. For convenience, I'll call this guy K. K was not
particularly smart, or athletic, or talented, or attractive, or congenial,
so he was quite a way down the social pole, a resident of the land of the
nebbishes. But to give him his due, he was intense, dogged, hard-working, and
perpetually argumentative. He was not afraid to offend. He took positions
that no one else in the schoolyard supported. I remember him haranguing me on
the subject of social security. It was a bad thing, he asserted, because his
father could make more money by investing on his own rather than contributing
to the pot. "But, but, but...," I remember stuttering, "it's insurance, and
not everyone is a good investor." This exchange must have taken place during
the Truman years. In the P. S. 217 schoolyard, where everyone was the child
or grandchild of immigrants, FDR was our guy and social security was a
revolutionary improvement in the quality of life. Wasn't it the case
that my widowed grandmother received $32 a month from social security --
not sufficient to live on, surely, but a great help, enough to pay her rent?
To argue against social security -- where in the world did K get such weird,
off-the-track ideas?  Plus, equally astonishing, K was an enthusiastic Yankees
fan. What an unholy, contrarian jerk!

Then K disappeared for a month or a year -- some period of time, I can't
remember exactly how long. He had relatives in a southern city -- Baltimore, I
believe -- and he lived with them for an extended while. When he returned,
he starting spouting the most grotesque racist claptrap. It's engraved on my
memory:  "they have a lot of uppity blacks down there, they won't even get
off the sidewalk for you." Whoa, daddy. First of all, no one said "blacks" in
those days -- they were "Negroes." And second -- "uppity?" I had never heard the
term before and was shocked out of my skull. And "get off the sidewalk" --WTF???
 These were words and sentiments far beyond my experience or conception, beyond
anything I had ever heard uttered in our part of the universe. I was offended
and flabbergasted. Remember, dear readers, that the only person more sacred to
P. S. 217 schoolyarders than FDR was Jackie Robinson. It was from K that I
first heard the grotesque sentence, "Would you want one to marry your sister?"

I tell you, I gave K a lot of room after those conversations. Truth to tell,
there was no need for our paths to cross -- we weren't in the same classes and
K didn't play softball or basketball -- as I said, he was pretty much of a
klutz.

Recently I looked up K on the internet. He's a retired professor of economics
and is a "fellow" at a right-wing think tank. He's made a career out of opposing
third-world development and supporting "free market solutions" to all our ills.
That dogged dullness has produced a number of books. I've even found a picture
of him -- where he was once flabby and pimpled, he's now bald and sleek, with a
malevolent cast to his eye.

There's always been a connection in my mind between conservatism and racism. The
link is narcissism. "I've got mine, let "them" take care of themselves." For
the Ks of the world, it's not "how do we take care of less fortunate and of our
old people?"  It's, "how do 'we' deal with 'them.'"  And "they" are usually,
almost always, darker-skinned than "we."  I'm sure that K would deny that his
"free- market" views have anything to do with racism. But I know better -- I was
there at the beginning, before K became quite so sleek.

Source: 2009/09/notes-on-the-tarpaulin

Title: Notes on the "Tarpaulin"
Date: September 12, 2009

We're packing up, getting ready to go -- even though there hasn't been the
slightest hint of frost. When I loaded the metal sculptures into the bed of the
truck, I realized that it would be a good idea to cover them with a tarpaulin.
So down I drove to Main Street and to the recently enlarged Aubuchon. "Where
do you keep your tarpaulins?" I asked the young clerk. "What is a tarpaulin? 
I've never heard of it?"  "Never heard of a tarpaulin," I replied, taken aback,
"you use them to cover boats or cargo or the backs of trucks." "Oh," he said,
brightening, "a tarp," and he took me right there where the shelves were loaded
with blue "polytarps" -- canvas being virtually extinct, at least in our part of
the landlocked world.

The young feller didn't know the world "tarpaulin" and looked at me as if I
were some sort of pretentious snob. But "tarpaulin" goes right back to my
childhood -- it might be the first three-syllable word I ever learned. Not
that I was nautical, not in any sense a "tar." But when it rained at Ebbets
Field, the ground crew would roll out the infield tarpaulin and then we'd all
sit and listen while Red Barber and Connie Desmond chatted for an hour or so
until either play resumed or the game was postponed. "Tarpaulin" is not a hard
or obscure word -- certainly not to baseball fans who can remember when fields
didn't have roofs. But the big linguistic question is -- will the word tarpaulin
survive in all its glory or will it be truncated into a pathetic apocopic
monosyllablic shadow of itself?  Or will it be confused with the TARP, which is
a horse of another acronymic color. Troubled (or more accurately, Toxic) Asset
Relief Program.

Well, I bought the "tarp"  -- not at Aubuchon, which didn't have the right size
-- but down at the Farm-Way. So now we're one step closer to shoving off for DC
and then back home. I'm overwhelmed with pre-nostalgia.

Source: 2009/09/my-entry

Title: Another P.S. 217 Picture
Date: September 13, 2009

Is it my imagination, or did we mature later in those days than kids do now? 
These handsome juveniles are thirteen and fourteen years old.  To my eyes, the
girls look barely half-grown, the boys variable but distinctly unfledged.

Claire R., who sent me the picture (thanks so much, Claire!!), looks womanly,
but the others --not far out of childhood.  The boys in the second row look
as though adolescence has not yet begun to rear its unhandsome head.

Want to know the names of these unpromising lads and lasses?  Search here.

I

Source: 2009/09/updike-part-iv

Title: Updike -- Part IV
Date: September 13, 2009

The Updike-athon continues  Since my last report, I've read Museums and Women,
Bech is Back, In the Beauty of the Lilies, Rabbit Run, Rabbit Redux, Rabbit is
Rich, and Rabbit at Rest.

The good news:  Updike is fluent, a masterful stylist, a remarkable story-
teller, a distinguished craftsman.  He's original, entertaining, bold,
inventive.  The section of Beauty of the Lilies that describe Alma DeMott's
childhood in Basingstoke, Delaware is as good as anything I've read in years --
a truly classic piece of writing

The bad news:  Updike's characters have no heart  They're almost uniformly
small-minded, bigoted, hateful, unloving and, in fact, incapable of love.  The
novels are distressing and depressing.  And inconsistent.  The Rabbit quartet
is reputed to be Updike's masterpiece, but the long section about Skeeter in
Redux is a ludicrous mess, a total bomb, a failure that disfigures the entire
series

A reader who knew America only through the Rabbit series would be
convinced that Americans in the second half of the twentieth century were
selfish, money- grubbing, racist, entirely without culture, sex-obsessed,
alcoholic, uneducated, insecure, obnoxious, undisciplined and knowledgeable
only of TV trivia.  I suppose that there are such people -- but there are also
substantial citizens, artists and artisans, and good, functioning families. 
I must say that four large novels in the company of Updike's folk can wear a
reader down.  I think it's time to re-read Trollope's Palliser novels, where
there is villainy but also redemption.  I crave an antidote.

Source: 2009/09/plastic-flowers

Title: Plastic Flowers
Date: September 15, 2009

Our property adjoins the old West Bradford cemetery. The two- or three-acre
plot of ground is the most visible remnant of the dairy, sheep and apple
community of  West Bradford, which was hacked out of the steep slopes above the
Connecticut river in the first part of the nineteenth century, peaked before the
Civil War, and then went into decline more than a century and a half ago. West
Bradford lost its post office address in the 1920s and its schoolhouse (if word-
of-mouth can be trusted) before W W II. We still have a few sheep and horses and
some beef cattle but also an ever-increasing number of commuters who head down
I-91 for their employment in Lebanon or Hanover.

The history of West Bradford can be read in the cemetery's gravestones. There
must two hundred of them. The oldest are made of local slate and are only a foot
or eighteen inches in height; these date from the 1820s. One or two of them
feature lugubrious, stunted iconic weeping willows which rain and wind have
rendered barely visible. The markers that date from the end of the nineteenth
century are larger, made of marble that was quarried thirty miles to the west of
us, and reflect the area's growing prosperity. They're laconic  -- just name
and dates -- and entirely bereft of adornment or decoration. They celebrate
the Baldwins and Cunninghams and Lows and Tebbetses who cleared these hilly
fields with horses and oxen and who left behind all those massive and beautiful
stone walls that snake and twist their way through lands that are once again
deeply forested. There are women buried here who have been denied even the brief
immortality that a grave marker affords: a man's name and dates and the notation
"his wife" or sometimes even "his wives."

Quarter-size headstones, numerous and unincised, attest to unbaptized infants.

There's a new part of the cemetery, still in use, which to my eyes is less
sturdy and more frivolous -- an emblem of a culture in decline. Just because
it's possible to laser a prancing reindeer onto a granite headstone doesn't
mean that it's a good idea to do so. How all those long-bearded and puritanical
Emersons and Pipers would have railed against such trifling?

A few years ago, one of our local Thurstons erected a pink granite stone with
a plastic cross epoxyed to its surface. The cross, it was said, was to be a
perpetual lantern -- lit until the end of time by some sort of device that
gathered energy during the day and discharged it at night. "Oh no," I thought
the first few times that I came home late at night and was greeted by a ruby
and unwinking polysterene crucifix, "how ugly, how tacky, how out-of-keeping."
Fortunately, the perpetual light only lasted a year or so before extinguishing
itself for good.

I rather enjoy having a cemetery is nearby. "Quiet neighbors," as they say
here. Our house lies halfway between the cemetery and the pond. It's satisfying
to be flanked by crucial symbols of life and death. My only quarrel is that
occasionally a visitor to the cemetery, perhaps a decayed descendant of one of
the pioneers, will pitch an old vase or some sun-faded plastic flowers onto
our land. I don't so much mind picking up a few pieces of trash as I object to
my property being used as someone's rubbish heap. It's disrespectful. But any
person who would think to commemorate his mother with polycarbonate or acrylic
geraniums will generally not be the most mannerly or ecologically sensitive of
souls.

One day, many years ago, I was sitting on the cemetery's split-rail fence with
D., a local farmer. We were chatting about the weather and such. He suddenly
swung around and pointed to one of the headstones: "That's the boy that died of
eating the crayons."

To honor both the visitors and the inhabitants of the West Bradford cemetery,
I've composed a country-and-western quatrain.

Remember me in marble and in granite;

Remember me with rose and lilies brave;

Remember me in sunshine and in shadow

But don't put plastic flowers on my grave.

Source: 2009/09/some-midcareer-baseball-deaths

Title: Some Mid-Career Baseball Deaths
Date: September 25, 2009

Ray Chapman, the most notorious of  the dead-in-mid-career, was batting .300
when he was hit on the head by a spitball thrown by Carl Mays in August of 1920.
"Big Ed" Delahanty, a Hall-of-Famer, fell drunk off the International Bridge at
Niagara Falls in 1903.  Cory Lidle, Thurman Munson, Nestor Chavez, Ken Hubbs
and the great Roberto Clemente died in plane crashes.  Many players, including
Nick Adenhart, a pitcher of great promise until April 9, 2009, have died in
car crashes.  Danny Frisella died in a dune buggy accident.  Steve Olin and
Tim Crews ran their motorboat into a pier in 1993.  Steve Bechler was a 2003
victim of Ephedra. Tiny Bonham and Jake Daubert died of appendicitis, Harry
Agganis of a blood clot, Darryl Kile was found dead in his hotel room, having
succumbed to an unsuspected heart defect. Urban Shocker died of pneumonia,
Danny Thompson of leukemia.  Dernell Stinson, Gus Polidor, Dave Shotkowski and
Lyman Bostock were murdered.  Just last year, Geremi Gonzalez was struck by
lightning. Jim Umbricht died of cancer at age 34. His ashes were spread over
the field he loved.  Unfortunately, he played at domed stadium with artificial
grass, so after a few days, he was vacuumed up and spends eternity in a Texas
landfill.

Source: 2009/09/on-noise

Title: On Noise
Date: September 27, 2009

Even as my hearing deteriorates, I become more and more disturbed by excessive
noise.  For example: coffee shops, which in any sensible world, would be oases
of tranquility, have become positively uninhabitable. When I visit such a place,
I do so either to talk with a friend or to read silently.  I do not go to
be assaulted by what the tattooed, benose-ringed young staff fancies to be
"music" -- grating sounds amplified to 11 on the Nigel Tufnel scale.  And then
last week I went to a baseball game at one of the new stadiums where they have
embraced to the ultimate the philosophy of  the "total entertainment package,"
which means bright blinking lights, almost constant "music," and exhortations
on the giant scoreboard to "Get Loud."  But baseball, more than any other
sport, requires thought and concentration.  It's a subtle game, not enhanced by
distractions. And yet it seemed that very few of the spectators around me were
actually paying attention to the events on the field.  The noise forbade it. 
When our side's left fielder played a routine fly ball into a single -- an act
which would have provoked indignation and jeers at the low-tech Ebbets Field of
my youth -- the crowd remained preternaturally silent, reserving its roars for
the inter-inning "kiss-cam" and similar travesties.

Do we truly enjoy or are we simply inured to the noise that has become so
constant at the old ball game, in the restaurant, or even on the leafy suburban
street, where the egregious leaf-blower has become an oppressive commonplace.
(Why do we not ban a mega-decibel machine that is less efficient than the time-
honored and virtually silent broom)?

The noise of machines and the noise of amplified sound is a relatively new
phenomenon.  Until 1650 or so, no such sounds oppressed our ears. There was the
occasional thunderstorm, and there were church bells, and there was the clatter
of horse and coach on cobblestone streets  -- but there was nothing comparable
to the sea of noise in which we daily swim. Our ancestors lived for a million
years in a world that we would judge to be virtually silent.  There were no
factories, no trucks, no airplanes overhead, no electric guitars and, inasmuch
as 95% of the people were village-dwelling agricultural workers, not even large
crowds.  The noise that we routinely endure is unprecedented and unnatural. 
And unhealthy as well.

Source: 2009/10/yellow-face

Title: Yellow Face
Date: October 06, 2009

"Yellowface" is the Asian equivalent of theatrical "blackface," as in the case
of Warner Oland (a Swede) or Sidney Toler (an Scottish-American) impersonating
Charlie Chan. "Yellow Face" is also the name of an uncharacteristic Sherlock
Holmes short story -- one that is unusual among Conan Doyle's compositions in
that no crime is solved nor none committed, and also because Sherlock Holmes'
overconfident deductions prove to be entirely erroneous.

Grant Munro has married a young widow, Effie Hebron, who returned to her native
England after her Atlanta husband died of yellow fever.  After some years of
blissful marriage, Effie begins to act most strangely;  she sneaks out to a
neighboring house in the middle of the night -- a house at the upper window of
which her puzzled husband catches sight of a strange and unnaturally immobile
yellow face.

After listening to Munro's narration, Sherlock Holmes confidently theorizes
that Effie's first husband did not die, but has secretly returned to England
to blackmail his erstwhile wife.  But when Munro, Watson, and Holmes break
into the house, they discover at the window not a husband come back to life
but a young girl, Effie's daughter, wearing a mask to conceal the fact that
she is a "little coal-black negress."  The mystery is solved:  Effie has
been behaving peculiarly not because she is seeing another man (as Munro seems
to fear) or because she is being blackmailed, but because she was afraid to
confess to her second husband that her former mate was black --  even though,
she proclaims,  "a nobler man never walked the earth."

And so the story proceeds to its climax.  How will Munro respond to the
revelation? Will he reject his wife, or embrace her?  "It was a long two
minutes [ten minutes in the first American edition!!] before Grant Munro broke
the silence....  He lifted the little child, kissed her, and then, still
carrying her, he held out his other hand to his wife, and turned towards the
door. 'We can talk it over more comfortably at home,' said he.  'I am not a
good man, Effie, but I think I am a better one that you have given me credit for
being.'"

"Yellow Face" is designed to be an uplifting story of tolerance and trust and
in truth it is extraordinarily progressive, even radical, by the standards of
1894.  But it's also a naive story.  It elides and dodges the complications
that it raises, especially about matters of race.  Is it credible, or is it
not more fear than fact, that a mixed-race husband and an English woman would
produce a "coal-black" offspring. Doyle's belief that such an engendering is
possible is a mark of the simplicity of his thinking about race.  Moreover,
there were strict "anti-miscegenation" laws in Georgia in the last part of the
nineteenth century. How did Effie and John Hebron manage to evade them?  In
what way did they live?  Hebron managed to leave a considerable estate to his
wife?  How did he achieve his wealth?

Doyle is interested in making a case for tolerance and he is interested in
Holmes.  But he does not much concern himself with the other characters that
he creates.  He does not explore the psychological costs for Effie when, as
she says, "she cut herself off from her race."  What prompted her to violate
so strong a taboo?  And why would a strong and independent woman suddenly
become so fearful when she re-married?  What did it cost her, emotionally,
to leave her child behind in Georgia where a dark mixed-race girl would be so
awkwardly situated?  How could she conceal so much of her history from Grant
Munro without overwhelming guilt?  How did she manage to achieve so blissful
a union with him while carrying many important secrets?  And what about the
poor child?  Born to an illegal union that is soon fractured by death, then
abandoned, then reclaimed and brought to a strange land -- and asked to wear a
yellow mask for fear the someone would be shocked by her pigmentation. Doyle
does not even broach the question of the damage to the child?   And what kind
of future can be in store for her in England?

Doyle seems to consider that "Yellow Face" concludes happily -- but does it?
While it is certainly to the author's credit that he is unfazed by the taboo
against "intermarriage," it is also true that he rests satisfied with easy,
superficial, and naive answers to hard questions. Or rather, he does not even
seem to realize that he has started a whole pack of hares in motion.

It's curiously negligent that Doyle does not even give a name to the "coal-black
negress."  She remains a plot-device, not a person.

It is equally odd that Doyle does not find fault with Sherlock Holmes' inability
to think past the convention of the genre, where blackmail is a commonplace. 
Intermarriage, Doyle seems to suggest, is so exotic, so unusual, that it would
not occur even to so brilliant a detective as Sherlock Holmes that a yellow mask
might hide a black face.

Source: 2009/10/why-i-love-health-insurance-companies-reason-453

Title: Why I Love Health Insurance Companies, Reason # 453
Date: October 14, 2009

I hate to fetch the mail nowadays because there are so damn many importunate
communications from doctors, hospitals, from medicare, and from insurance
companies.  Even though I'm in relatively good health and need only routine
servicing, each time I visit a doctor the system manages to generate one piece
of paper after another -- most of them written in codes that are almost entirely
inexplicable.  Could anyone have devised a more lunatic, more inefficient
health-care system?

The other day I received a letter from Great-West Healthcare, my "supplemental
carrier,"  to this effect:

"We recently reviewed one of your claims and discovered that we mistakenly sent
you a benefit check for $31.80.  We now realize that payment should have been
sent directly to your provider.  We have reprocessed the claim to pay the
provider.  Therefore, this letter is a request for the $31.80 paid to you in
error.  Please send a check for $31.80 to the address on the back of this
letter.  If you have any questions, please contact our service center at the
number on the front of your health plan ID card.  Thank you.

Of course, there was no address on the back of the letter, so I could not
respond.

But if there had been an address, this is what I would have said:

Dear Great-West Healthcare:

Thank you for you letter of August 10.  I will be happy to refund the $31.80. 
However, I have no record of this transaction, so before I pay you, I need
the following data.

A copy of a cancelled check for the amount that you claim to have sent me.

Evidence that you have actually paid the funds to the unnamed "provider." 
This evidence should be in the form of a cancelled check but if the $31.80 was
sent as an electronic deposit, a notarized affidavit from an officer of the
"provider" will be ample.

If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call me at my home
phone number, which can be conveniently found in the local telephone book
or obtained online, so that I can play you some nice elevator music while you
languish on indefinite hold.

Thank you. Your call is important to us.

Source: 2009/10/another-baseball-dream

Title: Another Baseball Dream
Date: October 26, 2009

I have recurrent baseball dreams, most of them nightmarish. The most frequent
is that I hit a sharp line drive to right, start for first but run as if I were
stuck in a sea of mucilage.  My legs won't move. The right fielder throws
me out before I'm halfway down the line.  I leave the field in disgrace,
thirty- thousand fans vigorously booing.  What does it mean?  "I can't get
to first base" sounds like an adolescent sexual worry, but I suspect that such
an interpretation might be too specific. Let's just say that the theme of the
nightmare is ineffectiveness and frustration.

What a relief, then, that this World Series time I can report on a very pleasant
dream.  My team (Dodgers or Phillies or just a bunch of nameless guys) was
pounding the Yankees.  (Cultural context for you non-Brooklynites out there in
Bloglandia: the New York Yankees represent all that is evil in American society,
and have done so since the days of Joe Page and Snuffy Stirnweiss and Charley
Keller, or for some sixty-plus years.  There is no question but that the rich,
whiny, crybaby Yankees are the special favorites of Bernie Madoff, Ann Coulter,
and Dick Cheney.)  In the dream, my side hit one opposite-field line drive
after another and the score went from 5-0 to 13-0 to 17-0.  Finally, we brought
to the plate a cute, tow-headed four-year-old boy.  He blasted the first pitch
over the head of their center fielder and knocked in three more runs. I woke up
elated, and in an aroused condition that gave me confidence that, yes, I could
get to first base. Possibly to third base.  Perhaps even score.  .

Source: 2009/10/a-visit-to-a-new-healthcare-provider

Title: A Visit to a New Health-care Provider
Date: October 29, 2009

Today I went to see a new doctor, a specialist.  His receptionist sits
behind a sign that reads "Co-payment must be made at the time of service. 
Failure to pay the co-payment will result in an additional charge of $10."  I
took a seat to wait and to fill out various forms -- and to be apprised of
a "policy change":  "A patient who misses an appointment without canceling 24
hours in advance will be charged $45."  I read a little further:  "Extended
telephone conversations will be subject to a charge of $15."

I know that doctors have to make a living and I don't begrudge them a decent
wage.  But goodness gracious, must they transform themselves into shameless
nickel-and-dimers?

I want to have confidence in my doctor.  I want to think that he's the
heir to Aesculapius, Hippocrates, and Jean Hersholt. I don't want to think
that he's a money-hungry "provider" whose primary aim, transcending all others
(especially healing), is to squeeze me for a buck here and a buck there.

Which is in fact what I did think.  Not a good first impression, Dr. Provider!

Source: 2009/11/updikes-gamble

Title: Updike's Gamble
Date: November 02, 2009

John Updike's novels are loaded to the ever-loving gills with invocations of the
most evanescent and ephemeral manifestations of "popular culture."  I can't
think of another writer who is so relentlessly fascinated by the most trivial of
things.  If his novels are to be read in a hundred years, they will not be
fully understood unless encrusted with extensive and elaborate footnotes.

"Roy has been carefully shaping can his Total mush into a kind of a pyramid with
the back of a spoon."  Who will understand the meaning of this sentence. 
"Total mush?"  I imagine a footnote:  "'Total' was the brand name of a fibrous
dry packaged breakfast food which, when liquids such as milk were added, could
be formed into a paste."

Here's another example.  Rabbit is musing.  "Biblical names.  Rachel,
Esther.  Not always.  Barbra, Bette."  And here's the putative footnote. "In
this passage, Harry muses about the names of Jewish women.  "Barbra" (sic)
refers to Barbra Streisand, a popular Jewish-American singer and actress of the
period.  Professor Harvey Wrongbody's assertion that "Bette" refers to Bette
Davis is clearly uninformed, as Miss Davis was not Jewish. "Bette" as Professor
Wrongbody should have known, references Bette Midler, a performer famous in her
day for impersonating Janis Joplin (see Index) in The Rose."

In the first few pages of Rabbit at Rest --  which is perhaps the most
consistently fine of Updike's novels, there are dozens or scores of allusions
that will test a future annotator's learning.  It's highly unlikely that with
the passing of generations anyone but specialists in late twentieth-century
Americana will be able either to identify or grasp the significance of  "this
guy Bundy who murdered dozens of women in dozens of states."  (Bundy?  Is that
King Kong Bundy?  McGeorge Bundy?  Al Bundy?)  Or have the least idea what
is meant by a "Cabbage Patch doll with its bunchy beige face" or the possible
thematic significance of "Cara Lott Gets Hot" or "Winn Dixie" or "Ekerd Drugs"
or the National Enquirer or "Planter's Peanut Bar" or "Melanie Griffith"
or "Deion Sander's recent arrest."  It's only twenty years since Rabbit at
Rest was published, and I was there, paying reasonable attention, but frankly,
I'm already becoming a bit vague about some of  the details.

If I were a novelist of Updike's talent, I would think twice about loading up on
trivia that cannot help but  barricade the novels from future readers.  But
perhaps Updike doesn't care.  Perhaps he's only interested in the moment and
in readers of his own generation.  To me, it seems as though he doesn't give a
royal fig for the future.

Shakespeare, a writer not for his age alone but for all time, occasionally
included references to fleeting phenomena.  I rather like it that he did so. 
I'd be intrigued to learn, once and for all, who was that "red-nosed innkeeper
at Daventry" to whom Falstaff refers.   But neither Shakespeare nor any other
writer with whom I'm familiar so saturated his work with multitudinous and
forgettable popcultch trivia.

But perhaps Updike has made the right choice.  Perhaps the density of reference
makes the novels so credible, so real, that scholars will be happy to annotate
and readers will revel and glory in the footnotes.

It's a gamble.  My guess is that it's a losing one, but time will tell.

Source: 2009/11/staas

Title: STAAS
Date: November 05, 2009

The woman with whom I've shared the last fifty-plus years has developed an
alarming new symptom.  She disappears in markets.

We'll be together, innocently pushing the basket in the vegetable section, for
example, and I'll wander off to fetch some cream cheese and a half-gallon of
milk.  When I return, she's gone.  Nowhere to be found.  I walk up and down
the neighboring aisles.  Nothing.  She's completely dematerialized.  I walk
up and down, back and forth, vainly searching.

After a twenty minutes, or half-an-hour, she's back, but teleported to an an
entirely different part of the store.  She doesn't even know that she has
vanished.  Sometimes she pretends that it's I who has disappeared.

I can understand that she could lose herself in the acre-and-a-half King
Soopers, or in the McGuckin prairie, or on the vast Costconian steppe.  But
in Bradford's minuscule P & C?  Or in Bradford's Main Street, comprised as it
is of far fewer square feet than any mid-size contemporary Walgreen's?  No,
there's more here than meets the eye.  This is no natural process.  Something
supernatural is going on.

It took some serious reflection before I came to the realization that it's a
clear case of abduction by aliens.  There is no other credible explanation.

I've given a name to the disorder.  I call it Spousal Transient Alien Abduction
Syndrome, or STAAS.

I've made some inquiries, and it seems that STAAS is not a condition found
only in my family.  In fact, it's quite common.  More than four-fifths of
the people that I questioned had experienced recent instances of STAAS. 
Curiously, it's much more frequently discovered in long-marrieds than among the
recently- hitched.  And less common among women than men.  In fact, men tend
to disappear for longer periods of time than women.

Moreover, just as might be expected, not a single one of the disappeared
remembers that he (or she) had ever fallen into the ungentle hands of aliens
-- which is certain proof that the abduction took place, inasmuch as it is
well known that these extraterrestrial beings possess the ability to scrub
human brains and obliterate memory.

I don't know what can be done to arrest the spread of this alarming syndrom   e.
Perhaps a Federal task forc                                                   e.

Source: 2009/11/damn-yankees

Title: Damn Yankees
Date: November 06, 2009

The Yankees 2009 payroll was $201,449,189, exceeding the next largest (the
Mets) by more than $50,000,000.  The median major league payroll was about
$80,000,000 and the lowest $36,834,000.  With 103 wins in regular season,
each victory cost the Yankees $1,955,810.  The other teams that made it
to the playoffs incurred considerably smaller but greatly varying costs per
win:  Boston Red Sox, $1,285,300;  Philadelphia Phillies, $1,215,097; Los
Angeles Angels $1,172,325; Los Angeles Dodgers, $1,056,995; St. Louis Cardinals,
$852,803; Colorado Rockies $817,402;  Minnesota Twins, $816,165.  Should
we be surprised that the Yankees could beat the Phils?  Given the numbers,
it would have been shocking if they couldn't.

Cheers to the Cardinals, Rockies, and Twins.

Cost per victory is a measure of management efficiency.  By far the most
effective 2009 team, dollar for dollar, was the frugal Florida Marlins, who won
87 games at a cost of just $423,379 per win.  On the other end of the scale,
the woeful New York Mets, with just 70 successes, were the only team to pay more
per win than the Yankees.  It cost the Mets $2,133,910 each time that they
walked off the field in triumph.

As long as the Yankees are allowed to pay salaries one-third larger than
their nearest competitors and two and a half times more than the median, it must
be expected that they will win regularly  -- which is why I'm for rigorous,
enforced parity.  Let's level that playing field.

And with all that money, how to account for the fact that the Yankees sported
such an entirely run-of-the-mill outfield.  Melky Cabrera?  Nick Swisher? 
Gosh, there must be better players than those to entice to the brand new
ballpark.

Which brings us to the next spending spree. free-agent outfielders wanted. 
Must be able to hit the short porch. Bring joy to the eyes of George S.

Source: 2009/11/adh22-in-my-life

Title: ADH2*2 in My  Life
Date: November 16, 2009

I can't drink wine, beer, or spirits. Alcohol of any kind, no matter how
sophisticated or elegant, makes me ill. In this respect, I'm similar to my
father and to one of my sons. People who know me only slightly  imagine that
I am unsociable or ascetic. Or that I'm a recovering alcoholic. In fact, I
suffer from an inherited disability.

Now at long last the culprit gene has been fingered. It's ADH2*2, "a rare
variation of ADH2, which produces a more active form of alcohol dehydrogenase,
the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in alcohol metabolism."

Alcohol dehydrogenase? There are more than a sixpack of them: "alcohol
dehydrogenases are a group of seven dehydrogenase enzymes that facilitate the
interconversion between alcohols and aldehydes or ketones with the reduction of
NAD+ to NADH...." More succinctly, "they break down alcohols." I don't know
whether ADH2*2 digests alcohol too fast, or too slow, or just idiosyncratically,
but the effect on me is stomach-ache, headache, and general queasiness. Wine,
"the merry cheerer of the heart," sours my digestion.

The eccentric allele occurs in 20 to 30 percent of Jewish populations
"suggesting that ADH2*2 is one of the factors explaining the low rates of
alcoholism in this group." Recent investigations have demonstrated "significant
relationships between ADH2*2 and alcohol use ... in all Jewish groups studied."
"Those with the variant gene have been seen to drink less frequently, consume
less alcohol overall or have more unpleasant reactions to alcohol."

This analysis makes perfect sense to me, but Science is apparently unsatisfied:
"the exact reason why ADH2*2 tends to discourage heavier drinking isn't known."
Well, Science, let me see if I lend a hand here. If you get sick rather than
high from a few sips, you stop drinking -- unless you're a complete and total
Schmuck."

Perhaps because I'm a teetotaler (though a reluctant one), I have little
tolerance for drunken excess. I'm not amused by loss of inhibition, by sloppy
speech, or by too-loud staggering enthusiasm. I've honored my father's warning
-- "never get into an argument with a drunk" -- to the letter. In actual fact, I
try very hard not to engage the alcoholically-addled in any discussion, whether
serious or flippant.

I regret that I can't participate in wine-tastings -- the stuff looks and smells
so good. But even there, I'm skeptical of the poetic language that oenophiles
employ -- hints of rubber and raspberries and old leather and that sort of
hyperbole. I tend to sniff deeply, and then proclaim, "tumescent but not
rigid."

It's not hard to be witty when you're sober and your Falernian audience has been
quaffing the pinot grigio.

Source: 2009/11/help-i-need-somebody-not-just-anybody

Title: Help, I Need Somebody Not Just Anybody
Date: November 17, 2009

I did so write a check to register the car, it turns out, but since we have
changed our residence, the registration certificate and the little adhesive
tab that you're supposed to fix to the license plate never arrived here, and
of course I forgot all about the legality of the vehicle. Had no idea. The
upshot is that while driving to the airport, I was stopped by a police guy who
was lurking in the shadows to pounce on malefactors such as I. I was issued an
expensive ticket. Very annoying. I'm generally a law-abiding citizen and I'm not
used to being in trouble with the authorities.

Not immediately able to figure out what went wrong, I hustled down to the Motor
Vehicle Bureau out there on 33rd Street. I took a number, sat down and rehearsed
what I would say to the clerk on duty. All I could think of was, "I need help."

When my number was called, I walked up to the designated clerk, a woman of
uncertain age. The sign on her desk said, in rather large letters, "Rhonda." And
so I did it. I couldn't help myself. I said, "Help, help me Rhonda." And then,
of course, I was immediately chagrined. "I'm sure you hear that all the time,"
I apologized, admitting to my appalling banality. "Not all the time," she said,
"but often enough."

It could have been even worse. I could have declaimed the entire poetic chorus
to the Beach Boys' 1965 hit:

Help me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me
RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp,
help me RhondaHelp me RhondaHelp, help me RhondaHelp me Rhonda, yeah.

Source: 2009/11/sons-of-japheth-sons-of-ham

Title: Sons of Ham, Sons of Japheth
Date: November 23, 2009

In Caroline Hentz's The Planter's Northern Bride (1859), Eulalia, the daughter
of a New England abolitionist, has married a slave owner and traveled with him
to his home in Georgia.  Here's what she sees. Warning: be prepared to be
shocked and revolted.

"All around, far as the eye could reach, the rich rolling fields of cotton,
bearing the downy wealth of the South, stretched out a boundless ocean of green,
spotted with white, like the foam of the wave.  Soon returning in grand march
from the fields, came the negroes, poising on their heads immense baskets,
brimming with the light and flaky cotton. Little children looking very much
like walking semicolons, toddled along, balancing their baskets also, with an
air of self-importance and pride. Eulalia recollected all the horrible stories
she had heard of negro insurrections, and thought what an awful thing it was
to be at the mercy of so many slaves, on that lonely plantation. When she saw
her husband going out among them, and they closed round, shutting him in as
with a thick cloud, she asked herself if her were really safe. They gathered
around him, eager to get within reach of his hand, the sound of his voice, the
glance of his kind, protecting, yet commanding eye. More like a father welcomed
by his children than a king greeted by his subjects, he stood, the centre of
that sable ring. She had never seen him look so handsome, so noble, so good.
As she looked at her husband, standing in their midst, the representative of
the fair sons of Japheth, wearing on his brow the signet of a loftier, nobler
destiny, every lineament and feature expressive of intellect and power, and
then at each of that dark, lowly throng, she felt a conviction that freedom, in
its proudest latitude, education with its most exalted privileges, could never
make them equal to him. She never dreamed that slavery could present an aspect
so tender and affectionate. Do the hundreds and thousands buried in the black
coal-pits and wretched dens of Great Britain, who have never heard, in their
living graves, of the God who created, the Saviour who redeemed them, pass their
sunless lives in greater comfort or fuller enjoyment."

Hey, it's good to be a slave. Apparently. "Tender and affectionate????

I was aware that there were anti-Uncle Tom's Cabin novels, designed to showcase
the glories of slavery, but I had never read one. The Planter's Northern Bride
is supposedly one of the best of the genre. It has the power to make you despair
for the intelligence of the entire human race. Some samples:

"Merry voices singing in the fields of labour or filling up the pauses of
toil...."

"The joyful songs and exhilarating laughter of our slaves...."

"The negro has an intense appreciation of beauty and grace, and feels the
influence of mental superiority."

"You will see the negro, not as he is at the North, an isolated, degraded being,
without caste or respectability, a single black line running through a web of
whiteness, but surrounded with the socialities of life, and though doomed to
labour, yet free from the cares and anxieties that rest so heavily on us."

Here are the words that Caroline Hentz puts in the mouth of one of Eulalia's
slaves.

"I tell you what, Crissy, when de nigger have good massa and good miss, dey well
off. When dey have bad massa and missis, dey bad off. Talk 'bout us being on a
'quality with white folks, no such ting. De Lord never made us look like dem. We
mustn't be angry wid de Lord, for all dat: He knows best, I 'spise. Look a'me,
black as de chimney back, -- dey, white as snow; what great, big, thick, ugly
lips I got, -- dere's look jist like roses. Den dis black sheep head, what de
Lord make dat for?  Dey got putey, soft, long hair, just like de silk ribbons.
Now look at dat big long heel, will you?" added Judy, putting out her bare foot
in the moonshine, giggling and shaking;  "who ever saw de white lady with sich
a heel as dat?  I do wonder what the Lord made us nigger for? I spect de white
dust gin out, and he had to take de black."

Slavery deformed society.  Arguments in support of slavery deformed the
intellect. The attempt to find supernatural sanction for slavery perverted
religion. Slavery incapacitated the slaveholding states. One hundred and fifty
years after slavery, they have still not caught up and they are still pulling
the country down.

Does Caroline Hentz believe the words that she puts on paper?  I believe she
does. I believe that she makes these observations and arguments with total
sincerity. I also believe that the kind of utterances to which she gives vent,
though no longer respectable, no longer made in public, are not dead but
continue to appear in VFW halls, in bowling alleys, in union halls, and in truck
stops all over the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Source: 2009/11/oh-no-whats-happening-to-me

Title: Oh No!  What's Happening to Me?
Date: November 27, 2009

So, a couple of days ago, we were watching some basketball on the HDTV, and
despite the fact that Carmelo was going to the rim virtually at will, I was kind
of down and depressed. Trying to cheer me up, the companion of fifty-plus years
says, "I'll tell you what. I'll get you anything you want -- absolutely anything
at all."  Meaning, of course, anything edible, anything from the kitchen. We'll
I'm not abstemious, I've always been a good eater, and I recognize that food has
the power to confer good cheer, so I thought and thought, and finally I said, "I
know what I'd like. How about a cup of decaf tea and two prunes." And then after
a few seconds, I screamed, "Holy moley, what in the living heck has happened to
me?"  Is it now the case that the outer limit of my once-voracious imagination
is a cup of decaf tea and two prunes?  So embarrassing, so downright geezerish.
What ever happened to ice cream sundaes with Fox's U-Bet and real whipped cream,
to rich and gooey lasagna, to late-night salami sandwiches on deli rye (not
that we would have any of those ingredients stocked in our bland healthful-but-
tasteless-low-cholesterol refrigerator). It's all downhill, this septuagenarian
eating. Ou sont les pepperoni pizzas dantan?  Where are the bacon cheeseburgers
of yesteryear?

Source: 2009/11/-a-further-note-on-nineteenthcentury-horsedrawn-vehicles

Title: A Further Note on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Vehicles
Date: November 29, 2009

Modern readers of the great classic novels of the previous era generally have
no clue about the significance of horses and horse-drawn vehicles. As I wrote,
right here on this blague a couple of months ago, "no, I'm not obsessed, it's
just that I have this little bee in my bonnet about the fact that we gasoline-
era moderns understand the exact social significance of jeep, Jaguar, Jetta,
and jalopy, but we are, except for specialists, utterly clueless as to the
valence of barouche, basket carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard,
buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, coupe,
croydon, curricle, cutter, daumont, dearborn, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly,
four-wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, jaunty car, jersey-wagon,
kibitka, landau, phaeton, post-chaise, rockaway, shandrydan, shay, spider-
phaeton, spring-van, stanhope, sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury,
tarantass, trap, troika, victoria, vis-a-vis, wagonette, and wurt."

What does it tell us when our hero arrives on the scene in a wurt?  Does it
mean that he is rich and stylish, or vulgar and pretentious, or tasteless, or
downtrodden.  We don't know, and so we read our own traditional literature with
one hand tied behind our backs.

Well, I though that I had made my point, and I thought also that I had exhausted
the list of nineteenth-century horse-drawn vehicles. But then I came upon
this passage in Edith Wharton's The Age of Innocence (a truly splendid novel
published in 1920, though the action is set in the 1870s).

They [Archer and Countess Olenska] walked back toward Beacon Street, and
near the club Archer caught sight of the plush-lined "herdic" which had
carried his note to the Parker House, and whose driver was reposing from this
effort by bathing his brow at the corner hydrant. "I told you everything was
predestined!  Here's a cab for us.  You see!"  They laughed, astonished at
the miracle of picking up a public conveyance at that hour, and in that unlikely
spot, in a city where cabstands were still a "foreign" novelty.

The novelty, the herdic, was "a kind of carriage invented by Peter Herdic
of Williamsport, Pennsylvania, in 1881" (so Wharton is guilty of a tiny
anachronism).  "A predecessor of the taxicab, the herdic was a small
two-wheeled carriage that had side seats and an entrance at the back.  Their
low entry made it easy for passengers to enter and exit the cars.  The first
herdics carried up to eight passengers.  The earliest herdics were painted
bright yellow."

Cheers to Peter Herdic, forgotten father of the Yellow Cab.

Source: 2009/12/english-teachers-

Title: English Teachers Are Such Jerks
Date: December 02, 2009

English teachers are such colossal jerks, at least whenever they appear in
movies. A case in point is Smart People (2008), which is the second-best
academic movie ever made in Pittsburgh (Wonder Boys is superior). Smart People
offers us a Carnegie-Mellon Professor of English, played by a shambling Dennis
Quaid, who is a depressed, angry, uncommunicative, and miserable being, and
who insults and patronizes both his students and his family. He's the perfect
embodiment of traditional and persistent American anti-intellectual stereotypes.
Book-learning has turned him into a mere grammarian, a pedant, who must learn
about "real life" from his rolling-stone, improvident, frequently-stoned but
streetsmart brother. Smart People is constructed around stereotypes that were
exhausted when Shakespeare created Holofernes and Sir Hugh Evans more than four
hundred years ago.

I've known a lot of English teachers -- some good, some bad -- but I've yet to
encounter the shallow stereotype.

English teachers make their way into a disproportionately large number of
movies. There are two reasons for this phenomenon. The first is that the writer
of the film wants to illustrate some thematic point, so he brings his characters
into a classroom where a pompous old fart or fartess can provide some cheap
laughs while explicating a poem or novel that is tangentially related to a point
the film is trying to make. The second reason is pure revenge. In films in which
English teachers figure, there's often --almost always, in fact -- a young man
whose writing is unappreciated by the narrow-minded professor. In Smart People,
he's the son of our own nasty hero, and his sparkling poem is published in the
New Yorker while his indifferent father is still waiting to hear whether his
critical-theory manuscript has been rejected yet once again. This character --
the brilliant but unappreciated young poet or playwright or novelist -- stands
in for the writer or director of the film, who is saying, in filmspeak, "look
at me now, you colossal jerk. I'm making movies and you're still back in high
school or at State U., grading freshman term papers. So there!!! That'll teach
you to give me a C+."

By the way -- Smart People is an intelligent, well-written film. I heartily
recommend it.

Source: 2009/12/dinner-conversation

Title: Dinner Conversation
Date: December 06, 2009

A:  Do you remember Walter Peter, used to teach history at the university?

B.  Yes, he had quite the reputation.

A.  Lazy as sin, among other things. I was his grader in the late 60s. He never
looked at a paper or at an exam. When a girl would complain about a grade, I'd
tell them to go see Professor Peter. Some of them would, some of them wouldn't
dare. There was this one young nubile maiden, very beautiful. She had a D on
the mid-term and didn't show up for the final, so of course I gave her an F.
She was one of those who were willing to see Professor Peter in his office. I
never heard back from her but eventually I took a look at the grade sheet. He
had changed her grade from F to B.  I asked him, how come?

B.  Did you get any kind of explanation?

A.  He said, I talked to her, and I felt sure she would have gotten an A on the
final, if she had taken it, so I changed her grade. He said it with a straight
face.

B.  I wonder if he thought you believed him.

A.  I don't think he even cared.

B.  Let me tell you my favorite plagiarism story. I was handed a paper which
began, "Moreover...."  Student just took a couple of paragraphs out of the
middle of a chapter. Didn't even bother to change the first word.

A.  There's also the story of the student who handed in a paper with the bill
from the ghost writer still in it.

B.  Here's one I heard from Don Baker.  He was teaching in  Mississippi,
early in his career. Freshman English. He receives identical papers from two
students in the same class. He gives an A to one and an F to the other. This
would be in the 1950s sometime. The F student comes into his office.  He says,
"Uh, uh, Mr. Baker.  I have a friend in the class. I sometimes study with him.
He, uh, uh, handed in a paper, kind of, uh, you know, similar to mine."  Baker
says, "and." The kid says, well, he got a much better grade than I did."  Baker
says, or at least he swears he says, "Oh, but I like him. And I don't like you."

Source: 2009/12/zebra

Title: The Chosen Zebra
Date: December 09, 2009

Ordinarily, I'm skeptical when supernatural images magically appear on everyday
objects. To me, such manifestations are perfectly explicable run-of-the-mill
instances of pareidolia.  [Pareidolia:  the tendency, inherent in the human
brain, to discover patterns (e.g. faces) in random markings.]  No matter how
intently I peer and squint, I simply cannot find the blessed virgin and her
child in the Ritz cracker. Nor in the stump of that felled yew in Donegal nor
in the water stain on the Samoan wall nor on the broken storm window in Jesup,
Georgia and certainly not in the miraculous bird dropping on the rear view
mirror of a pickup in Bryant, Texas. Not even in the revered and legendary 1978
Mexican tortilla. I am also willing to confess that although I haven't seen it
with my own eyes, I remain unpersuaded by the internationally-celebrated image
of Jesus in the partially-eaten toasted cheese sandwich that is reported to
have sold on Ebay for $28,000 and is now framed and publicly exhibited in the
Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino of Hollywood, Florida, where it amuses the
agnostics and wows the credulous.

In my conception, if the Ancient of Days had wanted to impress an image of his
very own filius unigenitus or of JC's tender and mild mom on breadstick or
bagel, cornbread or challah, he would have the made the representation clear
and distinct -- certainly not subject to dispute or interpretation or doubt or
skepticism. That's the way the Big Guy in the sky should operate when he's at
the top of his omnipotent game.

Which brings me to the illustration above, where, when you point and click, you
will encounter in sharp detail a  complete and perfect menorah incontrovertibly
etched, this Hanukkah season, on the port side of a zebra. No ifs, ands, buts,
or pareidolia.

Why a zebra, a creature not mentioned in the Holy Book?  Well, once again, the
L-rd moves in mysterious ways. If He chooses a zebra, who are We to question his
mighty decision?

Moreover, there's absolutely no question but that His menorah on a zebra beats
His Jesus on a toasted cheese sandwich all to heck.

Just sayin'.

Unless perhaps the Lord of Hosts uses photoshop?

Source: 2009/12/the-golden-age-of-sex-ed

Title: The Golden Age of Sex Ed
Date: December 17, 2009

I've been reading the novels of Edith Wharton. It's been one heck of a thrilling
experience. The Age of Innocence is a world-class masterpiece, as subtle a
novel as any that I've read in years, and The Buccaneers, which Wharton left
uncompleted at her death, is almost as good (fortunately, she left behind a
plot summary so we know how it was to conclude. Edith, couldn't you have hung
on for just a few more weeks?!) In addition, I was dazzled by The Reef and
The Children. Also a couple of volumes of short stories. I'm now reading the
very intriguing Glimpses of the Moon. And all the while, I'm wondering how I
could have passed over all this great stuff in my first seventy years and still
considered myself a serious reader. Wharton wrote forty books and I think that
until this month I had only read The House of Mirth, which, it turns out, is her
most notorious but not her finest work. But I'll give H of M another chance --
when I come to with new perspective.

Edith Wharton and her great contemporary Henry James are often bracketed  --
both of them upper-class New Yorkers and writers of "psychological" fiction.
I suppose there's some justice to the comparison, but I prefer to think of
Wharton's works as a culmination and also a critique of the great Victorian
novelistic tradition. One (of many reasons) is that nineteenth-century fictions
often revolve around the keeping of secrets. In the archetype, Mr. A loves Miss
B, and Miss B loves Mr. A, but some sort of social constraint forbids them
to acknowledge or to speak their love until 450 pages have elapsed. Wharton
repeatedly brings these conventions out into the open in order to rip them to
shreds. She scrutinizes and satirizes the imprisoning systems of manners (as
well as conventions of fiction) that the earlier era left unchallenged.  She
punctures taboos.

The secret that underlay all of those punishing proprieties was, in one form or
another, sex: sexual needs, sexual passions, sexual gratification. The godawful
messiness of it all.

When the twenty-three year old Edith Wharton was about to be married, she was
ignorant and terrified of sex (and this despite the fact that she was then
known, and I don't [and couldn't] make this up, as "Pussy" Jones ["Jones" as in
'keeping up with the Joneses', "Pussy" an affectionate diminutive certainly not
employed in its modern street-corner signification]). Like many another young
lady, she turned to her mother (in her case, Lucretia Rhinelander Jones, the
'best-dressed woman in New York') for advice.  The outcome was catastrophic.
So here it comes, sex ed in Victorian America, recollected in anything but
tranquility:

A few days before my marriage, I was seized with such a dread of the whole dark
mystery, that I summoned up courage to appeal to my mother, & begged her, with
a heart beating to suffocation, to tell me "what being married was like."  Her
handsome face at once took on the look of icy disapproval which I most dreaded.
"I never heard such a ridiculous question!" she said impatiently; & I felt at
once how vulgar she thought me.

But in my extremity of need I persisted.  "I'm afraid, Mamma---  I want to
know what will happen to me!"

The coldness of her expression deepened to disgust. She was silent for a
dreadful moment, then she said with an effort: "You've seen enough pictures and
statues in your life. Haven't you noticed that men are -- made differently from
women?"

"Yes," I faltered blankly.

"Well, then  ---?"

I was silent, from sheer inability to follow, & she brought out sharply: "Then
for heaven's sake don't ask me any more silly questions. You can't be as stupid
as you pretend."

The dreadful moment was over, & the only result was that I had been convicted of
stupidity for not knowing what I had been expressly forbidden to ask about, or
even to think of."

Poor dear Edith, our hearts go out to you and to all the maidens of the last
era. Her "heart beating to suffocation," her pathetic ignorant (not stupid, but
ignorant) inquiry, and the imperious mother hiding her embarrassment behind
an affectation of anger. O my!  Along with the ridiculous idea that furtive
(I'm sure) glances at "pictures and statues" could convey any bird-and-bee
information of value. Edith's derelict mom punted when she should have pulled
her goalie. She missed the "teachable moment." But then again, how do we know
what mamma Lucretia knew about sex. Perhaps she had nothing to offer. Perhaps
she was one of those Victorian ladies who was taught to lie back and think of
England (or, in her case, to think of Washington Square).

Pussy Jones's marriage to Teddy Wharton was a miserable failure. Some of Edith's
friends suspected that it was what used to be called a "mariage blanc" --
a marriage without sex. After twenty-eight years and, I'm glad to report,
a couple of fervent affairs, Edith divorced Teddy, by that time alcoholic,
manic- depressive, and institutionalized. Among her manuscripts Edith left an
unfinished pornographic fragment, Beatrice Palmato (which I have not yet read
but which is supposed to involve, double-eek!!!, father-daughter incest).

Edith Wharton's passage from unnaturally prolonged innocence to sexual
sophistication or perhaps even to sexual derangement summarizes, in little, a
big hunk of American social history. In the course of her lifetime, she had to
cope with revolutionary changes, and those changes provide the background for
some extraordinary and sometimes painful works of fiction.

So I will read on.

[Biographical details are from Hermione Lee, Edith Wharton (New York: Knopf,
2007).

Source: 2009/12/the-entirety-of-my-career-as-a-nude-model

Title: The Entirety of My Career as a Nude Model
Date: December 19, 2009

A friend of mine was teaching a course in life drawing and was having trouble
finding models. He asked me if I'd be willing to donate an hour. Hey, it was
the drug-crazed 1960s (or perhaps early 70s) and I had long since put modesty
behind. So I agreed.

It was odd to be naked  among a roomful of the clothed. I was more sensitive
to drafts than I would have guessed. It was difficult to remain motionless,
especially with all the houseflies a-lighting on the sensitive areas. It was
peculiar and a little flattering to have so many pairs of eyes fixed upon me.
However, my clearest memory is the student, a young woman, who at the end of the
hour, asked the teacher, "Next week, could you try to find someone with a more
interesting body?"

December 20.  I now realize that, bodywise, I have become more interesting over
the last forty years -- if interesting means lumpy, wrinkled, and asymmetrical.

Source: 2009/12/silliest-word-

Title: The Silliest Word in the Entire English Language, Bar None
Date: December 23, 2009

To decide upon the language's silliest word, many would steep themselves into
the gallimaufry that features such sesquipedalian monstrosities as mollycoddle,
liripoop, and kinnikinnick, but in my view such words are no more than flagrant
tomfoolery. (In point of fact, almost every word seems silly, if you just say
it over and over again, especially spoon, swivel, and sluice [just in the s's
alone]). A more promising category in which to delve is among those words that
ought, from their sound, mean something entirely other than they do, as for
example turdiform, titmouse, cacoethes, antimacassar and crepuscular. Some
words are silly because it is inherently ridiculous that their combination of
consonants and vowels should mean anything at all: usufruct, zeugma, ginkgo and
glebe fall into that unlovely grouping.

As a child, I thought that the silliest word in the English language was
"pumpernickel," but now I can make more mature judgments. I therefore announce
that the second most ridiculous word in English -- the penultimate -- is
"indubitably."  "Indubitably" is composed of a series of staccato syllables
that can only be spoken by a duchess, or a dandy wearing a tuxedo and a
monocle  -- or perhaps even a lorgnette. I have never heard anyone utter the
word "indubitably" with a straight face. It's a word that is intrinsically
litotic.

And now, after decades of pondering, I proclaim that the grand champion silliest
word in the English, and of this there can be no shadow of doubt, no possible
probable shadow of doubt, is: ointment.

The evidence?  Well, first of all, there's that wayward "oint." Except for
"oil" and oil-related words (oiler, oily), there are very few English words
that begin with "oi" --and for good reason. "Oi" lacks the dignity of more
imposing vowels. It's an unstable gliding sound, hard to fix in the mouth,
almost thriphthongic.  Moreover, "oint" comes perilously close to "oink" and
therefore reeks of the piggery. To couple "oint" with "ment" is to augment the
awkwardness. Most words that end in "ment" make obvious sense: battlement,
pavement, amazement, advancement. If the "ment" in ointment is such a suffix,
what, pray tell, is an "oint"?  And then there's that foolish near-congruence
of the first and second components of the word --its perfect and quintessential
spondeehood -- exaggerated by slant rhyme and the awkwardness of "nt"/"nt."
Altogether, "ointment" is indubitably absurd.

Etymology offers no solace. The silly thing came to us through Old French
"oignement" from late Latin "unguimentum" and from classical Latin
"unguentum."  "Ointment" may ultimately derive from an ancient root for butter.
Just as might be suspected, that first ludicrous "t" is an accident, having been
smuggled in, by analogy, from "anoint."

When Jean Lundegaard bites Gaear Grimsrud on the hand, he grunts, famously,
"Unguent, I need unguent." One hesitates to suggest an improvements to classic
dialogue, but, tell the truth, wouldn't the scene have been even funnier and
more memorable if Gaear had muttered, "Ointment, I need ointment?"  Especially
if the tip of his tongue had landed plosively on both of the lingual-palatal
stops?

Source: 2009/12/his-meanest-garment

Title: "His Meanest Garment."
Date: December 28, 2009

I was all alone for a week or so.

I'm not what you would call a spiffy dresser, even on the best of days, and
perhaps, solitary, I was even less attentive than usual to my presentation.
It is possible that I had neglected to comb my hair and it is also possible
that I hadn't shaved for a few days. I do know for sure that I was wearing my
favorite, familiar blue sweatshirt, the one with the hood, which is perhaps
fifteen years old and a trifle faded. It may even have had a stain or two on its
sagging front -- perhaps jam or spaghetti sauce or something equally tasty. The
veteran sweatshirt may also have been slightly frayed at the sleeves -- but it
is, or was, in my opinion, a very wearable garment.

In any case, one morning last week I took a walk over to Breadworks, my
favorite establishment for day-old muffins. I set down my notebook, which is, I
admit, slightly chewed, on a vacant table, noting that the next table over was
occupied, but at that moment only by a plate of eggs and a cup of coffee, the
customer no doubt hunting up more food or making a quick trip to the bathroom.
I dug into a stack of used newspapers, came up with yesterday's Camera and sat
down to read.

And then my putative neighbor, the young woman who must have previously claimed
the next table, returned. She took a long look at me. I smiled slightly, as one
does in such situations.  She quickly gathered her plate and coffee and moved
to a vacant table three over from me.

Oh my gosh! I know exactly what she was thinking. "Homeless." "Loathsome."

How awful it must be to be regularly and unapologetically shunned!

My daughters have been visiting this week. I hadn't even mentioned this
incident, but they independently took one look at my well-worn-in stained
garment and quite spontaneously trotted off to Army-Navy store just off the
Pearl Street Mall and came home with a brand new Carhart sweatshirt, which after
a few years of use will become a new favorite. The old blue friend-of-long-
standing is in the rag bag.

I can now I enter any coffee shop in our fair city and proudly rejoin the
respectable citizenry. Or should I say the fastidious citizenry?

Source: 2007/05/boustrophedonia.html

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."