

================================================================================Source: 2010/01/another-visit-to-the-coffee-shop

Title: Another Visit to the Coffee Shop
Date: January 01, 2010

Reading at one of our local Starbucks, I was, as is often the case, lost in my
book. But I looked up when a late 20s-early 30s blonde and bearded man sat down
at a table across the way. I noticed that he was holding his cup of coffee in an
odd way. And then I realized that where his right hand should have been there
were a pair of stainless steel hooks. Sad, I thought. And yet he seemed cheerful
and optimistic. I wondered if I would be in such good spirits if I had lost a
hand in an accident. I went back to reading, but looked up again when he fumbled
with the sleeves of his jacket. And then I saw that he had no left hand either.
Instead, a  pair of hooks, left and right, where hands and fingers should be.
What terrible accident could have caused a young man to lose both hands, I
wondered. Perhaps I was more sensitive than usual, but I was moved almost to
tears as I watched him manipulate his coffee and his napkin and his muffin with
his mechanical prosthetics. Soon his young and attractive girlfriend joined him.
She came on aluminum crutches. "Must have broken her foot," I thought. Then I
saw that there was no foot and that she had only one leg.

I'm slow, but I figured it out at last.

Soldiers. Home from Iraq. Bombs -- IEDs --  took off his hands and her leg.
They met at a rehabilitation hospital. Fell in love. They're trying to start
life over again.

I'm not ashamed that I turned away and started to cry.

And then grief converted to anger.

That damned useless war! That idiot ignoramus Bush! That villain Cheney!. Those
two megalomaniacs, and their co-conspirators,  who started this war -- they're
sitting pretty right now, aren't they? But these young folks right next to me --
they're not sitting so comfortably. They've paid the price.

Belatedly, I wish them all the joy that life can offer. As for crazy George and
strutting Dick, there's no penalty that they can pay, there's no retribution
sufficient -- but if their pernicious bodies would rot half a centimeter a day,
why, that would be a start.

Source: 2010/01/wellaged-outrage

Title: Well-aged Outrage
Date: January 04, 2010

Another day, another solicitation  from Cornell, the university that I attended
back there in the Bronze Age 1950s. I've got to admire their tenacity -- they've
been holding out the tin cup for fifty years and I've never dropped in a nickel.
Not even a copper.

Why so negligent? Well, there are a number of reasons. The first, and probably
most important, is that I took my education so seriously that I became a
teacher, and as a result,  I never accumulated the kind of dough that would
make the least impression on a multi-billion dollar endowment. A second reason:
I sent my daughter to Cornell during the 1980s (at what now seems like the
bargain rate of only $20,000 - $25,000 a year), and the total four-year cost of
her stay was a sufficient contribution to the ole alma mater. And finally, other
causes felt more pressing (last year, for example, Obama, and this year, helping
to keep our state legislature blue). But these reasons are mere rationalization
and excuse, for, truth to tell, I bear a grudge against Cornell. Let me unclasp
a secret book and tell you about it.

In my first year at Cornell, I shared a room in an all-freshman dormitory. It
was not gracious living, but I hadn't expected it to be. Cinder-block walls,
composition floors, cheap extruded-aluminum furniture. Worst of all, the doors
were fragile, hollow-core, and were always busting. I busted one -- I slid a
piece of furniture and sliced a hole into the 1/8" plywood sheathing of Room
2117. (Whose brilliant idea was it to put fragile doors in the way of a thousand
adolescent males?) Anyway, some guys came to fix the hole, which they did by
gluing a 2" by 6" piece of plywood ONTO THE SURFACE OF THE DOOR. Talk about
craftsmanship!

But here's the rub. I was billed $10 for the so-called repair. $10.00?  Not so
much, you say?  Well, I was then employed at $1.25 an hour, so the perfunctory
repair, which couldn't have taken five minutes to complete, represented the
before-tax wages of a full day's labor. (Further context: the rent for my half
of the room was $315 for the 32-week school year, or less than $10 a week.) 
Plus the bill was sent directly to my father, who was scrimping to send me
whatever bucks he could afford and didn't need to know that I had wasted $10
laying waste to the elegant decor.

I was outraged. I'm still outraged.

Hey, Cornell. Make it up to me. Do the right thing. When you've contrived an
apology and a recompense, well, then, maybe we can start to talk about possible
donations.

Source: 2010/01/a-melancholy-errand

Title: A Melancholy Errand
Date: January 08, 2010

Before Grandma died, she specified cremation and asked that her ashes be divided
between the graves of her husband Dan and her daughter Phyllis. Now the time has
come to fulfill the first half of the assignment. We'll fly to NYC later this
month. We'll make a pilgrimage to the Baron Hirsch cemetery on Staten Island,
scatter a portion of the ashes, leave behind a ceremonial stone or two, and
think thoughts as positive as the occasion will allow.

However, in the light of the Detroit plane incident, I'm concerned about
carrying a box of white powder on board. Am I paranoid? is it completely nuts to
imagine that some vigilant but misguided TSA employee will take a gander at the
ashes and think "anthrax" or "explosives." Take me into that little room where
they peruse your "body cavities." And then on to Gitmo.

Apparently, I'm not the only person with this worry.

"Passengers are allowed to carry a crematory container as part of their
carry-on luggage, but the container must pass through the X-ray machine. If the
container is made of a material that generates an opaque image and prevents
the security screener from clearly being able to see what is inside, then the
container cannot be allowed through the security checkpoint." Is our container
sufficiently transparent? How would one know?

Instead of carrying the ashes aboard, why don't we just check them through?

"Some airlines do not allow cremated remains as checked baggage so please check
with your air carrier before attempting to transport a crematory container
in checked baggage." Why would United Airlines care whether I put ashes in
my bags?  It's obvious -- they lose the luggage and then we sue them for
zillions.  How about if I promise not to sue?

I'm going to guess that it's not a good idea to sew the "cremains" -- hideous
neologism -- into my underwear.

OK, here's the plan.  We take a symbolic portion the ashes, secure it in a
transparent ziploc baggie, and insert a visible all-caps large-font note: "These
are Grandma's ashes. They are not dangerous. Feel free to examine or to sample."

Incidentally, I can offer no confirmation to the rumor that the Department of
Transportation plans to ban all underwear. Or that it will insist that underwear
be worn on the outside. These are vicious canards.

Source: 2010/01/haute-cuisine-c-1945

Title: Haute Cuisine, c. 1945
Date: January 09, 2010

A friend of long standing (a Shakespeare scholar) has posted a recipe for a
dish that she calls grieven but which was known as gribbinis in our part of the
world. It was a staple of my childhood, perhaps even my favorite food. Gribbinis
also linked me to my grandma. Inasmuch as she didn't speak the only language I
knew, it was natural and appropriate for us to bond over food.

"Accumulate a cup or two of chicken fat. Render the fat in a pan with about an
equal amount of chopped onion. Slowly heat the fat and onions over a low
flame, being careful not to let the mixture ignite. The onion will turn golden,
then brown, and some of the fat will become crisp."

My friend suggests serving the resulting mixture over mashed potatoes,
but for grandma and me the preferred vehicle was a hefty portion of about 3/4
grated black radish and 1/4 onion--along with some black bread to sop up the
grease. I thought it was a delicacy for a king, not knowing, then, that it was a
dish for an impoverished  peasant in a Ukrainian shtetl.

Black radish? Not a vegetable familiar to you? Black on the outside, white on
the inside, turnip-size. Very, very, very, pungent. Not widely used here in
North America, nowadays, but apparently still common in eastern Europe, where
mouths are more acclimated than ours to allyl isothiocyanates.

Whenever I'm among folks who make a fetish of  food preparation, I fantasize
about taking them home and plunking down a trough-size trencher of black radish,
onions, and gribbinis.

Would that be hostility? Possibly, just the merest tad. Or perhaps just a need
to remind myself where I came from when, perchance, I find myself among tender
and exquisite palates.

Source: 2010/01/marijuana

Title: The Shop on the Corner
Date: January 11, 2010

From our window, looking left across the street, we can see a squat old cinder-
block building that sits diagonally on its corner lot.  I remember when it
housed a gas station, then a taqueria, and afterward, for at least a decade, an
import rug store that was always 'going out of business,' until, contrary to
all expectations, it went out of business. The building lay vacant for a year
or so, but now it's found a new purpose. It's a medical marijuana "dispensary."
(Marijuana, when used for the relief of pain or nausea, is legal in Colorado).

When we're curious, and willing to make the effort, we watch the arrival of the
chronically afflicted patients. The are uniformly youthful and they come by car,
on foot, on bicycle, on skates or skateboard or scooter. The only vehicle in
which they don't arrive is the wheelchair.

In fact, neither "our" dispensary nor any other dispensary bothers to pretend
that their product (aka stash) is anything but recreational. GreenLeaf Farmacy,
for example, advertises Kief Hash! at $25/gram. Boulder Wellness Center offers
"High Quality Medical Marijuana: Tinctures, Vaporizers, Ointments, Teas, and
More." TopShelf Alternatives competes at $10/Gram and with "your choice of 34
home grown strains. Edibles include Mile High Ice Cream." DrReefer specializes
in "clones." Boulder MM Dispensary is "an upscale establishment with high
quality medicine."  Colorado Patients First, "where compassion for patients and
quality of medicine comes first," offers "Sour Kush, Big Blue, Opium, AK-47,
Maui Mist, Jack White, and Pot of Gold." For each painful disease, apparently,
its own uniquely targeted variety of ganja. To judge by the exuberance of the
clientele, the "medicines" must be alleviating tons of pain.

How did it happen?  Some years ago, voters approved an amendment to the
state constitution legalizing the medical use of marijuana. The argument was
compelling (and I voted for it).  Marijuana mitigates chronic pain and also
minimizes the nausea that accompanies chemotherapy. Until this year, the state's
Department of Public Health had limited individual physicians to five such
suffering patients. But then a judge ruled that the constitutional amendment
did not impose such limits, and, in the words of John Milton, "all hell broke
loose."

There's no zoning (as with liquor outlets), no sin tax (because marijuana is a
prescription drug), and no decorum.

"The latest data from the Medical Marijuana Registry maintained by the Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment shows that as of Dec. 15, 2009, 
a total of 820 licensed physicians had authorized medical marijuana for 15,800
patients. Of those 820 physicians, just 15 accounted for 73 percent of total
patients, and just five have authorized 49 percent of all recommendations."
There are now more than eighty marijuana dispensaries in our town. (There are
just ten traditional pharmacies.) It makes one wonder about the size of the
underground economy.

It's the Wild West -- unregulated, unbridled capitalism!  It's a growth
industry!

It's also massively hypocritical.

Why don't we just legalize marijuana, and then regulate and tax it the way we do
liquor and tobacco? Of course, neither liquor nor tobacco pays its way -- the
social cost of both drugs well exceed their revenues -- but that's a topic for
another day.

There are bills in the legislature to regulate the marijuana industry and
everyone knows that within a year there will be tight new restrictions. But
until then, we will much enjoy the scene at the corner store.

[Update March 15, 2023.  Pearl Maneli writes:  MMJ, as it's often called, is now
legal in Colorado, but the store visible from our window no longer sells it; the
building has been transformed into an upscale i.e. expensive pizzeria.]

Source: 2010/01/sa

Title: Salad Daze
Date: January 15, 2010

What would prompt a guy to dream that his carrots were growing upside-down?
Their abundant orange roots pointing straight into the air?  What point is my
dreamatorium trying to make?  In this particular nightmare, I'm absolutely
perplexed about photosynthesis. If they're upside-down, how do they..?

There's more. In the dream, my lettuce is growing right-side-up, but it's
encrusted with some sort of white stuff that forms a collar around the base of
the plant.

Courageously, I taste it. It's -- by gosh -- feta cheese. Salty, but still quite
good.

What the heck?

Source: 2010/01/wharton-horses

Title: The "Motor" vs. the Horse
Date: January 18, 2010

Edith Wharton loved the "motor" but never lost her nostalgia for the horse drawn
vehicles of her youth.

A passage in A Backward Glance (1932) conveys the novelty and thrill of her
virgin voyage.

"There were no motors in 1903; but as a toy for the rich they were beginning to
appear. My old friend George Meyer was the owner of a magnificent specimen. I
had never been in a motor before, and could hardly believe that we were to do
the run from Rome to Caprarola and back (fifty miles each way) in an afternoon.
The car was probably the most luxurious, and certainly one of the fastest, then
procurable; but that meant only a sort of high-perched phaeton without hood or
screen, or any protection from the wind. I had the high seat like a coachman's
box. Off we tore across the Campagna, over humps and bumps, through ditches
and across gutters, windswept, dust-enveloped, I clinging to my sailor hat. I
spent the next days in bed, fighting an acute laryngitis. In spite of this I
swore then and there that as soon as I could make money enough, I would buy a
motor, and having a delicate throat, scoured the country in the hottest weather
swaddled in a stifling hood with a mica window, till some benefactor of the race
invented the wind-screen and made motoring an unmixed joy."

The early twentieth-century "motor" was hectic, prone to breakdowns, and
erratic. In contrast, the vehicles of Newport, Rhode Island of Wharton's
aristocratic youth were dignified and stately, as much for display as for
utility. "Young ladies, married or single, expected to be taken for an afternoon
drive by the master of the house. The vehicles of the fashionable young men
were either dog-carts (drawn by a pair driven tandem) or a high four-wheeled
conveyance called a T-cart, which was drawn by one big stepper, while the older
men drove handsome phaetons with a showy pair, and an impressive groom with
folded arms in the rumble. Carriages, horses, harness and grooms were all of the
latest and most irreproachable cut, and Bellevue Avenue was a pretty scene when
the double line of glittering vehicles and showy horse-flesh paraded between
green lawns and scarlet geranium borders."

"Dog-cart?" "Phaeton?"  T-cart?"  What do these words signify?  And moreover,
what the heck was a daumont, "preceded by outriders, which swayed gracefully on
its big C-springs to the rhythm of four high-stepping and highly-groomed horses,
a postilion on one of the leaders, and two tremendous footmen perched high at
the back."

For more philosophizing on these nineteenth-century horse drawn conveyances,
click here.

Source: 2010/01/big-miller-

Title: One Heck of a Big Miller
Date: January 22, 2010

The miller in The Miller of Angibault is, according to George Sand, really,
really huge. "The big miller descended, stretching, from his corn-loft, cracking
the joints of his long arms and legs. He was well-proportioned, robust, easy in
his movements, and strikingly featured. This specimen of the countryside was
remarkable for a region whose inhabitants are generally on the short side." 
How tall was this "tall miller?"

Nineteenth-century novelists rarely give us hard data, but George Sand provides
the exact measurement for this "specimen." "Grand-Louis" is exactly five feet
eight inches tall!

Le Meunier d'Angibault was written in 1844. It's in Thackeray's Pendennis
(1850), I think,  that one of the female characters is described as a "maypole"
of five feet four inches.

I wonder how tall Shakespeare imagined Helena -- the famous "painted maypole"
of A Midsummer Night's Dream.  Probably just as tall as the boy who played the
part, but how much would that be in inches?

Height is believed to have increased a centimeter a decade in western Europe
from 1850 to 1950.  Is it possible that the great heroes of antiquity --
Hector, Samson etc. -- were all under five feet tall?  My grandfather was just
a hair above five feet tall.

The average height of American males was 5' 8" in 1960 and is 5' 9 1/2" today. 
How tall would a Louis have to be today to be called Grand-Louis?

Source: 2010/01/a-visit-to-the-post-office-

Title: A Visit to the Post Office
Date: January 25, 2010

Package to mail, so off I go to the post office. When I arrived, eight people
are on line ahead of me. I took my place. There were only two clerks on duty
and let me tell you they were not breaking any speed records. They were moving
as though through mucilage. If I had to guess, I'd say that they were working
at just above the speed in which all molecular motion ceases. Their pace seemed
carefully calibrated, as if in answer to the implicit question, "what's the
least possible amount of energy I can expend and still retain my job?"  There
was some grumbling on the line: "Only two clerks on duty!" It took me twenty-
five minutes but I completed my transaction. When I left, there were ten people
behind me, letters or packages in hand, shuffling and stamping their collective
frustrated feet.

How much time wasted?  Well, here were nineteen productive citizens taking
twenty minutes or half an hour to do five minutes worth of work. You do the
calculation. If there had been another clerk, and if the clerks were to move at
normal human speed, I would have been in and out in a flash. Multiply the TWF
(time waste factor) by all the post office stations in urban America. What an
astonishing, third-world loss of productivity.

The post office has been essentially privatized. It's not allowed to run a
deficit, so it cuts back on services and continues to raise the cost of mailing
an envelope. And makes people wait.

But it retains from its former incarnation the lifetime-employment uncivil-
service mentality. It combines the worst of free enterprise with the worst of
public ownership. It's a truly remarkable solution to the implicit question, can
we design a completely dysfunctional bureaucracy?

About a decade ago, some idealistic postmaster-general announced a campaign
to serve every customer within ten minutes of arrival. To that end, a large
clock was set in a prominent spot in the every office in the land (in ours, just
where the line commences).  A big PR fuss was made. About a year later, all
the clocks were quietly removed.  I wonder, where did they go. Does the USPS
maintain an old clock warehouse somewhere in central Nebraska? Or were they
discarded? Or taken home by the local postmasters. In any case, the campaign was
a total disaster. The system did not move.

The USPS didn't even do a good job of removing the clocks. When I stand in line,
I stare at a wire sticking out of the wall where a clock used to hang.  I stare
at it for ten minutes, for twenty minutes, for half an hour....

Source: 2010/01/another-long-night

Title: Another Long Night
Date: January 27, 2010

Last night, I had a specific sense that I hadn't been sleeping in clover.
I worried for hours and I worried about everything. I started, I think, by
brooding on the inevitability of a comet striking the earth and extinguishing
life as we know it. From there I moved to the collapse of the ecosyste. The
earth will soon (in geological terms) be hot, waterless, and lifeless. In
the nearer future, monsoons, tornadoes, tsunamis, hurricanes and other "acts
of god" will occur with increasing frequency. My pillow was hot, and the bed
sheet somehow managed to tangle itself around my legs.  I worried about the
possibility of nuclear weapons or vials of botulism falling into the hands
of jihadists. I worried about the declining population of our swifts and
swallows, our frogs and toads, our bats and bees and about the certainty that
the Asian longhorn beetle is about to do to the maples what the blight did to
the magnificent chestnuts and the Dutch elm disease did to ulmus americanus. Not
to mention the wooly adelgid that is intent on making hash of our hemlocks. I
worried about the decline of the American economy, about the rebirth of bigotry
and know-nothingism among the Republicans and about the pitiful fecklessness
of the Democrats. I was working myself up to quite a state, sweating into my
blankets. What about our radical-reactionary-interventionist supreme court?
Oh my gosh, I forgot to worry about all those poor people in Haiti! At about
four in the morning, I switched to more local worries: my apical hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, my increasing failure of memory, and my lifelong tendency
toward procrastination, once resisted but now re-emerging with a vengeance. I
reviewed the recent deaths and diseases among my age-cohort of friends:  --
K's polycynthemia vera, R's brain tumor, S's alcoholism, J's obstructed colon,
B's shingles, C's lung cancer, my brother's sudden death of stroke or embolism
or who knows what it was. I thought of the friends to whom I should have been
more kind, more concerned. I worried about my children and grandchildren, all
apparently thriving, but you never know. I fell in and out of sleep. I got up
and paced.

Toward dawn, I straightened the bedclothes, took a leak, ate some yogurt, and
tried again. I woke up in a cold sweat, having dreamed that I was painfully
plucking hairs out of my lips. Not hairs, exactly. More like boar's bristles.
And that every handful of bristles was infested with spiders and other verminous
insects.  Eew, hairy lips. How disgusting.

I did not worry about dying.

Death: no more nightmares, no more insomnia, forever.

Source: 2010/01/reposted-salinger

Title: Reposted:  Salinger
Date: January 28, 2010

J. D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye is an anti-bildungsroman -- a "novel
of education" without the least shred of moral, intellectual, or spiritual
growth. Holden Caulfield, the novel's naive yet jaded narrator, learns
absolutely nothing either about himself or about life. Unable to profit from
his various encounters, he dismisses almost everyone he meets as "phony."
That one adjective, repeated incessantly and ad nauseam, might lead a reader
to hope that Holden will find authenticity somewhere in his horizon, but The
Catcher in the Rye is not a novel that rewards optimism.  It concludes with
a vision of Holden's pre-pubescent sister Phoebe going "round and round" on a
symbolic carousel-- going nowhere, it would seem -- and in a brief coda Holden
himself has been institutionalized and placed under the care of an unsympathetic
psychoanalyst. Nor does the whiff of Humbertism in the relation between Holden
and young Phoebe contribute any last-second learning or cheer.

Even in the 1950s, The Catcher in the Rye enjoyed a cadre of fiercely loyal
partisans who powerfully identified with Holden Caulfield. I didn't believe
then, and certainly don't believe now, that Holden mirrored the anguish of my
own particular soul. I was not a true believer, and I was not entranced by
Holden. For me, the novel was nothing more than a better-than-average coming-of-
age story -- although a dispiriting one because Holden Caulfield does not mature
but instead remains stranded in perpetual, painful adolescence.

A novel without hope, The Catcher in the Rye has become an inspiration for the
hopeless. In Los Angeles, in 1989, twenty-one-year-old Robert Bando shot and
killed a young actress whom he had been pestering with trinkets and messages.
In a nearby alley, police found a .357-caliber handgun, a bloody shirt, and
a copy of The Catcher in the Rye. Two years later, John Hinckley shot and
crippled James Brady and almost succeeded in assassinating Ronald Reagan.
Hinckley had fantasized that killing the president would impress the actress
Jodie Foster, whom he imagined that he was wooing. In his pocket he carried
a well-read, tattered paperback of -- you guessed it --The Catcher in the
Rye. In 1980, on Manhattan's West Side, Mark David Chapman, concealing his
pistol under a copy of The Catcher in the Rye, shot John Lennon five times at
point blank. He had inscribed his copy of the novel with the words "To Holden
Caulfield from Holden Caulfield" -- Chapman had tried to legally change his
name to that of Salinger's troubled narrator. From jail, the proud murderer
issued an endorsement: "My wish is for all of you to someday read The Catcher
in the Rye."  At his trial Chapman asserted that he had killed Lennon because
the singer had become "phony," and at his sentencing he read to the judge the
section of the book in which Holden tells his sister Phoebe that he imagined
himself in a field of rye with "thousands of little kids" whom he must prevent
from falling off "the edge of some crazy cliff."

The Catcher in the Rye still sells well (15,000,000 copies in print by 1996) and
has become a fixture in the high school and college classroom, where successive
generations of adolescents can calibrate their degree of angst against Holden's.
But increasingly, and paradoxically, attention has turned from the novel to
Salinger himself, who has not published anything since 1965 and, secluded in his
Cornish, New Hampshire retreat, has become the world's most notorious hermit
since St. Simeon Stylites mounted his pillar in sixth-century Antioch. Although
he is a hermit, Salinger is anything but a saint. In 1987, in a bizarre echo
of Holden-obsessed stalkers, Salinger, then sixty-eight years old, flew to
California and barged onto the set of the TV show Dynasty in search of one of
the series's starlets, Catherine Oxenberg, with whom he had apparently fallen
into long-distance electronic infatuation. He was "escorted" off the set.
Did Catherine Oxenberg have a precursor?  She did, indeed she did. Several,
in fact, including Joyce Maynard, described as "the Lolita of all Lolitas,"
who was eighteen and a freshman at Yale in 1972 when Salinger, at the age of
fifty- three, initiated a romance by sending her a fan letter. These and other
even less savory details about Caulfield-Salinger's life can be found in Paul
Alexander's thin, amateurish biography Salinger (Los Angeles: Renaissance Books,
1999), which does not propose, although it might, that J. D. has learned as
little about life as his most famous character.

Source: 2010/01/complimentcomplement

Title: Compliment/Complement
Date: January 29, 2010

Here is a sentence drawn from a contract for new condominium construction.
"The laundry room flooring is a composition tile called Stonewalk; it is a
warm light color that compliments all of the wood floor options." And here's a
second sentence from the same contract: "bedroom carpets are a warm light color
that compliments all of the wood floor options."  Compliments?  As every
schoolchild is taught, "to compliment" means "to praise."  The wording of the
contract therefore asserts that Stonewalk, a composition tile, speaks highly of
the wooden floor. The bedroom carpets join in the chorus of adulation. No doubt
that it's a praiseworthy floor, but are the warm light carpets and the warm
light tiles fully qualified to make so positive a determination?

Surely the highly-skilled and well-compensated lawyers who drew up the contract
meant to write (if they subscribe to conventional canons of usage) that "the
color of Stonewalk complements the color of the floors." That is to say, the one
color "completes" or "makes perfect" the other.

For example:  you may compliment the sommelier, but the sauvignon rouge
complements the rosbif or the biftek. Them's the official rules.

But should they be?  Is the distinction between compliment and complement
meaningful? Or is it pedantic and arbitrary?

What can history tell us about these twins?

In Shakespeare's Love's Labor's Lost, Don Adriano de Armado is "a refined
traveler of Spain..., /That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;/ One whom the
music of his own vain tongue/ Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;/ [He is]
a man of complements."  But is a "man of complements" a courteous man who
offers gratuitous compliments, or is he rather a fulfilled or a complete man. 
Clearly, Shakespeare's word conflates the two meanings. A second example, this
one from King Lear:  "There is further complement of leave-taking between
Burgundy and [Lear]."  Does "complement" mean, "politeness" or "formal
civility," which would be "compliment";  or does it mean that Burgundy and Lear
have finished or completed or brought to perfection their parting sentences? 
Once again, both meanings are possible. Examples of such blurring can be
multiplied. Falstaff (in The Merry Wives of Windsor) says this: "I see you are
obsequious in your love and I profess requital to a hair's breadth; not only,
Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
complxment, and ceremony of it."  Complement, compliment; take your pick. 
Either is possible;  both make perfectly good sense.

It's obvious that the doctrinaire distinction between the spellings has been
imposed since the time of Shakespeare. In fact, the dictionaries tell us
that the introduction of a second, separate word is an example of learned
Frenchification. OED:  "Compliment (Fr) is a doublet of complement (the form
directly from Latin). The latter was in use before the introduction of the
French form, which slowly took its place between 1635 and 1715." The twins have
been, and still are, closer in meaning than traditionalists allow (which is why
the condo contract writers got it, so to speak, "wrong").

What to do?  My suggestion: let's overleap the conservatives and embrace the
truly reactionary. Let's declare that from now on, "compliment" and "complement"
are, just as they used to be, one and the same word.  No more racking the
brains over "i" and "e," no more anxiety, no more guilt.

Let the word go forth that from this moment on, tiles and carpets are free to
complement or to compliment floors -- just as they prefer.

Source: 2010/01/this-old-house

Title: This Old House
Date: January 31, 2010

"It was irresponsible for me to have bought this house," he thought. "And yet
it is so glamorous, so desirable.  I should have inspected it more closely. 
There are many parts of the building that I've never even looked into. Take
this room, for example.  It's far too long and narrow to be useful  I must
have been attracted to the bookshelf and to the books. But now that I look
closely, I see that the books are tattered and  worthless. I thought that they
were valuable, but they're just thrift store discards. And the kitchen -- I
don't think it's functional. These hand-carved boards, which I thought were so
beautiful -- they obstruct the sink and the stove. I'll have to remove them. And
in this room -- what is it, a bedroom? -- the murals are nothing more than the
scrawls of children. What could I have been thinking? I have purchased a house
that is a shambles. It's going to cost me a fortune just to make it habitable.
Look, in the living room the wallpaper is pulled off and the lath is exposed.
And here, in the grand ballroom, there's been leakage around the window frames.
This huge fireplace is falling in. This passageway, which ought to go to the
nursery --it's been blocked off. And this sitting room has no outside wall. No
protection from the weather at all. The wind could blow right through. It was
self-destructive of me to buy this house. It's financial suicide. What could
have attracted me to it? Let's walk around the outside. There are entrances that
I didn't know existed. Anyone could come in. It's not secured; there are no
locks, no doors. And a garage -- but the garage floor isn't concrete or paved
-- it's just sand and rocks. And this outside wall, which I took for marble
or granite -- it's just old loose, cracked, unpainted stucco. The yard is a
complete wreck -- all concrete and razor-wire, nothing alive. Who's that strange
man prowling around?  Why was I attracted to this place?  Why do I still find
it alluring, despite everything that I know about it?"

Later, we all went for a drive in the mountains. It was cold and the roads were
completely covered with snow and almost impassable. We arrived too late for the
party. "Let's all meet at the Unitarian church," one of the other guests said.
"I'm going to kill me a chicken," said another.

Source: 2010/01/tendentious

Title: Tendentiousness
Date: February 01, 2010

Here's verbatim quotation from the Camera, our hometown newspaper.  "Willcock
[CU Buffs' trainer] said I bruised something on the side of my leg," [Alec]
Burks said. "I've got real bad tendentious in my leg. He said he thought I
pulled something."

Nothing worse for team solidarity than a tendentious leg in constant squabble
with a doctrinaire ankle and an argumentative hip.

Tendonitis is no doubt the word in question. Once again, the spellcheck fairy
has waved the wand and produced nonsense.

Does the Camera employ human beings as editors? It would seem that it does not.

Source: 2010/02/insects-drugs-science-fiction

Title: Insects, Drugs, Science Fiction
Date: February 08, 2010

In the course of their long evolution our insect friends solved the problem of
adolescence.While we humans grow ever so awkwardly from childhood to sexual
maturity, your efficient, clever insect larva merely sequesters himself for a
few weeks or months and then emerges as a completely fledged adult. No whining,
no rebellion, no pimples, no door-slamming -- one day a child, and then, presto,
a full member of society. There's not a beetle on what Antigonus called "the
whole dungy earth" who ever had to "find himself."

I wish that my own pupa-hood had been so quick and painless, but in fact, it
was a commonplace mix of anxious folly and meaningless alienation. My most
successful strategy for coping with the mess was to escape into the imagination.
Not my own imagination, of course, for I had little or none, but into other
people's. In my pupal stage, I was an indiscriminate reader of the genre known
as fantasy and science fiction. Inhabiting, as I did, the wrong body, and having
been birthed in the wrong time and place, I preferred fantastic alternative
universes to so-called "real life." I subscribed to a bunch of pulp mags and I
also gobbled the extensive collections of sci-fi in the local public library.
Not everyone will recognize the writers who were then my literary heroes,
but for me they were names as familiar as Koufax and Drysdale or, for that
matter, Truman and Eisenhower. Does anyone out there remember these folks:
Robert Heinlein, James Blish, L. Sprague de Camp, Richard Matheson, Isaac
Asimov, Robert Sheckley, Arthur C. Clarke, William Tenn, Poul Anderson, Fredric
Brown, Fritz Leiber, Theodore Sturgeon, Clifford D. Simak, Fletcher Pratt, Ray
Bradbury?  Names to conjure with, so to speak.

Here's a paradox. While I vividly recall the names of these authors, I can
remember almost nothing of what they wrote. I was fully immersed in the genre
and yet it's evaporated from my memory -- leaving less of a mark than does
the grub that becomes a butterfly. I seem to recall a novel or story about a
planet in which the trees were murderous -- they would send their roots through
ventilating ducts and strangle people in their beds. I have a hazy recollection
of a story about a society in which overconsumption was the norm and in which to
take a sofa and a set of chairs off the hands of newlyweds was an act of love.
I recall some precocious evil children endowed with supernatural powers. Do I
remember, or do I just imagine that I much admired a story about human beings
shrunk to infinitesimal size who had to go mano-a-flagellum with paramecia. I'm
certain that I encountered a superfluity of post-apocalyptic stories: after
the A-bomb, after the plague, after the invasion from another planet -- all
such fictions obvious symptoms of cold-war paranoia. Why in the world should
an adolescent earthling have consoled himself with stories of extragalactic
invaders spaceshipping to our green earth to exploit, or colonize, or enslave,
or, occasionally, to butcher and stew us? In the 1950s, aliens were always
hostile. None of my authors, as far as I can remember, could envision them
greeting us with the outstretched tentacle of peace.

Although I think that some of the stories were imaginative, most of them were no
more than starwarslike space operas-- Westerns but with death rays instead of
six-shooters.

It's been many a year since I could abide fantasy. The genre is now repugnant to
me.  I can't read Tolkien or Harry Potter, I can't watch movies about ghosts,
or satanic possession, or space travel, or time travel, or about people stuck
in other peoples' bodies. All such nonsense bores the living heck out of me.
Nor is it merely the lowbrow stuff. I can no longer read Spenser or Ariosto
and my least favorite character in Shakespeare is the magician Prospero. Is it
a failure of imagination on my part?  Perhaps. But I don't feel it as a loss.
There's more than enough of the non-fantastic to keep me joyfully occupied. I'm
grateful that sci-fi served my pupal needs, but it's gone forever.

Nowadays I tend to think back to my adolescent reading only when I'm at the
drugstore filling a prescription. The names of the new concoctions devised
by Big Pharma all sound extraterrestrial to me. For example: Cyclessa is the
queen of the distant planet Pulmicort which circles around the star Ativan in
the galaxy called Levaquin. Cyclessa’s evil brother Coumadin, along with his
henchmen the evil twins Zantac and Zocor, have attacked the queen, using their
secret weapons Restoril and Ritalin. They're accompanied by the enchantress
Ambien, aka Zolpidem, who causes her enemies to fall into profound sleep. But
deep in the forest, young Prozac awakens from a spell, mounts the great horse
Oxycontin, and with the aid of his sidekick, the amusing but randy Cialis, who
has escaped from the clutches of the evil witch Prevacid....  Etc., etc.

Source: 2010/02/alliterative-nba-allstars

Title: Alliterative NBA All-Stars
Date: February 10, 2010

Everyone out there in Bloglandia has been eagerly awaiting my NBA All-Star team
chosen to accord with the template, A**** A****, B**** B****, so here it is at
last:

Centers:  Moses Malone, Alvan Adams, Darrell Dawkins.

Forwards:  Paul Pierce, Bill Bradley, Happy Hairston, Joe Johnson, Walt
Williams, Dale Davis.

Guards:  Rajon Rondo, George Gervin, Gale Goodrich, Lafayette (Fat) Lever,
Steve Smith, Wally Walker.

Coach:  Scott Skiles.

If anyone can suggest important additions to this list, I'd be mighty grateful.

February 11.  Spike Cohen writes:  "inasmuch as the spoken language has
priority over the written, George Gervin is ineligible. In place of Gervin, at
guard, how about Phil Ford."

Source: 2010/02/some-mondegreens

Title: Some Mondegreens
Date: February 15, 2010

When, In a Canterbury bar many years ago, I ordered a cider, the East Kent
cockney bartender responded with a question that I interpreted as "strong
Boer what knees?" Why would he ask me about the joints of a South African
farmer? I was absolutely befuddled even when he repeated the question several
times. Finally, in frustration, he held up two bottles of cider: the first was
labeled "Strongbow" and the second "Watney's." He was simply asking me if I
preferred Strongbow or Watney's -- but how was I to know?  Some years afterward
I mentioned this incident to an English friend who countered with a story of her
own. On her first visit to New York City, she said, she ordered a sandwich and
the counterman asked her "fur rear oughta go?"

I recalled these events while musing on two moments of childhood linguistic
extremity. The first was when I asked one of my P. S. 217 friends what they did
during Religious Instruction (in the 1950s, Roman Catholic kids were released
from class for two hours a week to study at the local parish church, which in
my neighborhood was St. Rose of Lima -- popularly known as "Roe Salima."  Our
teachers took the opportunity to catch up on the local newspapers while students
twiddled the collective thumb). My friend's answer, "Cat kiss 'em." It was many
years before I understood that the word I had no hope of understanding was
"catechism." I was even more puzzled when a Jewish student, who could not know
that I came from a family that regularly celebrated Yom Kippur with a roast
pork dinner, asked me, "do you put on to fill in?" I construed the question to
be some sort of insult, but after a decade or so I realized that I had been
asked something rather serious: "Do you put on tefillin? -- tefillin being small
leather boxes containing biblical verses donned by observant Jews during morning
prayers.

In my neighborhood, it was common for people to shout "doozie pots" at each
other.  I had no idea what that expression meant, except for a strong feeling
that it wasn't praise. It was not until I studied a little Italian that I
understood that what I heard as "doozie pots" was a Sicilian variant of tu sei
pazzo, "you're crazy."

None of these misunderstandings, strictly speaking, meet the mondegreen
threshold;  let's call them near-mondegreens. (The best-known mondegreen is
"I led the pigeons to the flag" -- a mishearing of "I pledge allegiance to the
flag." The word mondegreen derives from one of the Child ballads: "They hae
slain the Earl of Murray/ And laid him on the green," the second of these lines
misheard as "And Lady Mondegreen"). In my long list of personal mondegreens,
the two that are most vivid in my memory are connected to my incomprehension
of religion.  They are a) the luscious "round young virgin" of Silent Night,
and b) the theologically implausible "The Lord is ice, the Lord is made of ice"
in one of the choruses of The Messiah ("even so in Christ, shall we be made
alive"). Here's another mondegreen from my childhood:  "Who knows what evil
lurks in the hot cement?" March 12:  Last night at dinner, I remarked  that
one of my favorite innovations of the second half of the twentieth century was
"fitted sheets."  A guest said, "You're right;  we didn't used to have feta
cheese."

Source: 2010/02/nose-ornament-news

Title: News from the World of Nose Ornamentation
Date: February 16, 2010

Although youngsters sometimes try to piss off their parents by inserting
into their nose a modest jewel or a gold circlet, we (as a nation or as a
civilization) aren't terribly enthusiastic about decorating the old schnozzola.
While the English language has words for many kinds of jewelry (ring, earring,
brooch, bracelet, necklace, tiara, pectoral), it is vacant of vocabulary
for objects that are affixed to or hang from the nose. Consequently, this
magnificent piece of gold jewelry, crafted in Peru two thousand years ago, which
certainly bore a name in proto-Quecha or whatever was spoken at the time, is now
simply called a "nose ornament."

It's spectacular, isn't it? The four jolly, fat spiders in their intricate
communal web of mesh are truly lovely. We moderns can't compete.  We have
nothing to offer.

Here's another beauty, this one from the area that is now Columbia.

This nose ornament is five inches long from top to bottom, which means that it
would cover the mouth and hang well below the chin. The small gold discs and
the long flattened cylinders are loosely attached, so the ornament was designed
both to catch and reflect the light and to jingle. This one, like the spider
ornament, is glittery, ostentatious, and unapologetic.

I imagine that like most such jewelry, these nose ornaments were designed to
say, "I''m rich, I'm powerful, and I'm sexy. Come mate with me." To me, they
also say, very loudly, "I can endure massive rhinal discomfort." It appears
that these nose ornaments were inserted between the nostrils and attached to
the septum. To wear such an ornament would be painful even if the wearer never
sneezed or blew his nose, but to insert and remove it would be sheer nasal
agony. Those sharp points would dig into the tender flesh. And the object must
have been frequently removed,  because with the ornament in place, drinking
or eating would be impossibly messy. While the nose ornament might get a guy a
date, it would certainly inhibit chat or flirtation, and would also become a
major impediment if he got lucky.

I'm not impressed by the pitifully small nose ornaments worn by modern
teenagers, but I would definitely respect the child who was willing to brandish
something equivalent to these wonders. Especially the one with the spiders.

Source: 2010/02/shakespeare-eggcorns

Title: Shakespeare, Eggcorns
Date: February 20, 2010

In The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth, the Hostess (also known as Nell
or Mistress Quickly) regularly makes fritters of the English language. At one
point in the play, she is beside herself -- apoplectic, in fact -- because she
believes that she has been abused by Falstaff. Reaching for words to equal
her anger, she tries for "homicidal" three consecutive times. First she calls
Falstaff a "honeysuckle villain," then a "honeyseed rogue" and finally she
settles on "hempseed." Although "honeysuckle" and "honeyseed" are amusing
guesses, we feel --or perhaps I should speak only for myself-- I feel just a
bit guilty that I've let Shakespeare amuse me at the expense of an illiterate
woman's linguistic lapses.

I have the same reservations about Charles Dickens's jokes on the unlettered;
the word "apoplexy," for example, appears as "happyplexy."  It makes a second
appearance in Great Expectations, when Jo Gargery, of whom much is made that he
has never learned to read or write, explains that his father died of a "purple
leptic fit."

I think that pillorying linguistic errors is more fun when the perpetrators
are not illiterate but pretentious. Such is the case in Sheridan's The Rivals
(1775), where Mrs. Malaprop, striving for "pinnacle," refers to a character as
"the very pineapple of perfection." The most famous sentence in The Rivals:
"Sure, if I reprehend any thing in this world it is the use of my oracular
tongue, and a nice derangement of epitaphs" (apprehend, vernacular, arrangement,
epithets).

In the last couple of years, there's been an attempt to distinguish a subset
of such malapropisms as "eggcorns." The neologism derives from the unlearned
collapse of "acorn" into "eggcorn" (a substitution which is more intelligible
when the word egg is pronounced as in rural "aig"). An eggcorn is supposed to
be a special variety of malapropism in that "the new phrase makes sense on
some level ('old-timer's disease' for 'Alzheimer's disease'). But what sort
of sense?  Why is "baited breath" for "bated breath" anything more than a
simple spelling error?  For that matter, "honeysuckle villain" and "honeyseed
rogue" also make a kind of sense -- a Shakespearean and psychological sense. The
Hostess unconsciously reveals that she's sweet on Falstaff.

In any case, there's now an eggcorn database on the internet.  A goodly
number of the eggcorns are errors that have appeared time without number on
student essays. I can't guess how often I used to encounter "peak (or peek)
one's curiosity," "leech" for "leach," "peon" for "paean," or "pier" for
"peer";  or how many times students would "pour" over their work. I remember
being stunned the first time that I encountered "morays" for "mores," but I
eventually acclimated to that formidable shock. What can it possibly mean to
"reek" havoc?  Others common student errors: "spade" for "spayed" (sometimes
pluperfectized to "spaded"; "verses" for "versus"; "phase" for "faze"; along
with the exceedingly respectful "sirname." I believe that the amount of space
I enclosed by circling these common errors as they appeared on coffee-stained
student submissions would roughly equal the surface area of Weld County.

The eggcorn database contains some "learned" malapropisms that are new to me.
"Hare's breath" and its funhouse mirror twin "hair-brained"; "beyond approach";
"Cadillac converter"; "garbage shoot"; "wet one's appetite." I can't picture
"well-quaffed hair," but I can certainly visualize a "wind-powered turban." "It
finally donged on me" makes some sense, but "crutch of the matter" is utterly
nonsensical. How laid back is a "mellow drama?" To "give up the goat" may have
meaning in pastoral societies. My absolute favorite: "pus jewel," as in, "his
adolescent face was covered with pus jewels." The avian reference in "one fowl
swoop" (for one fell -- i.e. fatal-- swoop) was well anticipated by Macduff: 
"What, all my pretty chickens and their dam/ In one fell swoop....  O hell-
kite."

And speaking of chickens (and eggs), there's also chocolate "eggclair" and
"eggtopic" pregnancy, both of which are weirdly inventive, but neither worth
(drumroll, maestro!), a pullet surprise.

Source: 2010/02/rhinestone-cellist

Title: Rhinestone Cellist
Date: February 22, 2010

The hype and hoopla at sports arenas are truly deplorable, especially to aged
eyes and ears. At a Washington Wizards game in DC a couple of weeks ago, members
of the starting team were introduced not only with spotlights, screeching, and
"music" but also with bursts from a high-powered flame thrower. Even fifty
yards away, I could feel the toasty heat.

Wild over-the-top absurdity and irrelevance, in my opinion. I go to a basketball
game to see a basketball game, not to be danced at, kiss-cammed at, or showered
with gift certificates, free pizza, and t-shirts.

I'm back home in Boulder again, and last night I heard performances of
Prokofiev, Beethoven, and Brahms by the ever-so-formal Escher Quartet. Lord-a-
mercy, did they ever make me long for a little sporty glitz. The Eschers (three
men and a woman, all of whom appeared to be in their 20s) conducted themselves
as if they just woken up from a long day of sleeping in their coffins. They
were utterly joyless. They resolutely avoided looking at each other or at the
audience or betraying the least emotion. The expressions on their faces did
not say, "magnificent music"; they said, "is that curdled milk, or what?" They
plucked and sawed at their instruments with as much enthusiasm as if they were
cleaning out the septic system. Their playing was exact but uninspiring--but
what can you expect from three mortgage brokers and a dental hygienist?  The
Eschers acknowledged the generous applause of the audience as if they were
feudal overlords hearing the petitions of dung beetles.

Whenever I go to chamber music concerts, I feel young. Actually, I am young,
because in the chamber-music crowd, anyone without a walker or an oxygen bottle
is a kid.

The Escher should loosen up a bit -- and perhaps attract a younger and
livelier audience.

Here's the fantasy. Cue spotlight. Cue big-voiced announcer. "And now, on cello,
from Thousand Oaks, California, in his fifth year, out of the Manhattan School
of Music, Andy Janss." Janss runs on to the stage, carrying his cello overhead,
his rhinestones glittering in the lights. He high-fives the other members of
the group, shakes the confetti off his shoulder-length hair, tosses some talcum
powder into the air....etc. etc.  Crowd roars. He plays with enthusiasm. So do
his comrades.

But let us not sacrifice the dignity of classical-music. No flame throwers.

Source: 2010/02/grandpa-learns-to-text

Title: Grandpa Learns to "Text"
Date: February 24, 2010

The grand-daughter, age 10, visited here last December.  She showed me her new
cellphone. She was "texting" with a friend.  I asked her how she does it, and
she gave me a lesson, even though she was startled and horrified, I imagine,
to realize that, although an adult, I didn't know that it's one click for a
d, two for an e, and three for an f. Her thumbs flew, mine limped, but I got
the idea -- and then forgot about it until, a couple of days ago, when  was
waiting in the doctor's office without a book and wasn't in the mood for Golf
Magazine. I started to play with my two-month-old entry-level cellphone and
discovered that if you press Menu, and then Messaging and then Send Message and
then Enter Number that you can "text" -- of which I had no idea, my cellphone
skills being usually limited to "what is that noise coming from my pocket I'd
better check."  So I laboriously scribed (or thumbed) my first message to the
grand-daughter: "Thank you for teaching me to send text messages."  And then,
miracle of miracles, a few hours afterward (after fifth grade had been dismissed
for the day, I suspect), I received an answer, which I now reproduce verbatim:
"when ur txting u dont have 2 use full sentences."

Live and learn.

Source: 2010/03/alcohol-logic

Title: Alcohol, Education, Logic
Date: March 01, 2010

A sorority girl fell off the roof of her house last week.  She was, of course,
staggeringly drunk. She messed herself up pretty badly but she will live.
Accidents of this kind happen regularly in our college town. Kids fall off
roofs, kids drive drunk and kill someone or themselves, or kids just binge-drink
themselves to death. It's regrettable that we've become accustomed to such
stories. I think it's the saddest thing: a family raises a child for twenty
years, sends him or her off to college with great hopes -- and two weeks later
the kid has crashed the car, fatally, or choked to death on her own vomit.

As a result of this latest incident, the neighbors have been engaged in an
internet war. One noisy faction insists that it's our policies that are at fault
-- that kids drink themselves to oblivion because alcohol is legally prohibited
until age twenty-one. If alcohol were legal, the argument goes, students would
then do their drinking in a controlled environment, such as an adult-supervised
party or a bar with rules on over-serving, and they wouldn't indulge in private.
It's a paradoxical argument -- alcohol would be safer if it were not prohibited.

After a great deal of back-and-forth and uninformed argumentation, one of the
neighbors, an epidemiologist who has actually studied the problem, presented
some data. That when New Zealand lowered the drinking age from 21 to 18, binge
drinking and accidental deaths increased. That binge drinking is higher in
European countries, some of which allow alcohol at age 16, than in the U.S.
That underage drinking declines, sometimes by as much as 40%, when rules are
enforced. That when alcohol is less available, alcohol consumption decreases,
and conversely, when it is made more available, consumption increases. That
the unformed brains of teen-agers are particularly subject to being addled by
alcohol.

The advocates of lowering the drinking age were unmoved by the evidence. One
resident, whom I will call BB, wrote in to say this: "Surely, had this 20 year
old woman been of legal drinking age, she would have been in the regulated
environment of a drinking establishment and not at an underground party. The
likelihood of her being overserved in that regulated environment and then ending
up drunk on the roof of her sorority would be considerably diminished. Unlike
Dr. F's and others' studies, this is a real life study that happened right down
the street. Let's open our eyes and start to learn from these events."  BB's
takes the position that we can ignore the data, forget the scientific studies,
and replace them with his interpretation of this particular event. BB's is a
good example of what is called "anecdotal thinking." But anecdotes, standing
alone, are not evidence nor can they replace the systematic gathering of
evidence and statistics. Meanwhile, another neighbor of long standing, KW,
answers the evidence with his own simple argument: we all drank when we were
young, there were laws in place then but we ignored them, nothing will ever
change, why make it hard for kids, let them drink at 18. KW is not much more
logical than BB. He argues ahistorically, quite oblivious to the fact that
alcohol is used differently in different cultures and in one culture a different
times in history.

BB says, it's cold today, there can be no such thing as global warming;  KW
says, there's always been weather, and it's always been warm

When I was a teacher, I tried over and over again to explain to my freshmen that
a) you can't build an argument on an anecdote, and b) that the experience of
an individual is not necessarily universal -- that to gather data, to consider
the context, and to apply logic were the hallmarks of the educated individual.
Neither BB and KW, both of whom, I believe, graduated from college, ever took
the first step in their freshman "critical thinking" class. They have their
views, and they're not going to let facts get in their way.

Is it relevant that both BB and KW are Republicans?  I believe it is.

But what should we do about alcohol abuse?  It's an intractable problem we're
not going to solve it immediately, but we have an instructive analogy in the
case of tobacco, where in the U. S, the consumption of tobacco has declined
significantly. We decreased tobacco use by a) prohibiting advertisements that
made smoking glamorous and alluring, b) increasing taxes, c) disseminating
information on lung cancer and low birth weights, etc, and d) by making tobacco
less available. We could try the same with alcohol, where billions are spent
by distilleries and breweries to make make alcohol use seem sophisticated
and ennobling. Instead, we could discuss incarceration rates, fetal alcohol
syndrome, homelessness, domestic violence, puking in the streets and choking in
the bed. We could limit the number of bars and alcohol outlets. We could make
drinking more expensive by raising the taxes to cover the civic cost in police,
judiciary, accidents, and prisons. We could tax wine less and hard liquor more.
We could rigorously enforce existing drinking-age laws. We could also encourage
the use of less dangerous drugs.

In addition, we could try to improve our educational system, so that when the
neighbors came to talk about alcohol abuse, they could conduct their discussion
with respect for fact and logic.

Source: 2010/03/happy

Title: Happy or Else
Date: March 10, 2010

Every week or so there's yet another breakthrough 'scientific' survey to tell
you which city is the healthiest, or the least obese, or the richest, or the
most educated, or whatever.  There's a new one out -- a poll by Gallup-
Healthways that has determined that the "happiest" place in the entire U. S. of
A. is my very own city  B---ld--r, C-l-r-do. I don't have the slightest idea
how the pollsters chose to define happiness, but I do know that the conclusion
drawn by the B--ld-r Camera (a dreadful gray newspaper that could not possibly
add the least dollop of joy to the life of any subscriber of intelligence,
imagination, or self-respect) makes no sense at all.  The Camera suggests
that people who want to be happy should move right here to B--ld-er. Can't
be right: if everyone came, the cheerful and morose alike, we'd immediately
and automatically fall right back to average. Actually, we'd fall even below
average, because of the misery caused by the spike in traffic.

Perhaps we're all dancing on our toes because we've legalized marijuana.

I suppose that the news that I'm happy should make me feel better, but instead
it just makes me anxious. Even though I'm of a moderately equable temperament, I
do have my gloomy spells.  When I'm in a funk, or a brown study, or I'm feeling
the blues  -- tell me, am I failing in my civic duty?  If I'm not pulling my
own happy wagon, am I discomfiting some other poor soul.  Putting a burden on
him to be inordinately cheerful in order to maintain our reputation.

Gosh, living in a happy city is so guilt-provoking.

On the whole, I was a lot more cheerful before I learned about the poll.

Source: 2010/03/muff-and-spot

Title: Muff and Spot
Date: March 12, 2010

Every once in a while, a mountain lion creeps into the fold and snares a lamb,
a foal, or a German shepherd. At even more infrequent intervals, a mountain
lion attacks a human being (usually a child). Whenever there's a human-lion
interaction, there comes a deluge of letters to the local newspaper demanding
that the authorities exercise “lethal control" over the big cats. Killing
catamounts is neither hard nor dangerous. They were hunted nearly to extinction
in the nineteenth century. Dogs chase the animal up a tree. The brave hunter
takes aim and shoots.

But Is it a good idea to extinguish the mountain lion? In the United States,
there’s an average of one death by mountain lion a year. Here in B--ld-r
county, there’s been one such death in the last hundred years. One is a very
low number, especially when, in the country as a whole, snakes cause a dozen
deaths a year, lightning claims seventy-five, bee and wasp stings a hundred.
Dogs, when they’re not out hunting mountain lions, account for between twelve
to twenty deaths a year –- a couple of hundred a decade-- many of these, it's
sad to say, infants in the crib. Given the numbers, It’s hard to believe that
calls for the extermination of mountain lions aren’t motivated more by fear
than by facts.

Domesticated dogs are responsible not only for a dozen to a score of deaths,
but also for an estimated 4 to 7 million (that’s right, million!) cases of
dog-bite a year, almost 800,000 of which require medical attention. Dog bites
cause 368,000 emergency room visits, or (do the math!) one thousand such visits
a day.  The social cost of dog bites is estimated variously, but the Center for
Disease Control in Atlanta claims that the direct medical costs of dog bites per
year is $165 million, with many more millions in ancillary expenses.

Mountain lions, which are relatively harmless, inspire terror, but dogs, which
are far more dangerous, are our sacred cows -- loved, in my opinion, beyond all
propriety. It’s hard not to cringe when otherwise sensible people –- good
decent people --tell me in all seriousness that Towser is a full member of their
family, or that Fido is about to undergo an expensive hip replacement. The run-
of the-mill doggie in America enjoys a better diet and better medical care than
90% of the human beings on the planet -- a situation which I consider to be a
thoroughly indefensible skewing of resources. Dogs are not human beings, and
it’s immoral sentimentality to treat them as such. It’s embarrassing.

The ancients, following Aristotle, divided their possessions into three
categories: an object was an instrumentum mutum, an animal was an instrumentum
semivocale, and a slave was an instrumentum vocale. By eliding the differences
between humans and animals, the Greeks and the Romans made slavery both easy and
natural.

I used to worry that people who treated animals as humans would be tempted
to treat humans as animals. But it's not true; the people I know who are
sentimental about animals and "animal rights" are extraordinarily sensitive to
human rights -- but then, perhaps my sample is skewed. All of my friends are
sensitive to human rights; if they weren’t, they wouldn’t be my friends.

I wonder whether the love of dangerous dogs and the fear of the cats who are by
and large indifferent to us isn’t an instinct acquired over millions of years.
Our ancestors, armed at best with flint-headed spears, spent countless millennia
at the mercy of feline predators larger, more powerful and more terrifying than
100-pound mountain lions (the extinct European lion, panthera leo fossilis,
was taller, stronger, and and a foot and a half longer that the modern African
lion).  Some 50,000 years ago, an ancient Einstein conceived the idea of
domesticating wolves and selecting their population for useful traits. Humans
and proto-dogs started to cohabit; dwellings and caves came to be littered with
coprolites. Co-evolution began, and over the course of time, dogs and humans
came to be sensitive to each other's traits. Those early dogs were our first
allies on this lonely, hostile planet. They could raise a ruckus when a couple
or three lionesses prowled about the cave door.

We're indebted to dogs and so we tolerate their bad habits.  By the same token,
the over-hasty cry to kill the mountain lions is also an inheritance from our
fearful ancestors.

Source: 2010/03/my-life-in-periodicals

Title: My Life in Periodicals
Date: March 19, 2010

When I was a mere tad, perhaps seven or eight years old but already an
enthusiastic reader, I was given a subscription (by whom?) to a children's
magazine, perhaps Jack and Jill. It arrived once a month and took perhaps ten
minutes to read. It was certainly my older brother (who later owned a large
house that had twice as many mirrors as books, who said, "you still readin'
that thing for babies?" Always susceptible to public criticism, I soon turned
against the publication. Since then, I've subscribed and unsubscribed to dozens
of periodicals, many more than I can remember.  Here are a few: in my pathetic
teens, Mad Magazine, of which I was a serious enthusiast (and had been so since
Mad's Harvey Kurtzman comic book days). Closest I ever came to anarchy. Also,
Sport Magazine -- a precursor of SI.  Pre-steriods, pre-scandal, the athletes
profiled were virtuous, sober, and generous family men who had overcome venomous
small town upbringings and acute physical handicaps to rise to the top of the
mound or sit astride the Derby winner. Also, when I went though my adolescent
fantasy phase, various pulp sci fi mags -- Astounding Science Fiction and Galaxy
Science Fiction and probably others that came and went. I was much enamored
of the stuff, which was monumentally escapist and therefore analogous to my
sports obsessions. In the '60s, I matured to political magazines: The Reporter,
The Nation, and before it went totally and bizarrely wrong, The New Republic.
A decade later, when I had set out to study literature through a social lens,
I subscribed to Local Population Studies, The Journal of Interdisciplinary
History, The Psychohistorical Review, and The History of Childhood Quarterly.
When I became serious about Shakespeare I was an assiduous reader and collector
of the Shakespeare Quarterly and Shakespeare Survey and the Shakespeare
Newsletter and Shakespeare Research and Opportunities and the Shakespeare on
Film Newsletter. Closely related: English Literary Renaissance,  to which I
sent a number of my own contributions, and the George Herbert Journal (of which
I at one time owned every issue). In the '70s or '80s, Organic Gardening (sample
title -- "How We Grew Papayas on our Vermont Hillside Using Organic Methods
and Faith in God"); later, Fine Gardening (sample title: "How We Converted a
Defunct Brick Brewery into an Extremely Expensive Bed-and-Breakfast Complete
with a Replica of an 18th-century Capability Brown Landscape").  At then at
various times: Scientific American, Science News, Bluebirds Across Vermont, the
newsletter of the Southern Vermont Dairy Goat Association, One Two Three Four (a
magazine briefly in existence that concerned itself with the early history of
rock and roll), the Atlantic, The Skeptical Inquirer. Newspapers:  The New York
Times, Valley News, United Opinion (since renamed  the Journal-Opinion), Behind
the Times, the B--ld-r Daily Camera. Nowadays: Harvard Magazine, New Yorker, New
York Review of Books, Northern Forests. A long list, but note: no movie star
mags, no style, no self-improvement, no golf, no detectives, no alternative
healing, no finance, no how-to-pyramid-your-money, no automotive, no weapons. It
appears that I'm a person of narrow but eclectic interests, magazine-wise.

Source: 2010/03/truelife-overheard-dialogue-accurately-reported

Title: True-life Overheard Dialogue Accurately Reported
Date: March 19, 2010

Two derelicts on the B--ld-r M-ll, both of them victims of (I'd guess)
methedrine, beer, tobacco, certainly marijuana and who knows what else. Neither
of them looking good: emaciation, missing teeth, scraggly beards, odors strong
enough to be visible, cachexis.

A:  "What are you eating?"B.  "Some kind of corn chip?"A.  "How are
they?"B.  "Salty.  I don't like them."A.  "Yeah, I try to stay away from
salt. Not good for you."

Source: 2010/03/my-new-mirror

Title: My New Mirror
Date: March 22, 2010

There's been some criticism -- justified, I must admit -- about the dexterity
of my shaving. It appears that my face has become more, what shall I say?
intricate over the last years, and has developed some interesting crannies that
resist the approach of the razor. In order to improve my shaving technique, I
bought one of those circular magnifying mirrors that allows you to view your
face in such great detail that you can hunt down and harvest that last otherwise
inaccessible follicle. The mirror seemed like a good idea, but, dear friends
of a certain age, I do not recommend this purchase. Big mistake.

It had been many years since I studied my face so intently. Things have
happened. While I can still locate the remnants of the scar on my forehead,
where, when I was a boy, I was pushed into a subway pillar, the mark used to
reside just at the hairline. Now, the hairline has migrated a good three
inches to the north of the scar and -- thanks to the new mirror -- I can
clearly detect that the first remaining inch or so of brown-gray hair, which
I had thought to be of a healthy bushiness, consists of no more than a few
well-spaced strands. And what's this cross-hatching on my forehead? Not just
the prominent horizontal furrows but new vertical ones as well -- when did they
appear? And the deep gorges around my eyebrows! And the eyebrows themselves --
when did they become parti-colored? Randomly black and white? And how many
years ago did these long recurved eyebrow hairs begin to sprout? Fie upon it
--'tis an unweeded garden that's gone to seed. Why are the eyebrows themselves
so utterly asymmetrical? and what should I make of the thicket of whiteheads
-- or whatever the heck they are -- at all four corners of my bloodshot eyes? 
Was it always the case that my eyes were set so deeply into those wrinkled
dells? And my nose-- thanks to the new mirror, I can plainly see the scars
where the pre- cancerous lesions were frozen off. What in the world has
happened to the tip of my nose?  Was it always so preternaturally pointy? I
could use it as a letter- opener. When I lift my head just slightly, I see
that my nostrils, which I always took to be a matched pair, have set out on
separate paths. The right one now sits at a 45 degree angle to the left. It's
wandered off-center, like the eye of a flounder. And those nasty black hairs
jutting from my nostrils -- I must attend to them. And look, there are long
hairs coming out of my ears as well. And hanging, floppy earlobes marked with
deep lines. What are these fleshy nobs at the sides of my mouth? Were my lips
always covered with white flakes?  How is it that the left side of my underlip
is so much thicker than the right? And my pearly whites? Cracked and chipped
and not much of a row: sixty or so years of gnawing has given each tooth its
own unique size, shape, color, and identity. And what's this under my chin? A
single off-center hanging wattle? No symmetry even in Wattlelandia? Friends,
this magnifying mirror is a disaster. I should have stopped shaving entirely
and grown a camouflaging beard.

But hold on, there's some good news. It may not be a youthful or symmetrical
face, but It's not unfriendly. There's no sneer, or lip curl, or disdain, or
anger. Puzzlement, certainly. Wryness, perhaps. Curiosity, for sure.

Folks, at least we're not in a wicked-Dorian-Gray-kind-of-situation.

Wear and tear, yes; villainy, no. Things could be worse.

Source: 2010/03/existence-pre-and-post

Title: Existence pre- and post-
Date: March 22, 2010

Last night, one of our dinner guests said that at least we no longer have to
worry about "pre-existing conditions." Persnickety about language as always, I
pointed out that the phrase "pre-existing condition" was a ridiculous piece of
jargon. What is meant is "existing conditions?" A condition can't exist before
it exists.

"Aha," said another of my guests, a Lutheran minister,"now you've opened a
theological questions." He was referring to the disputed doctrine that the
existence of Jesus preceded his incarnation in the womb.

But if "pre-existence" is only taken seriously by theologians and by insurance
executives, then I'm going to stand on my claim that the phrase is both
obscurantist or bureaucratic and should be discarded from common use. "Existing"
is sufficient.

Moreover, the notion that insurance should be granted to the healthy but
denied to the ill is a more dangerous travesty than the mystification of "pre-
existence."

Source: 2010/03/grandpa-tells-a-whopper-cornell-takes-a-shellacking

Title: Grandpa Tells a Whopper;  Cornell Takes a Shellacking
Date: March 26, 2010

Last night, the grandkids had a little fun with the old guy. Miss T. (b. 1999),
concluded that Grandpa's electronic and computer skills were (her exact words)
"stone age."

Is she correct? Let us review the circumstances. I was here, in B--ld-r, trying
to watch the Cornell-Kentucky sweet-sixteen on streaming video (CBS again gave
the Big Red the back of its network-y hand) while simultaneously following the
Kansas State-Xavier double-overtime epic on Tivo (slightly behind real time so
as to sidestep the mini-dramas on the subjects of beer and deodorant). Miss T
and Mr. O were snuggled in bed with their mom out there near the Pacific shore
and we and they were sending messages back and forth on Facebook chat. Hey, not
exactly a "stone age" situation.

The kiddies were testing my knowledge of IM acronyms, and I was failing badly.
I didn't know ROTFL or JK or TMI or LMAO. Then Mr. O became dissatisfied at
the pace of the conversation, so he started sending me messages ("texting" me
is the jargon) on the cellphone, thereby giving me another device to manage.
Which is when I ran out of hands, and in frustration, told what HF (according to
SLC), also known as MT) calls a "stretcher." I said (or wrote, rather) to Miss
T. and Mr. O., something to the effect of "what do you mean I don't know about
electronic media. I used to IM all the time with my grandparents."

Frankly, they didn't buy it. I can't blame them; they know that my grandparents
didn't have much English.

Meanwhile, the Ivy League fell further and further behind, mostly because
Kentucky was quick enough to step around the screens and stop Cornell's three-
point game. In the other bracket, Kansas State lasted it out.

I know that it's negligent not to enlighten myself about useful chat acronyms.
Nevertheless, I suspect that the o-so-up-to-date grandkids at the other end of
the IM line are also missing something. They probably think that a "whopper" is
a hamburger. They probably don't know what a "shellacking" is. Or shellac, for
that matter. Probably think that it's something that originated in the Stone
Age.

Source: 2010/03/pretty-poison-1960-tuesday-weld-1943-

Title: Pretty Poison (1960);  Tuesday Weld (1943-     )
Date: March 27, 2010

Pretty Poison was released in 1960 to excellent notices. I remember adding it to
the must-see list. But I didn't get around to it at the time, probably because
the film wasn't widely distributed. But Pretty Poison stuck in my mind -- or
rather it was the combination of Anthony Perkins and Tuesday Weld that excited
my interest. During the VHS years I made another attempt to see the movie,
but it was apparently stuck in some sort of royalty-and-ownership dispute
and never made it onto tape. And then another twenty years elapsed and I tried
again, this time typing the name into my Netflix queue, and, mirabile dictu,
there it was.  So at last, after fifty years, a cd of Pretty Poison appeared
in the mailbox.

It's a fine film, well worth the wait. I don't know what I would have
thought about it in 1960, but in 2010 it seems like a late variant of
1950s film noir and an important but unacknowledged way station on the road
from Double Indemnity to Body Heat. It offers a dangerous jeune fille fatale
in the high school cheerleader Mary Ann Stepanek, some great plot twists, and a
creepy young man who's not as clever as he thinks (very similar to his lineal
descendant, the fatuous lawyer Ned Racine). The photography, all sunlit and
cheerful, disguises the noirish themes and keeps the audience off balance. The
screenwriter, Lorenzo Semple Jr., was, if I remember correctly, just emerging
from the McCarthy blacklist, which may be why the film stresses cold-war themes
-- spies and sabotage and the like. Can it be accidental that, in the last year
of the Eisenhower administration, a well-meaning but ineffective government
employee as given the name Azenauer?

At the very time Tuesday Weld, scion of an ancient Massachusetts family
performed in this film, I was taking courses in Cambridge, in Weld Hall. How
could anyone not be struck by her great name? Tuesday Weld is linked, in my
mind, not only to the Saltonstalls, Peabodys, and Lodges but also to Billy
Sunday, Rick Monday, Joe Friday, January Jones, Fredric March, May West, June
Jones, August Busch, Susan Sontag, Domenico Scarlatti and Jeudi Garland.

Source: 2010/03/bronte-notes

Title: Bronte Notes
Date: March 29, 2010

I have just read, for the first time ever, Agnes Grey (1847) by Anne Bronte,
and what an infinitely sad book it is! Poor Agnes, an impoverished clergyman's
daughter, goes as a governess and is daily humiliated by monstrously spoiled
children and their grotesquely insensitive parents. Her sufferings are
poignantly particularized. The novel is structured as if it were a comedy
(after extended tribulations, Agnes marries a decent young curate) but it is
nevertheless barren, desiccated, and joyless. Even the long-awaited marriage
proposal receives the shortest of shrifts:

"And so now I have overruled your objections. Have you any others. "No --
none."  "You love me then," he said, fervently pressing my hand.  "Yes."

And that's all the romance that this poor downtrodden, passive, beaten-into-the-
dust emotionally-stunted "heroine" is granted.

Nevertheless, my own personal sadness while reading this novel arose not
from Agnes Grey's suffering, but from Anne Bronte's -- there being not a
skin-of-the- teeth space between the bedraggled writer and the bedraggled
protagonist. Agnes's experiences as a governess exactly mirror Anne's --
except there was no saving curate to snatch the wedding chestnuts out of
the fire. Poor Anne returned home defeated, virginal, and alone, to die
at age 28, of tuberculosis. Nor is it simply the doormat heroine or the
downtrodden novelist that is so distressing -- it's the general oppression of
women in the first part of the nineteenth century that must draw a tear from the
stolidest of eyes. Here's a society that offered no decent options for women,
and even Anne Bronte, as talented as she was, hadn't the least ability to
think her way through attitudes toward women that proved to be paralyzing and
ultimately fatal.

I turned to Agnes Grey because I had recently read Anne's older sister
Charlotte's Villette, a novel that perplexed me more than any book I've read in
years. I couldn't make sense of it. I've read my share of nineteenth-century
novels, and I would like to think that I have a general sense of how they're
made, and, after I get a few chapters in, how they must conclude. In Villete,
all the early markers point to the eventuality that young Lucy Snowe, after the
customary and appropriate difficulties and misunderstandings will have been
resolved, will marry the handsome young Dr. John. But somewhere in Book II,
the game changed and the poor reader (me) became confused. Dr. John is allowed
to make some bad choices -- sufficiently wrong that he becomes superfluous and
gradually fades into the background. He metamorphoses from a major character
in the first half of the book to a minor character in Book III. His place as
Lucy Snowe's suitor is taken by a teacher, M. Paul Emanuel, who is nasty and
unattractive when introduced but who becomes more and more acceptable as the
novel proceeds. I couldn't comprehend the seismic shift until I read the truly
excellent biography of CB by Lyndall Gordon (Charlotte Bronte, A Passionate
Life (1994). It turns out the plot of the novel parallels CB's experience
in Brussels. Initially attracted to a young man who lost interest in her,
she fell deeply in love with a teacher at her school. Alas, M. Heger was not
available, either matrimonially or emotionally.

But at least Charlotte, unlike Anne, was willing to take a risk -- which is why,
in Charlotte's greatest novel, witty, forthright, independent Jane Eyre, for
all her weirdness, remains such a striking and refreshing alternative to the
ordinary oppressed nineteenth-century heroine.

Source: 2010/04/lascivious-wassails

Title: Lascivious Wassails
Date: April 06, 2010

In Anthony and Cleopatra, Caesar, who is disciplined and ascetic, both
envies and scorns Anthony. In one of the play's greatest moments, Caesar
apostrophizes his hedonistic, indulgent rival. "Anthony," he begins, "Leave
thy lascivious wassails." "Lascivious wassails" is a most marvelous phrase --
not only because of its serpentine hissing, but because it is so colorful. In
another context, the word "wassails" might signify conviviality, but in this
case it is so contaminated by the wickedness of "lascivious" that it can
only be taken to signify bouts of drunken excess. "Lascivious wassails"
is glancingly oxymoronic and consequently embodies Caesar's confused and
contradictory feelings toward Anthony.

It's an especially pertinent phrase because the speech that follows
celebrates those qualities of Anthony which Caesar most admires (and which he
simultaneously finds most threatening) -- his Spartan, soldierly ability to
put aside luxurious food and drink and to subsist on "the bark of trees," and,
if necessary, to drink from "the gilded puddle that beasts would cough at."

"Lascivious wassails" is brilliant in its freestanding self and without doubt
entirely appropriate to its context. It's one of Shakespeare's all-time-great
encapsulations -- a condensed and beautiful phrase.

Except that it's not Shakespeare's. Or, more precisely, it is probably not
Shakespeare.

The Folio text of Anthony and Cleopatra seems to have been set from a transcript
of Shakespeare's manuscript. It's the only early printing (there are no
Quartos). In the Folio, the line appears this way: "Anthony,/ Leaue thy
lasciuious Vassailes." "Vassailes" was, for the first hundred years of its
existence, understood to mean "vassals." Caesar, it appears, wants Anthony to
take leave of not his cups but his followers. In the fourth Folio of 1683, the
irregular spelling "vassailes" was regularized to "vassals." "Wassails" did not
arrive on the scene until 1724 and was the ingenious, inspired invention of
Alexander Pope. Every single editor since Pope, no doubt taken with the beauty
of the phrase, has printed "wassails."

It's not as though "vassals" doesn't make sense. It's perfectly fine. It's
just the "wassails" is better. In this instance, let's face it, Pope outdid
Shakespeare. If not for Pope, it is highly likely that it would have been
"lascivious vassals" until the end of time. Who beside a great poet would have
thought of "wassails?" Certainly not I.

Editors aim for authenticity -- to print what they believe Shakespeare wrote.
Shakespeare probably wrote "vassals" -- but "wassails" is so clever that editors
cannot help but succumb. They follow the illogic that if it's brilliant, it must
be Shakespeare. And so authenticity gladly yields to beauty.

Other Shakespeare enigmas:  here, and here.

Source: 2010/04/notable-pearlmans

Title: Noteworthy Pearlmans
Date: April 07, 2010

The most famous, I think, must be Itzhak Perlman, who is the earth's most
versatile and distinguished violinist -- and is also father of five next-
generation members of the musical tribe. Almost as widely known but perhaps not
so spectacularly talented, is Rhea Perlman, better known as Carla Tortelli,
mother to many. The most brilliant of the clan, and certainly the most
eccentric, is Grigori Yakovlevich ("Grisha") Perelman, the mathematician who
solved Poincare's conjecture and then refused both the Fields Medal (the
Nobel Prize of mathematics) and the $1 million Clay Millennium Prize. Grisha
demonstrated what most of us simply take for granted: that any closed three-
dimensional manifold where any loop can be contracted to a point is really just
a three-dimensional sphere. There's also Ron Perelman, a consummate and ruthless
corporate raider, once the richest man in America, now, alas,  fallen to 18th
-- nor any longer contracted to nonce-wife #4, Ellen Barkin. The most amusing
of all Pearlmans is surely Brooklynite S. J. Perelman, screenwriter of two
great Marx Brothers vehicles -- Horse Feathers and Monkey Business. The most
reprehensible of the cousinhood is certainly Lou Pearlman, accomplished Ponzi-
artist and the mogul behind the bubble-gummy Backstreet Boys, whom he used and
possibly sexually abused to the tune of $300 million -- and who is now serving
a 25-year term in federal prison. Infinitely more respectable is the composer
and conductor Martin Pearlman, who learned his trade at Cornell and who is a
harpsichordist as well as the founder of the Boston Baroque. Nor should any
Pearlman census overlook Ron Perlman, aka Amoukar the Ulam, who many years ago
quested for fire. Nor sportwriter Jeff Pearlman, pitcher Jon Perlman, writer
Edith Pearlman, film critic Cindy Pearlman; nor the great rhetorician of a prior
generation, Chaim Pearlman.

And also: standing at the top of the heap in the world of fiction is The
Wire's incorruptible Maryland Assistant State Attorney, Rhonda Pearlman.

Source: 2010/04/horsedrawn-vehicle

Title: Wow!  Still Another Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Vehicle
Date: April 09, 2010

It's a patache, and George Sand (in The Miller of Angibault [1852]) offers a
detailed account. The patache, it would appear, was a blast from the past even
in the early nineteenth century.

"Madame de Blanchemont left in a simple patache, that respectable relic of
our forefathers' plain tastes, becoming rarer with each passing day. The one
which it was Marcelle's unhappy fate to encounter was of the purest native
construction and an antiquarian would have contemplated it with respect. It was
as long and low as a coffin; no springs of any sort diminished its charms. The
wheels were as tall as the cowl. The cowl itself was made of a sort of wattle
and daub, so that every little bump rained clods of clay down on the travelers'
heads. A thin but ardent little stallion drew this rural carriage quite nimbly,
and the patachon, the driver, seated himself on the car-shaft with his legs
dangling down."

The patache, which seems to be a country cousin of the "springless kibitka"
combined with elements of the basket-carriage, may now be added to the long list
of obsolete horsedrawn carriages.

Source: 2010/04/strange-flesh-1

Title: Strange Flesh
Date: April 13, 2010

Plutarch makes much of Antonius' "hardness in adversity notwithstanding his
fine bringing up." Shakespeare knew these words very well; in fact, his copy of
Plutarch was open to this exact sentence when he mended his quill and began to
compose the famous speech in Anthony and Cleopatra that begins "Anthony, leave
thy lascivious wassails."

Here are Plutarch's words (exactly as they came to Shakespeare through Sir
Thomas North's translation). The passage that particularly stimulated the
playwright appears (thanks to the magic of word processing), in a font of vivid
blue.

"Hirtius and Pansa, then consuls [were sent by Octavius Caesar] to drive
Antonius out of Italy. These two consuls... besieged the city of Modena, and
there overthrew him in battle, but both the consuls were slain there. Antonius,
flying upon this overthrow, fell into great misery all at once, but the chiefest
want of all other, and that pinched him most, was famine. Howbeit, he was of
such a strong nature that by patience he would overcome any adversity, and
the heavier fortune lay upon him, the more constant showed he himself.... And
therefore it was a wonderful example to the soldiers, to see Antonius, that was
brought up in all fineness and superfluity, so easily to drink puddle water, and
eat wild fruits and roots; and moreover it is reported that even as they passed
the Alps, they did eat the bark of trees, and such beasts as man never tasted of
their flesh before.

Shakespeare kept the sense of the passage but put Plutarch's words into the
mouth of Octavius Caesar, who despises, envies, but also fears Anthony,
his absent rival.

Anthony,

Leave thy lascivious wassails.  When thou once

Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st

Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel

Did famine follow, who thou fought'st against,

(Though daintily brought up) with patience more

Than savages could suffer.  Thou did'st drink

The stale of horses, and the gilded puddle

Which beasts would cough at.  Thy palate then did deign

The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.

Yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets,

The barks of trees thou browsed.  On the Alps,

It is reported thou did'st eat strange flesh,

Which some did die to look on.  And all this

(It wounds thine honor that I speak it now)

Was born so like a soldier, that thy cheek

So much as lanked not.

Plutarch is shocked that high-born Antonius could bring himself to eat "wild
fruits," but Shakespeare, ever willing to push an idea to the limit, makes
Anthony's diet even more crude. "Thy palate then did deign [i.e. find worthy]/
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge" -- that is to say, Anthony eats not
just "wild fruit," but the less palatable "roughest berry." In an even harsher
transformation, Plutarch's "puddle water" becomes "the stale (i.e. urine)
of horses, and the gilded puddle/ Which beasts would cough at."  It may be
stoic to drink "puddle water," but it is a far greater challenge to a dainty
constitution to survive on horse piss. As the passage continues, Anthony's diet
becomes progressively more exotic. Plutarch says that Antonius consumed "beasts
as man never tasted of their flesh before," and seems to imagine Antonius as an
adventurer at the utmost boundary of culinary experience. But when Shakespeare
suggests that Anthony ate "strange flesh/ Which some did die to look upon,"
Anthony becomes not just a soldier/explorer coping with natural adversity but
a demi-god or some other kind of supernatural figure able to triumph over
enchantment or magic -- one who can incorporate fleshly food that would kill at
a glance men with natures less powerful than his own.

Shakespeare characteristically intensifies, exaggerates, or hyperbolizes
Plutarch's already extravagant tale. He raises the rhetorical ante. Whatever
Plutarch proffers, Shakespeare doubles and redoubles.

The animal theme that runs through this series of transformations begins with
the evolution of Plutarch's phrase "by patience he would overcome any adversity"
into Shakespeare's "patience more than savages could suffer." More patience than
savages?  What would that be? Shakespeare provides an answer to an implicit,
unspoken question, which is, What is a more, or worse, or a lower being than
a savage? The answer seems to be "an animal" -- and consequently Shakespeare
employs images of bestiality throughout this speech: the horses whose stale must
be guzzled, the beasts who cough at the gilded puddle, the stag who browses
the bark of trees under sheets of snow, and, climatically, the strange magical
flesh that some -- but not Anthony -- die to look upon. In a characteristically
Shakespearean paradox, as the passage proceeds Anthony becomes both more animal
and more heroic -- at the same time both baser and yet more transcendent.

And what is that strange and magic Alpine flesh?  It's impossible to say, and
Shakespeare offers no clue. Perhaps it's mere hyperbole -- an author carried
away by his own rhetorical power. Does Anthony violate the ultimate food taboo
and become a cannibal?  Some readers have thought so, but the evidence is
lacking.

There is, however, a hint that Octavius himself thinks that the strange flesh
episode is nothing more than a tall tale. "On the  Alps, it is reported.... "

Source: 2010/04/cat-got-your-tongue

Title: "Cat Got Your Tongue"
Date: April 14, 2010

So it was 1946 and I was in first grade in P. S. 217 and I must have been
throwing my massive seven-year-old weight around because one of the "class
mothers" took me aside and accused me of quote picking on unquote her dear son
Michael who was at least six inches taller than poor poor pitiful skinny me. I
remember that I was astonished and taken aback but that I was still in my own
head poised enough to think, what a jerk Michael must be to tell on me to his
mother -- although frankly I don't know now and didn't know then what I could
have done to earn her enmity or deserve the reproach. I was innocent! What I
remember most clearly is that I was rendered quite speechless when Michael's
mommy asked an explanation or apology from me and especially that she two
or several times demanded of me, scornfully, "what's the matter, cat's got
your tongue? Cat's got your tongue?" I had never heard that expression before
and didn't know what it meant, but it sure added a deal of mystery to the
confrontation. My tongue was still in my mouth and not in the possession of some
feline and I was neither clever enough nor bold enough to stick it out at her.

What does it mean, "Cat's got your tongue." It's still a mystery to me even
today. Interestingly enough, the expression isn't of ancient origin and
apparently dropped to earth only in the late nineteenth century. It's a puzzle,
though. Why a cat?  But then, why "cat's pajamas?" Why "cat o' nine tails?" Why
"cat's meow?"

In any case, I was nonplussed that Michael's mommy spoke to me so obscurely and
Iwas indignant to be accused of misbehavior. In fact, sixty plus years later 'm
Istill indignant.

Is it possible that the cat-and-tongue episode stimulated my interest in
language?

I really don't know why this antique event swam out of the dark backward and
abysm of the past. Just yesterday, when I mentioned it to Mrs Dr. Metablog, she
recalled that one day, also in 1946, when she was in elementary school and she
was not sitting as still as we were then expected to sit, she was accused of
having "ants in her pants."  She's indignant.

Source: 2010/04/our-new-neighbor

Title: Our New Neighbor
Date: April 16, 2010

Our new neighbor is a white-haired woman, seventy-five or eighty years
old.  She has fair, wrinkled skin, uses lots of cosmetics, and dresses
conservatively.  She carries a cane.

On the inside of her right ankle, she sports a faded red and black tattoo of
Mickey Mouse.

Source: 2010/04/fever-of-rome

Title: Fever of Rome
Date: April 18, 2010

Except for its title, which misses the mark, Edith Wharton's "Roman Fever" is an
exquisite and near-perfect short story. I'm not sure if I would love it quite
so much if I hadn't recently indulged myself with an Edithathon of 25 or 30
long novels, of which "Roman Fever" is a quintessence or distillation. Packed
into a few pages is all you would ever need to know about formal, repressed,
rule-bound upper-class New York society in which no-holds-barred competitiveness
is masked by lifted-pinky manners. The story is so cleverly designed that the
last satisfying sentence more than fulfills a reader's wickedest expectations.

Mrs.  Ansley and Mrs. Slade, both well-tended New York widows who've pretended
to like each other for a lifetime, chat on a Roman balcony. Each is expert at at
one-upmanship. Their apparent friendship masks hatreds and sexual jealousies as
obvious (once the curtain is lifted) and as brutal as those of lions living in
the less habitable portions of the Kalahari desert.

I know of no work of fiction that is at once so polite and so ferocious. And so
chilling.

Source: 2010/04/earthquakes

Title: Earthquakes - Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc -  King Lear
Date: April 23, 2010

We all remember, and we're all still shocked and amazed that the late,
unlamentable Jerry Falwell proclaimed that the 9/11 attacks on the US were
caused by "the pagans, and the abortionists, and the feminists, and the gays,
and the lesbians." How to understand either the logic or the brain of such a
thinker? We moderns tend to reason in terms of cause and effect, and cause
and effect just doesn't cut it with Falwell. Was he thinking something like,
feminists cause sin (a debatable proposition) and Al-Qaeda wants to cleanse
us, so they run the airplanes into the towers. That would be unbelievable
nonsense, even for Falwell. Here's another attempt to divine his mind:
feminists are dangerous and evil and therefore the good old US of A has become
Sodom/Gomorrah/Ephesus and the Big Guy in the Sky is offended and therefore he
engaged Al-Qaeda to punish the US for its sins by enabling or permitting those
young Saudi jerks to fly planes into the towers in order to persuade us to
repudiate the feminists. Does that make sense? Very little.

Similarly, Pat Robertson deduced that Hurricane Katrina was all about abortion.
In this case, the Ancient of Days didn't even bother to enlist human agents.
Noticing that there were abortions being performed in the US, he let loose the
winds from the caves in which he had confined them and instructed them to bust
up the New Orleans dikes and drown a lot of people.

Jerry and Pat are a pair of idiots, not only because they lack intelligence, but
also because their view of the world is five hundred or a thousand years behind
the times. They'd be mainstream in dark/medieval Europe when Attila the Hun and
Timur (or Tamburlaine) the Great competed for the title of Scourge of God --
the flagellum dei. They pillaged and burned and raped over vast areas of the
world not because they were  imperialists and conquerors but because they were
instruments of god. They wreaked vengeance on our sins. It was orthodoxy. Cause
and effect? Sorry, not part of the picture.

The fallacy post hoc ergo propter hoc  -- "after this therefore because of
this"  -- means that just because B comes after A doesn't mean that A causes
B. Just because an abortion is followed by a hurricane doesn't mean that the
abortion caused the hurricane. Just because someone prays to one or another god
and recovers from illness doesn't mean that the prayer caused the cure. The
volcano isn't quiescent because we sacrificed the maiden. No religion, not a
single one, can bear the light of post hoc. Fully honored, it puts them all out
of business. Along with all the other varieties of magical thinking.

All this hardly bears mentioning except that a couple of days ago, a 'senior
Iranian cleric" Hojatoleslam Kazem Sedighi, pronounced that very soon a massive
earthquake will devastate the city of Teheran and that the earthquake will
be caused by "women who do not dress modestly. [Such women] lead young men
astray, corrupt their chastity and spread adultery in society, which increases
earthquakes." There's a chain of logic for you. A guy catches a glimpse of a
lock of hair, or, god forbid, a bit of bosom, and boom -- earthquake.  But
it's not his fault -- it's that his natural chastity has been compromised by
them there female blandishments. Delilah all over again. Forget the movement of
tectonic plates. The energy released in earthquakes isn't caused by subduction.
It's ankles.The senior Iranian cleric has not correctly grasped the meaning of
the demotic phrase, "the earth moved."

Sedighi is a boob and is even more presumptuous and illogical than Pat and
Jerry. The earthquake hasn't even occurred and he's already blaming it on the
outfits. He's launched a pre-emptive strike on post hoc. His is a fallacy so
monumentally illogical that hasn't yet earned a name.

It's instructive that Shakespeare, writing before the age of reason and before
the scientific revolution, offered a full debate on the subject. In King Lear,
Gloucester takes the traditional view. Eclipses, like hurricanes, are filled
with meaning. Gloucester does not hold with reason or with the logic that he
calls "the wisdom of nature."

"These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us: though the
wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged
by the sequent effects: love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide.
In cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces, treason, and the
bond cracked 'twixt son and father... We have seen the best of our time: 
machinations, hollowness, treachery and all ruinous disorders, follow us
disquietly to our graves."

Gloucester's bastard son Edmund dismisses tradition and argues scientifically
and rationally.

"This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are sick in fortune
-- often the surfeit of our own behavior -- we make guilty of our disasters the
sun, the moon, and the stars: as if we were villains by necessity, fools by
heavenly compulsion; knaves, thieves, and treachers, by spherical predominance,
drunkards, liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of planetary
influence, and all that we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on. An admirable
evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of
a star. My father compounded with my mother under the dragon's tail, and my
nativity was under Ursa Major; so that it follows, I am rough and lecherous.
Tut, I should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament
twinkled on my bastardizing."

Gloucester is, in our terms, superstitious and simple, but he's also orthodox
and reverent. Edmund is realistic and rational, but he is also as loathsome a
villain as Shakespeare ever created. Shakespeare is a late medieval writer,
which is why he should not necessarily be looked to for moral advice but rather
for great poetry, great stories, and aesthetic bliss.

Meanwhile, the "excellent foppery of the world" has become the province of
fundamentalists of all stripes.

Source: 2010/04/allawkard

Title: All-Awkward
Date: April 28, 2010

While I admire the highly skilled, I am also much attracted to the guys who do a
lot with less. It's good to throw 100 mph, but my hat goes off to the pitchers
who succeed with little more than desire and guile.

I don't mean just baseball. I've been watching the NBA playoffs and I'm now
prepared to name my All NBA Overachievers, guys, who, metaphorically, can throw
65 on a good day.

Center: Joakim Noah. The most awkward center in the league and one of the most
effective. It's terrifying to watch him try to dribble the ball downcourt. His
outside shot is, to say the least, unorthodox. But he works hard on every play
and when he's knocked down, as is frequently the case, he bounces up like some
mythological figure who draws strength from the earth. Plus there's not another
center in the league who's fluent in French and Swedish.

Forward. Paul Pierce. Can't run, can't jump, but is a perennial all-star and
the go-to guy at the end of a close game. I've seen him play hundreds of games
(since he was at Kansas, in fact), and I've never seen him "fill the lane." He
can't get there in time. Great shooter, though, even if you can't figure out how
he does it, year after year.

Forward.  Shawn Marion. He must have the ugliest shot in NBA history. He seems
to hold it out in front of him and push it off with a stiff arm. And yet it goes
in. He couldn't have gone to basketball camp as a youngster. He does everything
"wrong" and yet he's tremendously effective. And he's an outstanding defensive
player.

Guard:  Andre Miller. He's slow, he can't jump, he has no muscles in his arms,
and he can't shoot 3-pointers. But he's intelligent, makes the right decisions,
and throws the best alley-oop pass in the league. He's a marvelous player, way
undervalued.

Guard.  Omigosh, I can't think of another active all-overachiever guard,
so I'm going to go with Mark Jackson, now retired, who's the archetype. Not
particularly athletic, not big, not quick, not a leaper by any means, and yet
third on the all-time assist list. Smart though -- a Brooklyn boy.

Source: 2010/05/bou

Title: Boustrophedon, Rongorongo, and the Phaistos Disc
Date: May 03, 2010

In a previous post, I expressed fascination that writing could go in any
possible direction. I began with Swift, who satirized both "women" and the
English when he described the fanciful Lilliputian script: "their manner of
Writing is very peculiar, being neither from the Left to the Right, like the
Europeans; nor from the Right to the Left, like the Arabians; nor from up to
down, like the Chinese; nor from down to up, like the Cascagians; but aslant
from one Corner of the Paper to the other, like Ladies in England."

To Swift's curious catalog (the Cascagians are of course his own invention), I
added boustrophedon, a system that Swift did not know but one that would surely
have delighted him.

In boustrophedon (a lovely Greekish word that signifies "turn like an ox
plowing"), alternate lines move in opposite directions. Lines one, three, five
and seven and so on proceed from left to right; lines two, four, six, and
eight from right to left. Ancient languages such as Safaitic were written in
boustrophedon; some Etruscan inscriptions, still undeciphered, seem to follow
the same pattern.

Boustrophedon is not unreasonable, but it's certainly awkward for those of us
who have made a fetish of left to right. Here's how Shakespeare transforms
boustrophedonically. The passage takes a bit of effort to read but it's
certainly intelligible.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,—

!srats etsahc uoy, uoy ot ti eman ton em teL

It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood;

,wons naht sreh fo niks retihw taht racs roN

And smooth as monumental alabaster.

.nem erom yarteb ll'ehs esle, eid tsum ehs teY.

Right, left, up, down, aslant, and back and forth might seem to have exhausted
the possible formats. But such is not the case. Rongorongo, the language
of Easter Island, is written in still another style, that of "reverse
boustrophedon." In Lost Languages (2002), Andrew Robinson describes how this
most peculiar system works.

"To read a Rongorongo tablet, one started at the bottom left-hand corner and
read along line 1 to the right-hand corner. Then one turned the tablet through
180 degrees and began reading line 2 from left to right again,  At the end of
line 2, one repeated the 180-degree turn so that the tablet was in the same
orientation as at the beginning, and read line 3 from left to right and so
on....  Every even-number line is written back-to-front and upside-down in
relation to an ordinary English text."

I don't believe that even Jonathan Swift could have invented a manner of
composition so counter-intuitive, so odd.  But then, those Easter Islanders
(or, more properly, Rapanui) danced to a drummer who is uniquely their own. I
don't believe that there's a second reverse boustrophedonesque culture anywhere
on the planet.

Is that all? Are there no other possibilities? Yes indeed, there's also the
phaistos disc, which (according to Andrew Robinson once again), "was discovered
in 1908 by Luigi Pernier in the ruins of a palace at Phaistos in southern Crete.
The archeological context suggests that the date of the disc is 1850-1600 BC.
The disc is 6.5 inches in diameter and .75 inches thick and is made of fine
clay. On both sides is an inscription which consists of characters impressed on
the wet clay with a punch or stamp before it was fired. They are arranged in a
spiral around the center of each side."

The writing begins at the outermost circle and works its roundabout way towards
the center, which means either that the scribe knew exactly how many letters (or
ideographs, or syllables) he intended to use, or that he started at the center
and wrote backwards until he reached the circumference of the disc. Neither
method is particularly convenient or flexible, so it's not surprising that
spiral writing never caught on. It certainly wouldn't do for people like me who
revise heavily.

The phaistos disc cannot be translated.

Source: 2010/05/novacaine

Title: Why I Fear Dentists
Date: May 06, 2010

Novacaine was discovered sometime around the turn of the last century, but it
hadn't reached the backward interior of Brooklyn during my childhood. As a
result, I endured hours of drilling and filling without anaesthetics. It was
horrible.

The local dentist was named Dr. Caress. It would have been more appropriate if
he had been called Dr. Butcher.

There were no high-speed drills. Dr. Caress used a mechanical drill -- a motor
attached to a system of small pulleys, if I remember correctly, at the business
end of which was some sort of bur. It was slow and awkward and It took forever
to drill out a cavity. There was lots of starting and stopping and moaning and
readjusting and rinsing and spitting. I can still remember the pain. It was not
a "discomfort" kind of pain. It was a torture kind of pain.

All this in the office of Dr. Caress.  I can't even imagine what it was like
across Ocean Parkway where the local dentist was named Dr. Yankowitz.

More on Dr. Metablog's mouth right here.

Source: 2010/05/ditch-the-didge

Title: Ditch the Didge!!
Date: May 09, 2010

The downtown mall is home to a motley assemblage of street buskers. Some
are excellent and welcome performers: the occasional string quartet, the
accomplished visiting bluegrass band, a witty gaggle of a cappella singers.
Others are less excellent but still tolerable; the contortionist, the magician
with the rings that divide and rejoin, the sword-swallower, the zip-code
man, the fire-eater, the too-young violin student supervised by his mommy,
the juggler whose act hasn't changed since the days when he was known as a
joculator. And then a step lower still: that inaudible French girl who struggles
with her ukelele. Less welcome are the drummers: bang, bang, bang with no
discernible rhythm, just noise great enough to set off sympathetic vibrations in
your own personal pancreas. But the worst of the worst is the didgeridoo-master.
After decades of practice, all that the didge player can produce is an ugly
drone. One note. It goes on and on, relentlessly, and it's dull, grating and
loud. If you haven't heard it, imagine a big old bagpipe, playing one note
at the bottom of its range, for ever, and ever, and ever. Worse still are
didgeridoo assemblies: didgetets or didgeridoo chamber orchestras.

The didgeridoo comes to us from northern Australia, where it was invented
more that 1500 years ago. Perhaps it hasn't evolved because it's thought to
be sacred. While the rest of the world developed wind instruments that played
a variety of colorful notes, the non-innovative didge people embraced an
unchanging and exceedingly boring drone. They are patient people. One by one,
native Australians said no to the bassoon, the clarinet, the horn, the sax, the
flute, the piccolo, the trumpet, the tuba, the oboe bright and cheerful, and
decided that a branch of a eucalyptus tree, naturally hollowed by termites,
was all that they needed in the way of wind-instruments. In another fit of
imagination, they invented the bull-roarer, an instrument that hasn't yet taken
a bow on the mall, but trust me, it won't be long.

Let's face it;  the didgeridoo is an instrument that hasn't produced a pleasant
sound in many thousands of years. It has no plans to do so. Didgeridooists are
barking up the wrong tree -- it's never going to be music. It's always going to
be noise.

Which brings me to my point, which is that would-be mall performers should
not be permitted to busk until they have passed a performance test and have
been granted a license. The Board of Acceptability would consist of some of
the more traditionalist faculty of both the Music School and the Department of
Theater and Drama. The chairman would be an open-minded but engaged citizen,
such as Me.  Approval must be unanimous. We (the Board) would strictly enforce
standards of artistic excellence. Life would improve.

Source: 2010/05/mrs-peixada-by-sidney-luska-1886

Title: Mrs. Peixada by "Sidney Luska" (1886)
Date: May 10, 2010

I've just read, and much enjoyed, a novel called Mrs. Peixada, by one Sidney
Luska. The novel was published in 1886 by Cassell & Company, Limited, at 739
Broadway, in New York City. I had it recalled it from the library's archives,
where, from all the evidence, it hadn't been touched for a hundred or so years.
Why did I read this book? Because a) I'm reading stuff from the last two
decades of the nineteenth century, and b) because the novel is listed in the
bibliography of the wonderful anthology Victorian Love Stories (1996) edited and
illuminated by Kate Flint -- an anthology which persuaded me that although I
think of myself as moderately well read in Victorian fiction, there are untold
riches out there of which I am embarrassed to be unaware.

Mrs. Peixada isn't exactly a shower of gold, but it's a revelation. The author
"Sidney Luska" turns out to be a pseudonym for Henry Harland, who is better
known for his second career as an editor of the Yellow Book. I guess that
Mrs. Peixada falls into the broad category, novel of sensation, but it's also
a mystery story laced with occasional touches of social comedy and progressive
social thought.

The plot could be next year's blockbuster movie. Arthur Ripley woos and falls in
love with the mysterious young widow, Ruth Lehmyl, who has recently moved into
an apartment in his Beekman Place neighborhood. We're treated to the details
their sophisticated and modern courtship  -- music, museums, poetry. At the
same time, Ripley, a lawyer, has been engaged to track down a murderess named
Mrs. Peixada, who fled New York after being acquitted on grounds of insanity of
murdering her husband. Ripley tracks her from Vienna to Rome and to London, but
then loses her trail. He marries Mrs. Lehmyl --  only to discover that she and
Mrs. Peixada are one and the same person.

Although there are holes in the plot through which a daumont or shandrydan could
be driven with room to spare, the novel is engaging and intriguing. But then I'm
an easy mark.

Perhaps our screen writers aught to do some looking at the lower tier of
Victorian novels  -- especially if (as it seems) they're interested in making
lower-tier movies.

But for me -- it's time to learn more about Henry Harland.

Source: 2010/05/-crackanthorpes-wreckage

Title: Crackanthorpe's Wreckage
Date: May 11, 2010

The Crackanthorpe name is not as well known as it should be. The short stories
in Wreckage (1893) are a good sharp antidote to the pieties and sentimentalities
of Victorian fiction.

There must be hundreds of novels which feature a virtuous, long-suffering
heroine, who, however mistreated, turns cheek after cheek until her patience is
rewarded with a beau and an unexpected inheritance. Think Jane Eyre.

Here is Hubert Crackanthorpe's version of this archetype:

"A blind desire to silence [Aunt Lisbet], to stamp the life out of her, swept
over Lilly. Seizing the parasol, which lay on the kitchen table, with all her
strength she Aunt Lisbet across the side of her head.

And over the thought of that blow she lingered, recalling it again and again,
repeating it in her mind with a strange, exquisite pleasure. For into it she had
put the hatred of years.

Aunt Lisbet uttered a low, plaintive moan -- the curious moan of sudden pain --
and fell, dragging with her on to the floor a pile of plates.

The crash sent every nerve in Lilly's body tingling, but when, a moment later,
Aunt Lisbet moved to get up, the blind, murderous desire returned. Another
brutal blow of the parasol, and she knocked her back again."

Hubert Crackanthorpe drowned (perhaps accidentally, perhaps taking his own life)
at age 26. His fiction is sometimes compared to that of de Maupassant, but I
prefer to think of him as the Dostoevsky that England never produced.

Source: 2010/05/parade-of-jargon

Title: Parade of Jargon
Date: May 14, 2010

At the coffee shop, reading Crackanthorpe and drinking my horrid decaf tea, a
phrase from the conversation of the important-looking business guys at the next
table wafted my way. "We don't have to re-invent the wheel." Wow, I thought to
myself, does anyone still perpetrate that old cliche -- and do so without a
shred of irony or self-awareness?  I listened more closely to them and in less
than five minutes plucked the following flowers of wilted rhetoric:

"From the get-go" -- "chicken-and-egg problem" -- "here's the pressure point" --
"low-hanging fruit" -- "where the rubber meets the road" -- "that's the genie
coming out of the bottle" -- "it's fifty-fifty"  -- "here's my quick pitch."

All useful phrases, I suppose. Shorthand. But, nevertheless, kind of
embarrassingly banal.

If these guys sensed my disapproval, why, they'd probably laugh all the way to
the bank.

My advice to them, and to others similarly situated: when you use cliches, try
to think outside the box and turn it into a win-win situation. You don't have
to knock the ball out of the park, language-wise, but you don't need to throw
anyone under the bus either. It's all water under the bridge that we'll cross
when we get there. Can we agree to disagree?  When you look at this problem
from the 30,000 foot level, then, and only then, can you eat the elephant one
bite at a time. So, let's give it 110%. And, you know, if you fail to plan, you
plan to fail. Are we all on the same page?

Source: 2010/05/still-another-directional-dyslexic-anxiety

Title: Still Another Directional Dyslexic Anxiety
Date: May 21, 2010

One of the awkwardnesses that we dysgeographicoids, or directional dyslexics
(or whatever you want to call us) have to come to grips with is -- being asked
for directions. You might just be walking down a street, more or less aware
of where you are, and a car pulls up next to you and a lady leans out of
the window and asks, how do you get to, let's say, the football stadium. I
don't know about you, but I immediately break into a sweat. Especially if
it's a place that I've been to a hundred times and ought to know like the
back of my hand. The best way to deal with the tension and anxiety generated
by such questions is to pretend complete ignorance: "I'm sorry, I'd like
to help you, but I'm a visitor here." Sure, it's an itsy-bitsy lie, but a
useful one, because the lady in the automobile is going to get much better
instructions from the next person she asks, who will probably be completely
normal, direction-wise.

I remember a particularly tragic instance of direction-giving-panic from my time
in England. I used to walk, once a week, from Charing Cross Station to the
British Museum. The streets were all a-tangle -- not a one of them parallel or
perpendicular. I carried a detailed map but nevertheless, week after week, I
managed to lose myself in the maze. I would have thought that I appeared to be
totally bewildered, but nevertheless, I was several times accosted by tourists
and asked the way to some monument or tube station. Of course I didn't have the
least clue.

Yesterday, walking to the library, a lady in an automobile asked me the
directions to Whole Foods. I  tried not to panic but I could feel the clammy
hand around my heart. "Which Whole Foods," I asked, stalling. "Nearest one."
Well, I've been there a hundred times, so I made an effort. Plus I knew it
was only two right turns. "A few blocks this way," I said, pointing, and then
turn right until 30th Street. Big shopping center on the left."  So the car
drove off and I spent the next ten minutes wondering whether I had given the
right directions. Is it after or before 30th Street? Is there an easier way?
Is the other Whole Foods closer than the one to which I sent her? What would a
directionally-gifted person have said?

But at least I hadn't sent her in the absolute wrong direction. I think.

More on directional dyslexia here, here, here, here, and here.

Source: 2010/05/brooklyn-watchamacallums

Title: Brooklyn Watchamacallums
Date: May 24, 2010

The 6' 8" Russian oligarch and billionaire Mikhail Dmitrievitch Prokhorov,
chairman of the conglomerate Polylus Gold and president of the Onexim Group has
acquired the New Jersey Nets. The Nets (or as they are sometimes known, the
Swamp Dragons), are moving to Atlantic Yards in Brooklyn year after next, and
Prokhorov wants to change the team's name to something more germane. It's a
monumental challenge to find the correct moniker. After all, what Brooklynite
would be content with Brooklyn Nets, especially when the New Jersey team carries
with a storied history of failure, mismanagement, and dysfunction. Who can
forget the sale, for a few paltry bucks, of Dr. J himself?

Should the Nets be renamed the Brooklyn Dodgers? Too presumptuous by
half. In honor of Prokhorov, how about the Brooklyn Billionaires?  Not fan-
friendly. Brooklyn Gold? Brooklyn Samovars? Brooklyn Borsht?

My good friend Otis Jefferson Brown proposes Brooklyn Eagles. I think it's a
brilliant idea. It has history, especially for those who remember the Brooklyn
Eagle (once edited by Walt Whitman -- 5 '11", 200); it has patriotism, it has
style, and it lends itself to headlines -- "Eagles Soar Once Again";  "Eagles
Tear Apart Hawks."

Unless someone comes up with a better name, I'm going with Brooklyn Eagles.

Source: 2010/05/replacing-children-in-in-america

Title: Replacing Children In In America
Date: May 25, 2010

I finally got around to watching In America, a film which won all sorts of
awards in 2002 and which I ordered from Netflix after it appeared on someone's
best films of the decade list. It's a fine movie, especially if you enjoy piping
your eye from dawn to dusk. Always susceptible, I cried a full quart. Samantha
Morton, familiar from her role as Hattie in Sweet and Lowdown, is endowed with
the most expressive face in the history of cinema, and the director of In
America, Jim Sheridan, is smart enough to take advantage of her features.

The story is not unfamiliar -- immigrants in America, culture-clash and
assimilation, poverty and a bit of triumph at the end.  he film skirts
dangerously close to cliche and occasionally falls over the precipice -- I'm
sorry but I've seen too many movies in which an emotionally-stunted hero waits
until the final frame before he breaks into tears.

In America is at heart a drama about replacing the dead child. Johnny and Sarah
Sheridan lost a boy to a brain tumor and they've been off balance ever since. 
They're not going to be whole until they make another baby. Sarah's pregnancy is
precarious and the parturition difficult, and in a contrived piece of hoakum,
the baby doesn't begin to thrive until the suffering soul of a dying friend is
mystically infused into her.

No thought is given (nor should it be) to the poor baby, whose whole life will
be colored by her entrance into the world as savior and redeemer and who will be
freighted with expectations that she will never be able to fulfill.

Source: 2010/05/at-the-backyard-barbecue

Title: At the Backyard Barbecue
Date: May 30, 2010

"I grew up in Durban and in Cape Town. It was a privileged enclave. I had no
idea what was going on except that when I competed in sports, there were kids
who had no shoes. That was my first awareness. I went to government schools, but
everyone was white. The teachers were not allowed to talk politics but we knew
how they felt. When I was eighteen and finished high school, I could either go
into the "police" or to jail.  f you were in the police or in the army, you
were going to fight the guerrillas in Angola or you were going to put down the
natives. My mother was British, so I had a British passport. I left the country.
I was a triathlete. Sometimes we were sent to train in South Africa. I knew then
that I could never come back. I lived in France for fourteen years. We lived in
southern France, in Marseilles and in Avignon. There were many Arabs and they
would jeer at my wife when she went running. We came to Boulder because of the
running community. It's a great place for children. It may be a bubble, but it's
a good bubble. I don't run anymore but I coach triathletes. It's what I know how
to do.

Mandela was amazing. He was very forgiving. I don't know if it will always be
forgiving. I completely understand the resentment."

Source: 2010/05/more-real-live-conversation-

Title: More Real Live Conversation
Date: May 31, 2010

Clerk at bookstore:  Can I help you find something?

Me:  My wife.  Have you seen her?

Clerk.  Possibly.  Probably.  How long since you saw her last?

Me.  Only a few minutes.  But she has a habit of being abducted by aliens.

Clerk:  Have you tried Metaphysics, upstairs?

Source: 2010/06/postfriendly-skies

Title: Post-Friendly Skies
Date: June 03, 2010

It had been a while since I last flew Frontier --the airline with the cute furry
anthropomorphic talking mammals on their tails. There have been some changes
-- all of them for the worse. There's now an extra charge for each piece of
luggage. Those free meals are a thing of the remote past. So are the days when
you would get the entire can of ginger ale or tomato juice. It's now a splash of
juice in a cup of ice. No free TV -- you swipe your card, they swipe your cash.
The seats are smaller, too. More rows,less leg room. Wasn't there a time when
air travel was glamorous? Now it's just a big Greyhound in the sky, a warehouse
on wings.

Not only was my seat compressed, but the back didn't recline.  Somehow I had
signed up for a seat that bordered on the emergency exit row. In earlier planes,
such seats used to recline, but I'm guessing that Frontier has gained a few
inches by rendering the backs immobile -- at the cost of my comfort (but not at
reduced cost).

Adding to the insult is an unapologetic sign on the back of the seat in front
of me inscribed with the words NO RECLINE THIS SEAT. I wonder what language
the author of this sign think he is using. Not English, that's for sure. "No
recline this seat" does not even come close to parsing. What would it have cost
Frontier to affix a sign that read "the seats in this row do not recline." Where
do they outsource their signs -- to Mars? No recline this seat!!  Come on,
frontiersmen; you can do better than that. If you have no respect for me, at
least have a little respect for the language. The talking animals speak better
English.

To the chief of sign-makers at Frontier I say, "No hire this job."

There was another sign for me to stare out while I sat there, miserably cramped,
watching the clock. "LIFE VEST UNDER YOUR SEAT."  Is Frontier banging the
frugality drum a little too hard? The sentence might have read, "Life vest
IS under your seat."  How much could a trifling copulative verb cost?  If
Frontier wanted to be truly prodigal, it could even have raised the cash to
provide an indefinite article: "A life vest is under your seat." Wow. A complete
sentence!. What a concept!

Source: 2010/06/childhood-memory

Title: Childhood Memory and Prolegomenon to Any Future Epistemology
Date: June 17, 2010

I would have been six or seven years old, so it was 1945 or 1946. I was
visiting the apartment at 334 Eastern Parkway where my grandmother lived
with Aunt Mollie. Mollie and my father were engaged in an earnest conversation
of which I understood not a whit. I suspect that they were speaking the
language of the old country. Very likely they didn't want me to know what they
were saying.

I was on the floor studying what I now realize was some sort of halftone
illustration. Perhaps a magazine illustration -- something from Life or Look or
Collier's. Halftone is a style of reproduction in which a picture is comprised
of a myriad of tiny dots. When halftones are done inexpensively, as in comic
books, the dots are plainly visible. When they're done expertly, they're almost
beyond the perception of the human eye. But they're not invisible to the
inspection of a small child.

I said to my father and to my aunt something to the effect that "if you look
at this picture closely, you can see a lot of dots." I passed the illustration
to my father. He said, "No, there are no dots there." I said, "Look again. I
can see dots."  He looked again and so did Mollie. "Nope, no dots," they both
agreed. They handed back the picture and resumed their discussion. I had been,
in modern terms, totally dissed.

"Who are you going to believe? Me, or your own eyes?" says Chicolini in Duck
Soup.

I was shocked. My father, whom I knew to be correct in all things -- to deny
the existence of something that I could plainly detect. And my aunt as well.
Two adults, neither one who had ever been wrong about anything! What was going
on here? What was a child to think? It was a moment of great revelation, and a
turning point in my worldly experience.

Well, I wasn't about to argue with such formidable figures. But I knew in my
heart that I was right and they were wrong, wrong, wrong.

I also knew that I had to choose between Authority and my own senses. And of
course I chose sensation. The picture was made out of dots, no matter what they
said.

But my infant mind did not rest. At that moment, I knew that I would never ever
put blind trust in authority, never again. If my own father couldn't see the
dots and I could, then how could I believe anything that was contrary to the
evidence of my senses. My infant bosom got its back up, and I became a skeptic
-- and I've remained a skeptic.

It was not until many years later that I realized that the senses themselves
could be untrustworthy.  But by that time, my habits were fixed. In a contest
between authority and the evidence of the senses -- it would be sense all the
way.

Source: 2010/07/an-unsettling-anecdote-1

Title: An Unsettling Anecdote
Date: July 13, 2010

There's an article in the current Harvard Magazine on the subject of
caregiving. (I've been thinking about caregiving quite a bit the last while,
because I've been the recipient of a lot of it, having been bedridden for a
couple of weeks with a slipped, or herniated, or ruptured disc). Taking care of
me has been a chore, performed with great grace and generosity by Mrs. Dr. M,
by Dr. M's oldest son, and by his son's wonderful wife.

The article on caregiving begins with a striking, unsettling anecdote.

In 1966, as a visiting medical student at a London teaching hospital, I
interviewed a husband and wife, in their early twenties, who had recently
experienced a truly calamitous health catastrophe. On their wedding night, in
their first experience of sexual intercourse, a malformed blood vessel in the
husband’s brain burst, leaving him with a disabling paralysis of the right
side of his body. Stunned and guilt-ridden, the couple clutched hands and
cried silently as they shared their suffering with me. My job was to get the
neurological examination right and diagnose where the rupture had taken place.

The author's point is that a diagnosis is incomplete in the absence of
compassion, not only in this most dramatic case but in more ordinary occasions.

It has been difficult for me to keep my mind off this traumatized young couple
--- stepping enthusiastically and it would appear naively into a first adventure
in sexual expression only to be overwhelmed by an out-of-the-blue horror. It's
a sorrow beyond ordinary sorrow. I wish that the author had added a paragraph
in which he reported that the young man recovered, that surgery corrected the
defect, and that the couple went on to live a long and satisfying life. I fear
that the absence of such a report means that there was no good news. Starting
with an aneurysm in the brain, it's easy to descend into scenarios of doom.

Ah life! So many potential disasters out there, so many bullets to dodge.

Even while I'm lying here, unable to get around without pain, I know that I've
lived a most fortunate life. No intercourse-related aneurysms, for one thing.

Source: 2010/07/on-pain

Title: On Pain
Date: July 16, 2010

Regular readers of this blague have got to be wondering -- where have you
gone, Dr. Metablog? A hungry readership turns their lonely eyes to you (woo
woo woo}. We're missing your pithy and astute commentary. All these athletic
contests come and gone, even including the World Cup, and all those political
follies, and not a word of commentary?  How can it be, Dr. M? Cat got your
tongue?

Well, dear blogreaders, the fact of the matter is that Dr. M. has been sidelined
with an injury and has been languishing on the disabled list. Ruptured his disc,
he did. L5 if you want to be specific. On his back now these last two weeks,
gulping the oxycodone, enduring a series of trips down there to the regional
hospital. Dependent on family and friends for succor and sustenance

Lying here, solitary for longer periods than is his wont, Dr. M,, who never
had a mind for philosophy, has had an opportunity to meditate on a subject of
particular relevance to his condition. He's been thinking about pain. About
dealing with pain.

Sometimes even Dr. M has to deal with very practical problems.

At the hospital, various "providers" ask me, over and over again, to "put
a number from 1 to 10 on the degree of your discomfort."  "Imagine," they
say, that 10 is the worst pain that you can conceive, what is your number?"
For me, this becomes a very difficult question, and one to which I don't
know how to respond honestly or accurately. For one thing,  I have a rather
vivid imagination, and for another, I've read more than is healthy about
ingenious systems of medieval and "renaissance" torture. It's true that my
back hurts, and the pain is real, but it's nothing compared to the worst that
human beings have endured or can be compelled to endure. I'm sorry to say that
I can imagine pain an order of magnitude beyond what my questioner can begin to
conceptualize.

But if I should say, "one" on a scale of one to ten, they'd throw me out of the
hospital and give my place to a more deserving patient. So I say, "eight and a
half" or "nine" -- not because such a number has the least bit of meaning but
because I think I've given my interrogators the magic number that will allow me
to get the care I need.

I have a friend who had a very painful form of arthritis, but couldn't get the
attention of the medical establishment for many horrible months -- until he
answered the pain question with "I'm going to go out in the backyard and shoot
myself." Then he was diagnosed and put on medication in an hour.

Moreover, I don't know how to measure my pain against another's. My eight
might be someone else's five, or vice versa. I don't want to be theatrical
(I can't bear to be a spectacle), but I also have no desire to be excessively
stoical. A ruptured disc hurts. Ask anyone who's been there. Is it equivalent
to childbirth? I suspect not. I know that burns are supposed to be infinitely
more agonizing. I got to the point of wincing and moaning and feeling faint,
but not to fainting or writhing or screaming. And I could always get relief
from oxycodone, which is not always the case in more serious situations. I even
had some morphine, which, at the time, was surprisingly ineffective. Now I'm on
the road to recovery, I believe, and the pain is very much handled with those
horse- size ibuprofen. But ten days ago it was all narcotics, all the time. And
I was grateful for them. Very much so.

I am reminded once again that pain is isolating. It separates you from your
friends. You live in the pain, and with the pain, and you deal with the pain.
You can't communicate it and you don't want to communicate it.

I fault myself for not having been sufficiently empathetic during my lifetime to
the pain that other people have experienced.

While I've been lying here, I've read two books by daring people who do not
hesitate to court pain. The kind of person who decides to climb an unclimbable
mountain, break his leg and then drags himself miles, freezing, starving,
crippled. The kind of person who leaves warm hearth and happy home to walk to
the South Pole dragging a two hundred kilogram sledge. These folks endure all
sorts of horrors, voluntarily. Then they write books about their pain (whole
paragraphs which I involuntarily skim and skip). When I read these stories, I
feel like a wimp to complain about a ruptured disc. On the other hand, I feel
sane -- not to have deliberately injured myself for the sake of some wild,
inexplicable impulse.

Source: 2010/07/miss-dusenberry

Title: Miss Dusenberry
Date: July 17, 2010

Miss Dusenberry, an English teacher at Erasmus Hall High School, was a
formidable presence.

It was 1954 or 1955 and I was a junior, carrying just sixteen years of
experience on my skinny back. To my shy, inhibited self, Miss Dusenberry (Edna?
Grace?) was perceived as ancient (50s), statuesque (5' 10"), domineering (she
spoke authoritatively on all things literary) and wildly eccentric. She wore
fragrant cosmetics and bedecked herself with so many bracelets and bangles that,
striding imperiously around the room, she jingled atonally and constantly.

My schoolwork did not please her. Miss Dusenberry derailed my educational
career, demoting me from the honors track in English (where the bright students
were grouped and where lessons were taught) to the general track where
classrooms were disorderly, students ranged from noncompliant to sociopathic,
and it was assumed that nothing would be learned, and it wasn't.

Yesterday, on an odd nostalgic impulse, I re-read Hawthorne's Young Goodman
Brown for the first time in close to sixty years. The story is more shocking to
me now than it could possibly have been in the 50s, when I had no background
to understand puritanism or the manichean view of the world. The story is more
alarming in what it takes for granted about American culture than for what it
consciously critiques. Hawthorne's world is not and never has been, my America.

Not only was I distressed by the story, but my mind flew back, or regressed,
to Miss Dusenberry herself, who tried to present the story to unsophisticated,
un- empathetic me back there in the Duke Snider/Joe McCarthy/Sid Caesar
era. No wonder that I flopped in Miss D's class. Good grief, was I ever
unwordly/unPuritan! On my intellectual horizon, the big worry was whether Roy or
Gil might go hitless two days in a row. I had not the merest tad of experience
(or even reading) to bring to bear on the elucidation of a dark allegorical
treatment of severe Calvinist soul-sickness. Didn't, for that matter, know what
Christians were talking about, except that the women and the kids dressed up and
went to mass on Sundays (in our Neapolitan and Sicilian immigrant neighborhood,
men stayed home and washed the car). There were no devils, real, imaginary, or
allegorical in my deep, mysterious forests -- and no forests either, in concrete
Brooklyn. I had no concept of spiritual despair or sin or damnation or salvation
or any such things -- still don't in fact -- not in any personal way.

Anyway, back in Erasmus Hall, Miss Dusenberry led the class through some
stories by Hawthorne. We might even have read The House of Seven Gables --
that other novel, the one with the A-word, would have been far too sexual and
embarrassing. Then came the unit exam and that's when the allegorical world of
Calvinism hit the fan of naive Flatbush literalism. The topic on which we were
assigned to write an in-class essay was -- "Is there balm in Gilead?"

I got to tell you, I was buffaloed.

It's easy to look back now, sixty years later, and translate Miss Dusenberry's
question into "in Hawthorne's view, is there hope for spiritual redemption in
a fallen universe?" An invitation, I must say, to turn the bullshittery up to
eleven. But I didn't know the word "balm" and I had never heard of "Gilead."
I didn't know the hymn and I most certainly didn't know that there was any
such thing as a Book of Jeremiah which contained relevant dark sentences to be
interpreted allegorically or mystically.

So I failed, ignominiously. Not the worst failure of my childhood -- being
thrown out at home plate when I had been sent in as a pinch-runner was a
far greater ignominy. But to tell truth, I've never made my peace with Miss
Dusenberry. Her bangles occasionally rattle my sleep.

Hawthorne? well, I've just kind of set him to one side.

Source: 2010/09/wisdom

Title: Paternal Wisdom
Date: September 13, 2010

Regular readers of Dr. Metablog know that the good doctor has been flat on his
back for a couple of months.  However, I'm glad to say, the crisis has passed
and I'm upright once again.

While lying there I had an opportunity to think about old times. I began to
recall some things that my father used to say.  I wouldn't say proverbs or
gnomic wisdom or anything so formal -- just sentences that would occasionally,
casually, pass his lips.  Here are a few of them, lightly annotated.

1."Never omit an opportunity to do a someone a favor, and never be embarrassed
to accept a favor." My father would say, "people like to help each other."  My
own experience has confirmed my father's wisdom and I've tried to follow his
example. However, there was a time that I ran into a stone wall with this one, 
I was forced into close dealings with a man whom it was impossible to help --
because whenever I did something for him, he thought that it meant that he had
outwitted me. My favor, offered freely, became his triumph. Needless to say, our
relationship did not prosper.

2.  "Anyone can get rich if he makes it the entire effort of his life."  My father was the least materialistic person I've ever known. He had no possessions and wanted none. Not only did money hold no allure, but he was contemptuous of those who felt the need to acquire it. But was he right? Can "anyone" get rich?  I don't think so. I've known people who tried and have gone down in flames.  But I certainly understand my father's point.

3.  "When the stock market is going up, everyone's a genius." I know that my father owned one stock in his entire life -- because a friend insisted. He would have kept his cash in the mattress if he could have. I think that recent world economic events confirm his sentence and lead to a corollary -- "sometimes the geniuses only seem to be geniuses."

4.  "Never get into an argument with a drunk." He was certainly 100% on target on this one. There's just no odds -- even if you win the argument, the drunk doesn't know it. Plus the jerk is liable to throw the beer bottle at you. (I doubt that my father was drunk a single time in his entire life. I was drunk once, in 1962, and it was enough).

5.  "Try to do the things you're not good at." He said that when he was younger he would say, "I don't like to swim" when the truth of the matter was that he wasn't a good swimmer. (He was a fine athlete.)  He would counsel me -- "do what if you're not good at it. Try it."  I wish I could say that I've honored this precept, but in all honesty, I haven't. Sorry, pop.

6.  "Don't forget to wash behind your ears."

7.  "Always try to appeal to the better side of human nature."  For example, in raising children, you should not punish a child; instead, you should say, "you don't want to be the kind of person who would do such-and--such."  I believe this saying of his to be practical and useful. Needless to say, my father didn't respect  that side of the political/ religious/ social spectrum that considers human beings to be fallen, inherently depraved and selfish creatures. He was basically optimistic -- though his optimism was certainly tempered by the public events of his last decade.

8.  "Never run with the crowd for the sake of being one of the boys."  This saying was central to his view of the world. I believe it came out of some particular experience of his youth but he never shared the details with me. I can certainly say that I've honored this precept -- perhaps to a fault. I could have been more sociable, more "clubbable"

Source: 2010/09/scamels-from-the-rocke

Title: "Scamels from the Rocke"
Date: September 17, 2010

Not only Shakespeare specialists, but lay readers and playgoers are puzzled
by Caliban's mysterious "scamels."

From the context, it's clear that scamels are an easily obtained food. Listen
as Caliban lists some of the items he can gather from his island's prodigious
storehouse:

I prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow;

And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts,

Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how

To snare the nimble marmoset.  I'll bring thee

To clust'ring filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee

Young scamels from the rock.

Alas and alack, there is no such thing as a "scamel."

Caliban's taste in food is catholic, as is to be expected of a hunter-
gatherer. Nevertheless, his is not an appealing diet. "Crabs" could refer
either to crustaceans or to crab-apples. "Pig-nuts" are barely edible tubers. A
"jay's nest" does not sound gourmetish, and even if Caliban means the jays
themselves, he's not chosen a species of bird famous for flavor. The "nimble
marmoset" is a small monkey which a 1613 pamphlet (too late for The Tempest,
written c. 1611) acknowledged to be "good meat". "Filberts"  Shakespeare's
spelling is 'Philbirts') are also called hazelnuts, the North American variety
of which -- the unappetizing beaked hazelnut -- is better browsed by our native
deer than by homines sapientes. But what, prithee, are these peculiar scamels?

Among the older guesses: shamois (young kids); scannel (a kind of hawk); scams
(a dialectical word for limpets, or snails); seamar, or wild trefoil; sarcelle,
the French word for the teal; scallion; seagull.

But modern scholarship has coalesced around "sea-mell." It's now thought (by
90% of those who have studied the question) that Shakespeare knew a manuscript
report about a shipwreck called "A true repertory of the wreck and redemption
of Sir Thomas Gates, Knight, upon and from the islands of the Bermudas...July
15, 1610," which was not printed until 1625 in Purchas his Pilgrimes. Among the
details that Shakespeare found in the "true repertory" was a brief account of
a bird called a "sea-meawe": "a kind of web-footed fowl there is, the bigness
of an English plover... [which] hovering in the air made a strange hollow and
harsh howling.... Our men found a pretty way to take them, which was by standing
on the rocks or sands ... whereof the birds would come flocking to that place
nearer and nearer."

"Sea-meawes"  (a variant of seamell) was the word that Shakespeare encountered
in the manuscript letter.

I believe that he read the second letter of sea-meawe not as an "e" but as a
"c", or, alternatively, Shakespeare's own ms "e" was misread as a "c" by Ralph
Crane, the scrivener who prepared a fair copy of Shakespeare's holograph for
publication --  or perhaps even the compositor  who was assigned to set the
Folio page A5v misread Crane's fair copy. A "scamel," I'm .9 positive, is a
seabird hunted from a rock; it's a sea-mew or sea-mell.

The Tempest is filled with words compounded of the prefix "sea" and a second
element: sea-nymphs, sea-sorrow, sea-change, sea-swallowed, sea-marge. Why would
Shakespeare not have been enchanted by the fortuitous "seamell?" Scamel indeed!

Source: 2010/09/magic-only-goes-so-far

Title: Wood Heat, c. 1611
Date: September 19, 2010

There are many curious ideas and events in Shakespeare's Tempest. Here's a
trivial one that both bothers and amuses me. For what reason does Prospero
keep Caliban in his service and close to home even after he has tried to rape
Miranda? Here's the puzzling explanation offered by the great magus himself: 
"We cannot miss [do without] him.  He does make our fire,/ Fetch in our wood,
and serves in offices/ That profit us."

The very vague "serves in offices/ That profit us" tells us that even
Shakespeare had a hard time justifying Caliban, whose only occupation, it would
seem, is to keep the Prosperian fireplace well stoked. He's certainly not
keeping the books.

My puzzle: Prospero is a great magician. He can raise storms, put people into
trances, devise supernatural banquets and shows, release spirits from cloven
pines, and even (though we don't see it) raise the dead ("Graves at my command/
Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth.") If he's so supremely
golldarned powerful why can't he magically gather his own firewood? Come to
think of it, why does he need firewood at all? Instead of using a stove or
fireplace, why does't he just command Ariel to warm things up a bit.

Now I am aware that my concern here is a little on the ridiculous side.
Shakespeare is simply making up an excuse to keep Caliban around because Caliban
is essential to the play. Nevertheless, it's an odd justification -- although
in truth no odder than that Shakespeare feels it necessary to give Caliban a
practical, down-to-earth function in such a wildly unmoored-to-reality play.

(When I was a teacher I would always run aground of the engineering student
who would explain to me that Gregor Samsa's metamorphosis into a beetle was
unrealistic because a beetle of human size couldn't be supported on insect
legs and would be too large to breathe through spirochetes. "It's a story," I
would respond. "A fiction. You have to suspend disbelief. You can't accept the
transformation but boggle at Gregor's breathing.")

Similarly, it is foolish for me to believe, so to speak, in Caliban, and yet to
worry about his log-carrying. Or about the temperature of Prospero's home.

But I think there is a point to be made about Shakespeare. He could imagine
magic but he could not get his mind around practical, down-to-earth post-
Baconian technology. He had no trouble making his characters fly, but he
couldn't imagine a room (or a cave) being heated except by wood, magically
chainsawed and laboriously stacked. In Cymbeline, impatient Imogen, in need of
quick transport to Milford Haven, asks for a horse with wings, not a helicopter.
Shakespeare was not a technological visionary.

Source: 2010/09/brief-remarks-on-fritters-and-turnips

Title: Brief Remarks on Fritters and Turnips
Date: September 22, 2010

Shakespeare's The Merry Wives of Windsor is a moderately successful play but
not among Shakespeare's greatest hits. Nevertheless, there are two fragments
of first-class witty dialogue that continue to tickle me even after all these
years. The first is Falstaff's indignation at Parson Evans's Welsh-accented
transformation of the words "cheese" and "butter." EVANS:  Seese is not good to
give putter. Your belly is all putter."  FALSTAFF:  "'Seese' and 'putter.' 
Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes fritters of English."
There's no mystery about the the imaginatively inappropriate word " fritters" --
it simply means chopped meat fried in a batter.  I don't know why "fritters"
amuses me so, but it does. It's off-target and off-kilter and yet so very
concrete and specific.

The second, and even funnier moment, is when Anne Page, one of the few sensible
characters in the play, makes it clear that she won't marry the foolish Dr.
Caius. "Alas," she says, "I had rather be set quick i'th'earth/ And bowled to
death with turnips."  "Set quick" means "buried alive," presumably up to the
neck, but it's the lovely, unexpected "turnips" that produces the laughter,
perhaps because no one before or since has thought to employ the usually
harmless vegetable as a deadly weapon.  I read the police blotters, I should
know.

For the record, Shakespeare never, In the 38+ plays, used either word again. He
knew that he had squeezed meaning enough out of both "fritters" and "turnips."

Source: 2010/09/sleep-thou-ape-of-death-cym

Title: Somnus Imago Mortis
Date: September 27, 2010

It's an ancient commonplace -- sleep is the image of death.  In some versions,
it's a preparation for death: God has provided us with sleep to get us ready for
our inevitable end.  "Somnus imago mortis" is all over Shakespeare:  "sleep
thou ape of death,"  "death-counterfeiting sleep," etc.

My own personal sleep is so wracked with awakenings and nightmares and night-
sweats and fluff in the lung and a feverish tongue that I can't easily think of
it as a preparation for anything.  For me, sleep is rather a task, an effort,
than a period of oblivion.  I want my tombstone to be inscribed with the motto,
"No more insomnia, forever."

But just six weeks ago, I experienced a pure "somnus imago mortis" moment.  I
was on a gurney, drugged, prepared for surgery.  I was wheeled into a room. 
Time came to a complete halt.  And then several hours later I was awakened.
Nothing -- nothing -- intervened from the time that I was put under until the
moment when I came to. (Perhaps there was an amnesic in the drug cocktail -- I
wouldn't know.)

It was such a profound and eventless sleep that it has, in fact, prepared me for
the sleep of death.  There was not a whisper, not a thought, nothing.  Now, at
last, I know how it will be.

In the hospital, there was a very welcome rebirth.  But why, then, does the
phrase, "I have been half in love with easeful death" continue to resonate in my
brain?

Source: 2010/09/cymbeline

Title: "Beyond Beyond."
Date: September 29, 2010

I sometimes think that I must be the world's number one fan of Shakespeare's
Cymbeline, which I have just re-read twice during the past week. Here's a play
that is seldom performed, infrequently read, rarely referenced, and omitted from
most university courses on Shakespeare. Although it's generally grouped with
the last plays or, as they have come to be called, the romances, surely fifty
people know The Tempest for everyone who is familiar with The Winter's Tale and
ten people know The Winter's Tale for everyone who knows (or has even heard the
name) of Cymbeline. Nevertheless, I love the play; it's perpetually entrancing.

Cymbeline is the most densely plotted of all of Shakespeare's plays and as
a result, it's difficult to follow, especially on the first dozen or score
of readings. It's so dense with plot that, in order to cram everything in,
Shakespeare devised a most elliptical and condensed style of speech. There are
some sentences to which I must still refer to the footnotes for explication --
and sometimes the footnote says, "seems to mean," or "perhaps means, but might
also mean."  Moreover, it's a hard play to read for those who don't come to it
with a deep familiarity with other of Shakespeare plays, because sometimes the
author seems to condense into a phrase or two an idea which he had explored more
fully in an earlier work. For example, in a number of the comedies there is an
opening scene in which characters discuss their unhappiness -- simply in order
to establish a situation in which the play can proceed from sadness to joy. And
frequently there's an early reference to the contrast between private emotion
and public posture.  n terse, economical Cymbeline, Shakespeare gets these
forms out of the way in a flash. An otherwise unknown "Gentleman" begins the
play: "You do not meet a man but frowns. Our bloods/ No more obey the heavens
than our courtiers/ Still seem as does the King."  And we're off and running. 
(Brief translation of the proceeding lines: everyone is sad because they attend
to the King's disposition.) It's a forbidding start -- but it covers an enormous
lot of ground. As it must, because Cymbeline brings on stage a wicked queen and
her doltish son, a physician expert in drugs that cause a person to simulate
death (just as in Romeo), a fair princess later to disguise herself as a page,
two brothers stolen from the court in swaddling clothes who will become military
heroes, an invasion of England by Roman forces, a low-born suitor of great worth
who will suffer exile but eventually return to claim his bride, an Italian
schemer who wagers than he can seduce a princess, and, moreover, the dream-
vision appearance of the hero's dead mother, father and brothers -- and finally
a guest appearance of Jove himself who descends on a machine to intervene
and prophesy. The play spends four and a half acts tying up thick plot-knots
and then a half an act unloosening them. Twenty-four misunderstandings are
clarified in couple of hundred lines. The conclusion is a miracle -- or rather,
a succession of miracles. Cymbeline is as manipulative as manipulative can be,
but I've never been able to read its last lines without dropping real tears.

My favorite scene, just to give an idea of how complicated and outrageous a play
it is, comes when Imogen (or in some modern texts Innogen), the princess, awakes
from drugged sleep to discover the ass Cloten (who "Cannot take two from twenty,
for his heart,/ And leave eighteen) to be dead, his head having been struck off,
but wearing the clothes of her lover Posthumus Leonatus (a long story). Imogen
naturally takes the one for the other, their bodies being apparently of the same
stature. She mourns her headless enemy as though he were her friend. It's a
truly bizarre, grotesque and wonderful scene. It is, as Imogen says in another
context, "beyond beyond."

Cymbeline is a rare treasure -- but it's not for the faint of heart, not for
skimmers.

Source: 2010/10/anatomy

Title: Beast of a Book
Date: October 03, 2010

I read Anatomy of a Beast by Michael McLeod, cover to cover, but I'm gol-durned
if I know why I did so.  A bad habit, finishing bad books.  And it is a bad
book -- badly written and badly edited.  Well, I'm exaggerating.  It's not all
that bad.  There's enough material in its 222 padded-like-an-old mattress pages
to make a good 2200 word essay.  Why is this book published by the University
of California Press when there are so many serious academic manuscripts unable
to find a publisher.  Anatomy of a Beast has "trade book" written all over it
-- the breathless first-person narrative, the transparently-contrived Quest, the
anecdotal style.

Good golly, Miss Molly, I'm allowing myself to get carried away.

What's it about?  Anatomy of a Beast examines the Bigfoot legend.  Finds it
false, a concoction of fakery and gullibility.  So far so good.  But that's
as far as it goes.  There's no persuasive analysis of the phenomenon and no
serious attempt to relate it to other frauds, conspiracy theories and other
spiritualisms and mass delusions.

Why is the famous Bigfoot film of 1968 still taken seriously years even after
the man who wore the gorilla suit has confessed?   I don't know.  Nor do
I know why crop circles are given tv-time after the man who perpetrated the
fraud described exactly how he did so.  Why are there posters on billboards
all over my town, today,  advertising "A Course in Miracles" to be offered by
a guy whose credential is that he just returned from India having studied with
some revered swami (and this 250 years after Hume's Essay on Miracles)?

Why do people -- apparently sensible people -- ask me if I think that
Shakespeare really wrote the plays?   Why do a majority of Americans not
"believe in" evolution?

Has the Age of Reason been cancelled?

A better, more challenging discussion of Bigfoot and other "cryptozoological"
fantasies might have earned a place in the story.  Not this disappointing book.

Source: 2010/10/a-conversation-in-romeo-and-juliet

Title: A Conversation in Romeo and Juliet
Date: October 04, 2010

The artistry of Romeo and Juliet I.v.30-41 is, I fear, under-appreciated. It's
an utterly revolutionary moment in the history of the drama, but it's so subtle,
so art-that-hides-art, that it easily slips under the radar. Let me quote in
full.

Capulet.  Nay sit, nay sit, good cousin Capulet,

For you and I are past our dancing days.

How long is't now since last yourself and I

Were in a masque?

Cousin Capulet.   By'r Lady, thirty years.

Capulet.  What, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.

'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio

Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,

Some five and twenty years: and then we masqu'd.

Cousin Capulet.  "Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir:

His son is thirty.

Capulet.    Will you tell me that?

His son was but a ward two years ago.

Romeo.  What lady's that which doth enrich the hand

Of yonder knight?

Romeo and Juliet is a play of rhetorical experimentation. In its course,
Shakespeare employs extravagant puns and wordplay, rhyme, prose, embedded
sonnets, stichomythia, two passages of contrived, Petrarchan oxymora, outrageous
bawdy, lament both real and parodic -- everything, in fact, that was in the
garner of a 1590s playwright.

The overlooked conversation between old Capulet and his cousin is an
innovative piece of rhetoric of Shakespeare's own invention. It's simply
everyday, colloquial conversation -- in his time, a complete and utter novelty.

It's two old guys talking the way old guys talk when they're savoring the past.
Repetitions: "'tis not so much, 'tis not so much" and "'tis more, 'tis more";
mock challenge: "will you tell me that"?; references to details known only to
the participants: "Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio..."; homely exaggerations:
"His son was but a ward two years ago." Even though Shakespeare casts the
passage in blank verse, he manages to capture the authentic sound of real
people engaged in real conversation.

But why?  It's all a trick or device to set off the sentence of Romeo's that
follows.

Unlike the Capulet cousins, Romeo is wholly captured by the language
of splendid and hyperbolic love-longing. Shakespeare therefore encourages his
audience to contrast the everyday quality of "His son was but a ward two
years ago" with Romeo's "What lady's that which doth enrich the hand/ Of
yonder knight." Needless to say, there are no knights at this merchant-class
gathering. "Knights" are a creation of Romeo's imagination. So is
the slightly archaic phrase "yonder knight," which is directly out of the
world of romance and clashes magnificently with the context that Shakespeare
has so carefully contrived. So too the inversion "what lady's that" instead of
"who is that lady" and the highly poetical (and supremely beautiful) "enrich
the hand."

Romeo's sentence is at the same time very serious and highly comic -- a triumph
of Shakespeare's original and  almost invisible craft.

Source: 2010/10/horse-feathers-1932-everyone-says-i-love-you-1996

Title: Horse Feathers (1932) /Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
Date: October 06, 2010

Goodness gracious! I should have known that the two films were distant cousins
-- after all, Woody Allen's film (one of his very best, and certainly his most
genial) ends with an extended tribute to Groucho in which everyone wears
phony mustaches and pretends to puff on stogies. But not having taken a look
at Horse Feathers in twenty or thirty years, I failed to realize how much
Woody had borrowed. How could I have forgotten that Everyone Says I Love
You extracts and transforms two songs from Horse Feathers: "I'm Through With
Love" as well as its own title song. And of course it shares its liberated
and episodic series- of-skits structure not only with Groucho but with all
vaudevillians. Not to mention a willingness to throw logic to the winds or under
the bus for the sake of a gag. Everyone Says I Love You is a lovely, gentle
film (much more mild than its raucous unsubtle predecessor).

Its exhilarating choreography is very distinctly not indebted to anything in the
earlier film.

Some ambitious scholar could write an illuminating essay on Woody's Marxism.

Source: 2010/10/sign-of-the-times

Title: Sign of the Times
Date: October 07, 2010

I had a prescription to fill for amoxicillin.  I noticed that there's a
new pharmacy on Pearl Street;  or at least I thought there is.  It's
called by the very pharmacy-sounding name Boulder Rx.  I walked in: 
very definitely not a pharmacy.  Not when there's a large illustration
of marijuana leaf and a sign that reads "Headies."  And a very thick probably
bullet-proof plate glass window separating customers from clerk.  Sign of the
times.  MMJ (medical marijuana) is now perfectly legal here in Colorado.

I took my prescription elsewhere.

From the Boulder Rx website:  "Menu: Bubba Kush, Tangerine Kush, Sour D,
Chemdog, Godfather, Sour Kush, Purple Cinderella, Mananuska, OG Kush." 
Different strains, not doubt designed to attack different diseases.  I wonder
exactly what is cured by Purple Cinderalla.

Toto, I've a feeling we're not in Kansas anymore.

Source: 2010/10/we-are-all-frail-brooks-conrad

Title: We Are All Frail/  Brooks Conrad
Date: October 14, 2010

Even moderately serious baseball-watchers know that we've just experienced a
disaster of the Mickey Owens-Willie Davis-Bill Buckner variety. Poor Brooks
Conrad, a journeyman infielder, playing for the Atlanta Braves in an important
playoff game, committed three horrible errors. He bobbled a ball, dropped a
popup, and then, with the game on the line, let a routine grounder go right
through his legs. He was nutmegged, as they say in soccer. Game over, Atlanta
eliminated. The hi-def TV camera focussed on him, allowing millions of Americans
to lipread the poor guy's puzzled, exasperated, embarrassed, "What the fuck."
Interviewed after the game, Conrad was more decorous but no less defeated: "I
wanted to dig a hole and go to sleep in it."

Sleep won't do it, because Conrad's errors will be re-played forever and ever
and ever.

The play that lost the game was one that Brooks Conrad has made time and time
again -- at Arizona State, during his ten years in the minors, and during
his three-year (229 at bats, 53 hits) and now completed major league career.
He wouldn't have been in the game -- as a substitute for the injured Martin
Prado -- if he didn't have the ability to put a glove on a pop fly or handle
a ground ball. One of the announcers called it accurately:  "they say you
make errors with the glove but in this case the problem is right between his
ears."  Brooks Conrad somehow lost the ability to do things that should have
been entirely routine  -- which is why I feel so sorry for him, and why I
identify so strongly with him.  It could happen to anybody, anytime. I remember
once driving along on a big four-lane and for a second I forgot which foot
operated the accelerator and which the clutch.  I panicked, momentarily, but I
recovered, and no one ever knew.  didn't have millions of people watching me
and clucking.

I'm glad to say that the next day, when Brooks took the field during warmups (he
was mercifully held out of the game), Atlanta fans gave him a big cheer. "We are
all frail," as Angelo says, and it's not wrong for us to be reminded of it once
in a while. But poor Brooks, condemned to a lifetime of waking up in the middle
of the night, Buster Posey's grounder skidding past his glove and through his
legs, runners endlessly, one after another, in an infinitely loop, crossing home
plate to the deafening roar of the crowd.

Source: 2010/10/milagro

Title: Milagro 51, Ciencia 49
Date: October 18, 2010

A Chilean newspaper, El Espectador, has reported the results of a poll of
its readers. When asked about the recent rescue of the thirty-three Copiapo
miners, 49% of readers attributed the success to "ciencia" while 51% judged it
a "milagro." A miracle?  It what universe?  What could they be thinking? The
rescue was all hard work and ingenuity and high speed percussive drilling.
There's nothing the least bit supernatural about such a triumph.

Nor does it do any good to blame those primitive superstitious Chileans.
Americans would have divided  similarly -- with a higher score for "milagro" in
our ultra-benighted South and a somewhat lower score in the only semi-benighted
North. Even on my very own Facebook page, a number of friends of "friends" (not
my own "friends" I'm glad to say), posted exultantly, "This proves that God is
real."  No it doesn't -- it proves only that the true believers have no use for
evidence or reason. Why does the great signifier in the sky get the credit for
the rescue but no blame for the collapse that caused the disaster. And would the
god-enthusiasts have abandoned their belief if the men had died. Not a chance.
They would fallen back on the old bromide, not for us to question the will of
god -- or employed some other kind of trapeze artist illogic.

A miracle! Humbug! If a superman-like hand of god had come down from the heavens
and drilled the hole, I would vote milagro also. Otherwise, ciencia.

What is a miracle, anyway?  I thought that David Hume finished off miracles
a quarter of a millennium ago. Miracles are not "unlikely events," he said.
 "They are events that are contrary to nature." The mine rescue may have been
a long odds situation, but it wasn't unnatural. It was entirely in accord
with what we know about the world and human psychology and the ciencia of
mining. (Hume capped his argument by saying that there can be no such thing as a
miracle, because if it happens, then it's not contrary to nature. It is nature.)

But all of us use the word "miracle" very loosely. I may know, with one part of
my brain, all about eggs and sperm and DNA, but I still feel that it's something
of a miracle whenever a baby is born. Although it's a common miracle -- billions
strong --I'm awed by each and every newborn. As I am by the Chilean miners and
their rescuers. I'm awed, I'm relieved, I'm joyous, I'm dazzled, but most of
all, I'm proud of the compassion, the resilience, and the intelligence of my
fellow human beings --and there you have my understanding of the word "milagro."

Source: 2010/10/modern-and-familiar

Title: Prostituting that Past-Cure Malady
Date: October 24, 2010

i''ve read All's Well that Ends Well many times (thrice just in the last
week), always with puzzlement and  dissatisfaction. It's a confused and
confusing play. My best guess is that Shakespeare got going on some appealing
but intractable material and struggled with it for many years but was never
able to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion.

Until this last reading, I had never paid much attention to the King of France
who is, I think, more of a plot mechanism than a rounded character. Shakespeare
never even bothered to give him a first name -- he's "King" but whether Charles
or Louis or Lothair we're never told. He plays a crucial part in the fable,
because, dying of a "fistula," he is cured by our heroine Helen and in exchange
grants her the husband of her choice (her obsession, actually) -- the handsome
soldier and crass lout Bertram. Later in the play, after Bertram has fled from
the marriage, the King again intervenes to restore him (against his will) to
Helen. The King is short-tempered and highly conscious of his regal status -- as
Kings are in literature -- but he is not particularly eloquent or interesting.

But in my most recent reading, I was struck by some lines that I had not
registered in my salad days. Helen urges the King to allow her to try her
"receipts" (i.e. prescriptions or drugs) on him. He resists, of course, simply
so that Helen may overcome another contrived obstacle. But the King's sentences,
fable apart, are very pertinent, most particularly to those of us who have
staggered to life's endgame:

We thank you, maiden,

But may not be so credulous of cure,

When our most learned doctors leave us and

The congregated college have concluded

That laboring art can never ransom nature

From her inaidable estate. I say we must not

So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,

To prostitute our past-cure malady

To empirics, or to dissever so

Our great self and our credit to esteem

A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.

"Empiric" is Shakespearean for "phonies."  The King will not compromise his
rationality or his dignity by indulging himself with the sixteenth-century
version of faith-healers, herbalists, reiki masters, homeopaths, naturists or
any other of the enormous plague of quack-quacks who litter our anti-rational
landscape.

Good for him, I say, even though, as it turns out, he's wrong and the maiden
successfully works her receipts. Shakespeare keeps us out of the sickroom,
so we don't know exactly what she prescribes (just as well), but we do learn
that the credulous bystanders attribute the cure not to science but to divine
intervention. As the very orthodox and conventional Lafeu puts it, "They
say miracles are past, and we have our philosophical persons to make modern
(i.e. routine, everyday) and familiar, things [that are] supernatural and
causeless.  Hence it is that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear
(i.e. fear of the unknown)" -- an interpretation that might made sense in
Shakespeare's scientifically-ignorant late medieval world, but which is no
longer applicable.

Nevertheless, I trust that when my time comes, I will follow the King's good
example and come to terms with reality rather than succumb to irrationality and
"esteem a senseless hope."

Source: 2010/10/sheep-news

Title: Scary News from Longmont, Colorado
Date: October 25, 2010

Sometimes I can't make the slightest sense of what I read in the newspapers. 
Here's an example.  But first some sheep news.

The desert bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni), smaller than the ordinary
bighorn and one of the rarest and most endagered our native mammals, has
been reduced to dry ranges in Nevada and California, near rocky cliffs in
almost waterless environments. "Hunting has been prohibited or controlled
since the early 1900s, but much illegal poaching still occurs.  The subspecies
Ovis canadensis auduboni of the Black Hills and adjacent areas has already
become extinct."

Now the newspaper report.  The Longmont Times-Call celebrates a local
heroine, Ms. Sara Brandenburg.

"At age 15, Brandenburg became the youngest female in the world to the earn the
North American Grand Slam after shooting and killing four different species of
North American wild sheep — a dall, a stone, a Rocky Mountain bighorn and a
desert bighorn.  She shot a 230-pound dall sheep Aug. 17, 2009, in Alaska and
pinned her final animal — a 220-pound stone sheep — in the Yukon Territory
on Aug. 8, four days before her 16th birthday.The previous record-holder was
a 32-year-old, according to the Grand Slam Club/Ovis.When she shot the stone
sheep — the final one for her grand slam — tears poured down her face.
“It’s a big emotional rush when you get it,” she said.  While working
on the record, Brandenburg, who is a sophomore at Longmont Christian School,
missed two months of classes. She ended the year with a 4.0 grade-point average,
in part because she hauled textbooks on hunts. Moments before shooting her
desert bighorn sheep in Mexico’s Baja Desert, she was finishing algebra
homework.  Her father, Rod Brandenburg, taught Sara and her older sister,
Katey, 18, to hunt at an early age, instilling in them the same pioneer spirit
his great-grandfather had when he moved from Germany to homestead in the 1870s
in Westcliffe, Colo. He estimated it cost about $120,000 to arrange for Sara
to kill four sheep. When friends remark about the cost, Brandenburg says it was
worth it.  “I couldn’t afford not to,” he said.  When he watched Sara
shoot her final sheep, a wave of relief, exhilaration and admiration washed
over him, he said.  Last month, she took up archery and hopes to repeat the
grand slam with a bow this time or advance to the Super 10 title, which is
awarded to hunters who shoot and kill 10 North American big-game animals.  In
addition to sheep, Sara Brandenburg also has shot and killed three antelopes,
one white-tailed deer and one black bear, as well as a gemsbok, an eland, a
wildebeest and a zebra during a hunting trip in South Africa."

I don't understand blood sports.  I find them repulsive and inhuman.

Am I missing something?  The Brandenburg family values ($120,000 to kill four
rare sheep) are disgusting, sociopathic, and barbaric.   Are these people
locked into the Stone Age?

Source: 2010/10/who-is-violenta-what-is-she

Title: Who Is Violenta?  What Is She?
Date: October 27, 2010

Here's a puzzle about a character's name that will interest detectives
or dedicated Shakespeareans -- and perhaps only the most dedicated of
Shakespearean detectives.

As everyone knows, the "heroine" and dominant figure in Twelfth Night is
an audacious, sensitive, and intelligent young lady to whom Shakespeare
gave the name Viola. It is Viola who, shipwrecked on the Illyrian shores,
disguises herself as a man, enlists herself as a servant to Duke (or Count)
Orsino, whom she rapidly comes to admire, and is then dispatched by
Orsino to woo in proxy his beloved, Lady Olivia the recalcitrant. Viola
has the misfortune, while in mannish guise, to provoke Olivia's romantic
interest. The complications that arise from these mistakings take five amusing
acts to resolve. But it's Viola's play, from first to last, and there is no
question about her identity or her name.

Viola first comes on stage in the second scene of the play. The stage
direction in the 1623 Folio is unambiguous. Enter Viola, a Captaine, and
Saylors. In the speech headings throughout the play, Viola regularly appears
as Vio., just as Maria is Mar., Clown is Clo., and Malvolio is Mal. There
is but one exception to this practice -- and here begins the mystery. In
the middle of Act 2, scene 5, Viola comes as ambassador to Olivia but the
stage direction reads, inexplicably, Enter Violenta. Who is Violenta, what is
she? Inasmuch as Viola's name has been and will continue to be Viola, how
did it happen that just this one time she comes to be called by a similar
but very different name? The most likely explanation is that it's a mere
slip -- either an error of the compositor who set the Folio line, or an error
of the scribe who made a fair copy of Shakespeare's manuscript, or of W. S.
himself, nodding over his quill and inkhorn.

But for Shakespeareans, "Violenta" is most interesting name. While the
playwright created no characters named Violenta, there was one time when he
came very close to doing so. The near-Violenta almost appears in  All's
Well That Ends Well, the play that is printed in the Folio just before
Twelfth Night. In All's Well, Helen, who is obsessed with Bertram, pursues
her absconded and disloyal husband to Florence. There she discovers that
Bertram has been wooing a woman called Diana. But Diana was not originally
conceived as Diana. She had a momentary and evanescent pre-existence
as Violenta. Enter old Widdow of Florence, her daughter, Violenta and
Mariana, with other Citizens." So says the stage direction, but in the scene
that the s.d. introduces, there is no Violenta. No person of that name says
a word. In her stead there appears a Diana (or Dia.), whose entrance onto
the stage is unannounced. Diana appears where Violenta was heralded. Clearly
Shakespeare changed his mind.

It is therefore clear that the Folio compositors were working with a holograph
that preserved Shakespeare's first thoughts. Diana, the o-so-pure maid whom
Bertram cannot conquer, was orignally intended to be Violenta, who, it is
reasonable to infer from her name, would have repelled the young seducer's
advances not with virtue but with shrewishness. Later, when Shakespeare
altered his conception, Violenta turned into the mirage or ghost who both is
and is not present in All's Well.

The Violenta of All's Well can therefore be understood as a first pass at
Diana. But what possible explanation is there for the substitution of
Violenta for Viola in Twelfth Night?  It's a hard question, and the
not-entirely- satisfactory but best answer is that the typesetter who worked
on both of these plays (Compositor B, so-called) carried the name from one
play to the other. Let us suppose that he had just set "Enter... Violenta"
in All's Well when he resumed work on Twelfth Night. There he encountered
the abbreviation "VIo." and, the longer name still reverberating in his
mind, expanded Vio. to Violenta.

That's the end of the story. But there's a fascinating postscript. When,
in All's Well, Bertram makes his move on Diana, there's this exchange
(including the introductory stage direction):

Enter Bertram, and the Maide called Diana.

Ber. They told me that your name was Fontybell.

Dia. No, my good Lord, Diana.

Fontybell? Beautiful fountain? It would seem that Diana/Violenta once had
still another name. Or that Shakespeare wants us to think so.

"They told me that your name was Fontybell" is a pure, lovely, and haunting
line of poetry, but it's unrelated to anything else in the play. It's a
free-standing mystery, utterly without explanation.

More Real Shakespeare Mysteries can be found here, here,  here.

Source: 2010/11/more-on-my-brain

Title: More on My Brain
Date: November 01, 2010

How come my friend Ken W. can hike for three days in the mountains, dig a hole
and cache his supplies, and then, the next summer, return to the exact spot to
retrieve his stuff, while I can't turn around twice without getting lost? 
Why is it that my college roommate, Allan K., could draw a detailed map of
any place on earth from memory, while my friend Ellen P., equally intelligent,
cannot remember whether Kansas is north or south of Nebraska or east or west
of Missouri, or whether Wales is on the east coast or the west coast of Great
Britain?  How come some people have perfect pitch and others can't tell if one
note is higher or lower than another?  Why is it that some people who can't tie
their shoelaces are brilliant at mathematics?

How does it happen that there are baseball players who can take a quick look
at a ball coming off a bat and run to the spot where it's going to land and
stick out a glove and catch it?  How do they instantaneously calculate and plot
their course?  Why did I, as a youth, start in, veer left, turn right, and
then circle about in hopeless confusion?

Why is it that the only act of the human brain at which I am
naturally superior, gifted even unto genius is one of the least important? 
I refer, of course, to speling!

Source: 2010/11/takacs-morse

Title: In Which the Blogger Loses his Cool
Date: November 02, 2010

The Takacs Quartet graces us with six superb concerts a year.  It's true
that they sometimes hanker after strange new composers -- Psathos, Part etc.
-- whose compositions set my teeth on edge like the vile squealings of the
wry-necked fife or like a brazen canstick turned or like the gratings of a dry
wheel on an axletree  -- but mostly they play what distinguished Quartets are
ordained to play, that is, the great central European tradition from Haydn
to Brahms.  But last night, the Takacs, eek and alas, ventured into new
and grim territory.  Horribile dictu, they offered an original, commissioned
Drama that purported to be Serious and Illuminating.  It warn't.  It was
a interminable playlet about Beethoven's last years founded on the composer's
letters and conversation books.  It was barren.  It was predictable,
uninsightful, reductive, shallow, witless, dull, and pretentious.  I started
to squirm (boredom feeding on embarrassment and embarrassment on boredom)
after a couple of minutes, then broke into a sweat, but after a few minutes
resigned myself to my middle-of-the-row captivity and I did what I always do
in such situations -- recited to myself long-ago-memorized poetry.  When the
Drama mercifully ended, I was consoled to hear the woman in front of me (a
member of the music faculty) say to her companion, "Do you think they know how
bad that was?"

Do they?  I hope so.  I hope that the playwright, a tyro named  ------
Morse, recognizes that he's not Tom Stoppard or even Tom Stoppard diluted to
a 1% tincture, and that he takes up a profession that inflicts less pain on
innocent bystanders.

I left dispirited, especially for the actors, who tried to force a marriage
of Shakespearean style of performance to prosaic vocabulary and sentence
structures.  I do not use the word "Shakespearean" in a good way:  I refer
to that highly artificial, unnatural way of speaking and moving that, inherited
and debased from an ancient tradition, has stupefied and narcotized dutiful
culture- hungry audiences at summer festivals all over America.  Shakespeare
himself was clear that he did not want his actors to strut and bellow, but strut
and bellow was what they did last night.  If the actors did not split the
ears of all the groundlings, they certainly split mine.  Why do they speak
in that ridiculous manner when their aim should be "to hold the mirror up to
nature."  It's wrong of me to say so, but I felt that I could look into the
soul of the actor who played Beethoven and see a man who imagined that  he
was playing Lear at the Old Vic, when he was in fact performing in a play that
might, just might, satisfy the requirements for an M.A. in creative writing
at some off-brand college ("he's worked very hard on this so we might as well
pass him"), and that he was going to show "them" how it's done, but instead he
offered us sufferers a copy of a copy of a pale copy.

Egads, I'm breaking into a sweat again just thinking about it.

I pay good money to hear the Takacs -- and concert after concert, I get my
money's worth, and much more.  I want Schubert.  I want Mozart.  If I wanted
amateur theatricals, I would go to he local dinner theater.  Or to the high
school around the corner.

Source: 2010/11/gamboge-coloured-bluchers

Title: Gamboge-coloured Bluchers
Date: November 08, 2010

I have, on occasion, noted that modern readers of the great classic novels of
the previous era are unaware of the social significance of horses and horse-
drawn vehicles.  As I wrote, right here on this blague a couple of months ago,
"no, I'm not obsessed, it's just that I have this little bee in my bonnet about
the fact that we gasoline-era moderns understand exactly what is meant when
our hero arrives in a jeep, Jaguar, Jetta, or jalopy, but we are utterly
clueless as to the valence of barouche, basket carriage, berlin, britchka,
brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall, chaise,
chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon, curricle, cutter, daumont,
dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, four-wheeler, gig, go-cart,
governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty car, jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau,
phaeton, post-chaise, rockaway, shandrydan, shay, spider-phaeton, spring-van,
stanhope, sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika,
victoria, vis-a-vis, wagonette, or wurt."

I'm not the only person who has taken note of the variety of horse-drawn
vehicles.  In an early essay (one of the Sketches by Boz), Charles Dickens
reported that the road to Greenwich Fair was "in a state of perpetual bustle. 
Cabs, hackney-coaches, "shay" carts, coal-waggons, stages, omnibuses, sociables,
gigs, donkey-chaises -- all crammed with people... roll along at their utmost
speed."  What, pray tell, is a "sociable?"

In another of Dickens' sketches, a newborn is taken to be christened in
a "glass-carriage." It can't be made of glass;  it must be windowed.

On an "assembly night", "a 'double-fly' was ordered to be at the door of Oak
Lodge at nine o'clock precisely."  A "double-fly" would appear to be twice as
large as your run-of-the-mill fly.  Twice as long?  Twice as wide?

As little as I know about vehicles, it appears that I know less about
nineteenth-century clothes for men.  What does it mean that one of
Dickens' characters wears "cordury knee-smalls?"  Fashionable or ridiculous? 
What about "spotless inexplicables?"  "Black knee-shorts?"  "A black-glazed
stock?"  "Cloudy Berlins?"  "Drab shorts and continuations?"   "Knee-cords
and tops?" What does it mean that a man had "various particles of sawdust,
looking like so many inverted commas, on his inexpressibles."  And what,
finally, are "gamboge-coloured Bluchers?"  I can't even begin to imagine. 
Help!  I need an annotated Boz.

Source: 2010/11/othello-anters

Title: All About Antres
Date: November 14, 2010

"Antres" is among the rarest of rare words. Shakespeare's Othello speaks of
"antres vast and deserts idle" in the magnificent oration in which he takes
issue with the Venetian bigotry that claimed that he was only able to win
white Desdemona by employing drugs and witchcraft. No, it wasn't because he
was a sorcerer; it was because he was accomplished, heroic, romantic. "Antres"
is one of the exotic words that defines the great African general as a
non-Venetian -- an outlander, an "erring barbarian," an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger."

Shakespeare coined "antres" just for the occasion, deriving it from Latin
antrum, a cave. He never used "antres" again, nor did anyone else until
Keats fleetingly revived the word two centuries afterward. "Antres" never
domesticated into English and remains curious and remote, eternally in need
of an explanatory footnote. It is unlikely that Shakespeare expected that a
popular or even a courtly audience would grasp "antres" at first hearing. It's
a risky word, but Shakespeare didn't become Shakespeare without taking risks.

The playwright coupled the neologism "antres" to another shiny new Latinism
to produce "antres vast," a phrase which translates into the language
of 2017 as "really big caves." Yet no translation can do justice to
the spacious resonance of "antres vast." The caverns to which Othello
refers are monstrously huge -- grown grander and even more inaccessible
because Shakespeare ingeniously placed the modifier after rather than before
the noun. "Antres vast" are a hundredfold more mysterious -- darker, more
echoic, more glinty with stalactites and stalagmites -- than "vast antres."

"Antres vast" occurs in tandem with a second and equally remarkable noun-
adjective combination: "deserts idle." Othello reports that before he came to
Venice, he had not only traversed "rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose
heads touch heaven" but had also dwelt among "antres vast and deserts
idle." Strictly speaking, deserts cannot be "idle," but they can be vacant
or useless. "Deserts idle" reinforces and augments "antres vast." Taken
together, the two phrases are infinitely more evocative than either alone.

As a structure of sound, "antres vast and deserts idle" pivots on the "d"
of "and" and the "d" of "deserts" and it positions "antres" and "idle"
in symmetrical opposition. The two key words are dissimilar yet cleverly
interlinked, each comprised of an open vowel (Antres, Idle), a dental (anTres,
iDle), and a liquid (antRes, idLe). It is not by accident that "antres vast
and deserts idle" is such a euphonious and mouth-filling phrase.

Shakespeare not only invented "antres" for Othello's oration but also took
care to surround it with other linguistic novelties. For example: Othello
claims to have encountered "cannibals that each other eat/ The anthropophagi."
"Cannibal" is now a commonplace noun, but in 1604 it was a newcomer to the
language. "Cannibal" derives from "Carib," the name of a recently-encountered
people-- reputed to be man-eaters --who gave their appellation to the sea in
which they lived. "Cannibal" was sufficiently strange--it had only made harbor
in England (arriving by way of Spain) in the 1550s--that Shakespeare felt a
need to define it, which he did once in English ("that each other eat") and
once in Greek ("anthropophagi"). "Anthropophagi," a word that had originated
with Herodotus, was as new to English--and as seldom employed--as "cannibal."

"Antres vast," "deserts idle," "cannibals" and "anthropophagi" play crucial
parts in Othello's stirring autobiographical fragment.

I spake of most disastrous chances,

Of moving accidents by flood and field,

Of hair-breadth scapes i'th'imminent deadly breach,

Of being taken by the insolent foe

And sold to slavery;  of my redemption thence,

And portance in my travel's history:

Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,

Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,

It was my hint to speak -- such was the process.

And of the cannibals that each other eat,

The anthropophagi, and men whose heads

Do grow beneath their shoulders.

It's an astonishing story, each element more incredible than the one that
precedes it. Hair-breadth escapes?  Every hero can boast of them. Redemption
from slavery? A bit less likely. Hills whose heads touch heaven? A pardonable
hyperbole. Cannibals?  Surely, less believable still. The Othello landscape
then crosses the border from exotic to fabulous when it adduces "men whose
heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders." These headless men are the
blemmyae -- Nubian or sometimes Ethiopian -- who were a feature of 
pseudo-anthropological folklore from Pliny to Sir Walter Raleigh. The skepticism
that these monstrous creatures ought to provoke is diluted because the road to
the blemmyes passes through "antres vast and deserts idle." If audiences
had not been lulled and seduced by "antres," they might dismiss Othello as a
mere braggart soldier-- rather than admire him for the near-magician that he
becomes in his self- dramatization.

Shakespeare had yet another purpose for "antres vast." In the sentence that
treads on the heels of the "men whose heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders,"
Othello abruptly turned his attention to Desdemona. His language dulls. "This
(i.e. his exotic narrative) to hear would Desdemona seriously incline,/ But
still the house affairs would draw her hence." Shakespeare strategically
contrasts Othello's vocabulary to Desdemona's when he juxtaposes "antres
vast" to "house affairs." Only the tinnest of ears can fail to be struck
by the difference between the two phrases. Antres vast--house affairs; house
affairs-- antres vast. The gap between these two most pregnant phrases is small
enough to allow the electric impulses of sex and romance to spark, but is too
wide to allow genuine understanding or empathy to shoot the gap. The tragedy
of Desdemona and Othello arises out of the unbridgeable space between "antres
vast" and "house affairs."

Shakespeare therefore knew exactly what he was about when he invented the word
"antres."

If he had been in a more antic mood, less determined
to characterize Othello's massive dignity, he might have coined a word from
another Latin word for cave, e.g. spelunca.  But "spelunkies vast" --
or even "spelunkies splendid" -- could not possibly do the work of "antres
vast."

Source: 2010/11/antres-antrees-antars

Title: Antres, Antrees, Antars
Date: November 19, 2010

One of my loyal readers (see "Comments" to previous post) wants to know how the
word "antres" was pronounced. It's a reasonable inquiry but like many questions
about Shakespeare, its answer is not easy.

I myself pronounce "antres" just as I would "antlers," but without the "l".
If I were to guess at an Elizabethan pronounciation (and it would be a guess,
even though I've stumbled through the volumes on Shakespearean pronunciation by
Kokeritz and Cercignani), I would say the word with a more open initial vowel: 
"ahnters." But can we ever be certain how words were pronounced four hundred
years ago?  Especially nonce-words like antres?

Moreover, Shakespeare did not spell antres, "antres.'  Antres is a brilliant
editorial intervention that made its initial appearance in Lewis Theobald's The
Works of Shakespeare in 1733.

The first time that Othello saw print, in the 1622 quarto, antres was
"Antrees." The second time, in the first Folio of 1623, antres was "Antars." 
Are either one of these spellings, each of which yields a different
pronounciation, authoritative?  It is impossible to know. With some plays, it's
clear that F was set from Q, and that therefore any divergences are likely to be
errors. But in the case of Othello, Q and F descend independently from a lost
original (and it's been suggested that Q reveals evidence of the interpolations
and misunderstandings of actors). Neither "Anteers" or "Antars" is definitive.
Either pronunciation can therefore be justified.

Perhaps Shakespeare changed his mind. Perhaps a scribe or a typesetter,
struggling with a unique and unfamiliar work, took a guess. The rest is silence.

Source: 2010/11/first-week-in-the-west

Title: First Week in the West, August 1969
Date: November 20, 2010

Our final stop on the road westward was Gothenburg, Nebraska.  We set up the
old canvas tent in a park in the heart of town and slept to the screeching of
cicadas (a sound new to me).  (In those days we couldn't possibly have afforded
the $10 or $15 for a motel.)  By noon the next day we had reached Crook,
Colorado (population 128 in 2000 but considerably more in 1969 -- the town was
then large enough to support a restaurant and a gas station). We ate lunch but
when we got back into the green Dodge station wagon, purchased ($2500) for
our new life in the Rockies, we discovered that something had gone terribly
wrong with the gears and that the car would only go backwards. I worried that
we were going to be stuck in Crook with two boys under four years old while
we waited for a transmission part to be trucked in from Detroit. Filled with
financial trepidation, I backed the car around the block (there was only one
block, fortunately) to the town's lone mechanic. He said he'd "take a look." He
did, got himself a great big screwdriver and banged away under the hood for a
few minutes. "Fixed it." When he charged me $1.00 for the service, I began to
think well of Colorado. We piled back into the car and continued with the last
150 miles of the trip, gazing at the mountains in the distance and the arid
steppes, populated only by the occasional cow -- with nary a human being in
view.

We made it to Boulder sometime in that  same afternoon. It took a while to find
the house we had rented by mail. We missed it on the first pass and drove by
the old Pioneer Cemetery, which became our first landmark. We had no idea that
we had rented a cute small 1915 arts and crafts bungalow with the original fir
woodwork still intact -- what a change from our Manhattan apartment overlooking
Broadway. Our few sticks of furniture were delayed in transit (and would be for
three weeks), so we all slept on air mattresses for the while.

The Daughter (at whose request I am writing this reminiscence), was conceived
before the furniture arrived.

Our landlord and next-door neighbor was Jack David Angus Ogilvy, a rangy cowboy
and professor of Anglo-Saxon who was, contrary to all expectations, a distant
relative of the queen of England.  (Was it 1969 or the next year that I met
Jack's cousin, a pimply English boy named Angus, known across the sea as Lord
Ogilvy)?  That was a surprise. Another surprise:  the alley behind our house
was bordered with a huge crop of wild plums. The boys discovered the plums very
soon after our arrival.

I was taken by surprise by the Colorado light.   had always lived in the
cloudy east, and that bright western sun was a complete surprise. High altitude,
no humidity, and very big sky. I'm still not quite used to it.

Boulder was not the sophosticated, foodie, high-tech, trendy town it has become.
It was all white bread, the downtown unMalled and still dominated by banks, car
dealerships, Valentine's Hardware, Smith's Shoes, a big old Woolworth's and
wide empty streets. There were only a few restaurants -- I remember the Harbin
Inn, a mediocre Chinese joint, and the Gondolier ditto but Italian (still in
business but much changed). And our favorite, the Aristocrat, a breakfast place
with portions that could remedy in a single sitting those dangerous drops in
cholesterol.

On our first day in town, we drove by Boulder High School. Mrs. Dr. M. said,
"That's where I want to teach when I go back to teaching." Which she did, a few
years later and then for many years.

Source: 2010/11/dentists-i-have-known

Title: Dentists I Have Known
Date: November 23, 2010

When I was a child, there were two neighborhood dentists.  One was named
Caress and the other was named Yankowitz.  My parents chose Nathan Caress,
possibly for onomastic reasons, but they might have made a mistake;  Nathan
Caress should have been called Nathan Butcher.  Dentistry sixty years ago was
much inferior to dentistry today, especially in our dark corner of the universe.
 There was no anaesthetics, no novacaine.  Baby teeth that developed cavities
were summarily yankowitzed with a pair of what looked like industrial pliers.
 Adult teeth that needed repair were excavated with a low-speed mechanical
drill, then sterilized with carbolic acid, and filled with a mercury compound
that has over the years not doubt lowered my IQ by dozens or scores of points.
Dentistry was painful. No, it wasn't painful, it was torture.  Dr. Caress,
whose office was in the living room of his house on Rugby Road, had a big black
ugly mole on his left cheek. I studied that mole for many too many hours.

Sometime in my early teens I was sent to an orthodontist, Irving Pollack,
who had a very official suite of rooms in a high-rise on Joralemon Street, a
subway ride away.  I am grateful to him because, although he made a miserable
adolescence even more miserable, his "appliances" helped keep my mismatched,
askew anthology of teeth in my head.  In fact, I have all but one of them to
this day.

No thanks to my next dentist, T. Gorfein of Cambridge, Massachusetts, a genuine
criminal who asserted that I had twenty-two cavities and set out to fill them. I
left him after a couple of weeks, not because I was wise enough to suspect that
he was  a cheat, but because while he was working on me, he called over his
assistant and said -- genuine historical quote coming here -- "Would you look
at that sucker bleed."  At the university clinic, the dentist to whom I was
assigned could find only two cavities, which she (my first female practitioner)
painlessly filled. I must have had other dental experiences before Colorado's
Amiot and Johnson, both of whom were competent but both of whom insisted on
talking Republican nonsense to defenseless me while my mouth was filled with
equipment and fat fingers. Johnson left a crown too high, causing enormous pain;
searching for an alternative for his ham-handedness, I remembered that I had
bus-commuted with a dental student who seemed intelligent. She became a dentista
of high regard for many years until she took very early retirement from the
trade -- I never knew why. She sold her practice to another competent woman who
charges outrageous sky high prices for her services, but keeps me healthy.

So the score as we head into overtime:  one fake tooth, two root canal jobs,
a couple of tender spots, two unerupted wisdom teeth waiting to cause trouble,
but unabated ability to eat and enjoy corn on the cob. Nevertheless, lots of
residual Caress-caused nervousness every time I need to see someone in the tooth
business.

More tooth news:

Source: 2010/12/my-swiss-cheese-brain

Title: My Swiss Cheese Brain
Date: December 03, 2010

As a youth, I could memorize poetry with great ease.  Nowadays, with a toe
into the water of my eighth decade, what was once a snap has become a
frustration.  But inasmuch as the authorities continually remind us geezers
that we need to keep the intelligence well-lubricated, I persist.  Yet it now
takes two or three hard weeks to memorize a speech in one of Shakespeare's
plays that, fifty years ago, I might have learned in less than an hour.

I've been trying to commit to the old brain Othello's magnificent speech about
wooing Desdemona -- the one with "antres vast and deserts idle" -- about which
I reported last week.   Instead of memorizing fluently and quickly, my swiss
cheese brain continually generates gaps, fissures and holes.  For example,
take this passage.

This to hear would Desdemona seriously incline

But still the house affairs would draw her thence

Which ever as she could with haste dispatch

She'd come again, and with a greedy ear

Devour up my discourse.

There's no reason why this sentence shouldn't be easy enough.  I read and
study it, but when I shut the book and try to recite, it comes up this way:

She'd come again and with a  greedy [empty space]

Devour up my discourse.

The word "ear" has evaporated, or rather fallen into the black hole of memory,
or gotten stuck in the synaptic link between two nerve cells.

I peer into the book once again and take a second crack.

She'd come again and with a greedy ear

Devour up my [empty space].

Ear appears, discourse disappears.  And so on through the thirty-two line
passages.  Nouns sink beneath the waves and then bob to the surface.  And
these lacunae occur again and again. And again.

It is fascinating to me that I retain the rhythm of the pentameter line and
that I always know that I am missing a two-syllable noun.  Nevertheless, the
precise word will not emerge -- at least at the moment that I need it.  But
it's there, coated with polysaccharides, lurking in an obscure empty space
behind a neuron.  It's astonishing that the words that disappear are almost
always nouns.  I have very little trouble with other parts of speech.  But
then noun- loss is a recognized characteristic of your "mature" brain.

Because it has taken so long to memorize, I have become extremely well-
acquainted with the speech.  Slow motion has its advantages.  Othello
tells us that Desdemona would come "with greedy ear [to] devour up [his]
discourse."  It wasn't until I had gone over that sentence a hundred
times that I realized that Shakespeare used "devour" to connect with the
"cannibals that do each other eat" in the earlier part of the speech.  It's
a purposeful comparison: while wandering and errant Othello encountered
anthropophagi, domestic Desdemona, confined to house affairs, was only able to
eat words.

Clever fellow, that Will S.

Source: 2010/12/trains-planes-and-buses

Title: Trains, Planes and Buses
Date: December 05, 2010

My first railroad (not subway) trip was in 1945 -- a New York Central train
from NYC to Glens Falls, New York.  I was dazzled but queasy;  it was
a coal-burning engine and the smoke was both visible and smellable.  I
spent my infant time looking out the window and studying the adjacent set
of tracks as they combined and separated -- a most vivid memory.  I was
born into a sedentary family and have no further recollection of being in
a train again until 1952 when Aunt Mollie took me to Washington. We ate
dinner on the train, a marvelous luxury.  in 1956, testing my adolescent
independence, I voyaged to Ithaca on the old Lehigh Valley R. R. (the
"Leaky V.), then in its dotage and quite seedy.  During the late 1950s,  I
occasionally rode up to Utica NY on the NY Central.  The round-trip fare
was an astonishingly steep $20.50, or half a week's work.  But afterwards
it was almost all automobiles.  I don't know that I was on a train again
until 1975-76, when I commuted weekly from Canterbury (second class with the
accompaniment of Cadbury chocolates) to Charing Cross station.  Calais
to Paris, 1976. I can remember also Lugano to Florence to Rome, c. 1990,
and Stockholm to Copenhagen a decade later.  NYC to DC, on Amtrak, many
times around the turn of the new millenium.  Not a great deal of train
travel, but then, as we all know, the railroads are a glorious but dying
institution, at least in the US.  Nor adventuresome either:  no Orient
Express or Trans-Siberian.  Planes?  My first trip was from NYC to Ithaca,
on a 12 seat Mohawk -- perhaps to this day my smallest plane and bumpiest
flight.  Many, many trips from Boston to NYC (Eastern Airlines), from Logan
to LaGuardia and back.  A dozen or so jumps across the water to Europe,
all of them accompanied with headaches and disorientation.  My longest so
far:  Denver to Port Elizabeth, South Africa.  To Hawaii and back. To San
Jose, Costa Rica.  Innumerable, far too many,  domestic flights from Denver
to NYC, Denver to Oakland, Denver to DC -- all highly routinized.  At first,
decades ago, flying was romantic;  dinner was served;  people dressed up for
the experience.  Now it's being sardined into a grudging Greyhound in the
sky, with bodyscans and shoe checks to boot.  And waste:  all that time and
money thrown into the sea looking for plastic explosives secreted in  my
retired-teacher/ grandpa orifices.

The word Greyhound reminds me those horrible 1950s trips (midnight to 8am)
from the Port Authority on 34th and 8th to Ithaca with "rest stops" in
East Stroudsburg and Scranton at 3am, with no food available except rancid
sandwiches from the slot machines.  I cannot shake the memory of the awful
smell of spoiled tuna, gas fumes, eructations and flatulence on those filthy
cramped buses.  Nor of the degenerate displaying his private parts in the
men's room in Hackettstown, New Jersey one slushy night.

But put me in a car on a two-lane anywhere west of the Mississippi, with no
particular place to go, and I'm one happy guy.

Cherry pie in Hannibal, Missouri or breakfast at the Jesse James Cafe in Casey,
Iowa.  Bliss!

Source: 2010/12/modern-biography

Title: Modern Biography
Date: December 06, 2010

It's been a Charles Dickens revival here.  The Dickens formula -- "make them
laugh, make them cry, make them wait" -- works as well for me now as it did
fifty years ago.

I was curious to fill in the gaps in my knowledge, so I trotted over to
the library and found a newish biography of Dickens.  It looked eminently
respectable:  St. Martin's Press and its author a "Professor of English
Studies" at the University of Stirling.

But youch, what a travesty the new "biography" turned out to be.

Here follow some sentences (none of which I've altered in the least) from
a book which has the temerity to call itself Charles Dickens, A Literary
Life.  Prepare yourself for pretention, bathos, meandering metaphors and
syntactic peculiarities marinated in post-modern obfuscation.  Savor these
monstrosities.

"'Dickens,' a convenient and perhaps unavoidable label, masks a range of
Dickenses, which, taken together, constitute a highly complex whole."

"In short, this book will attempt to separate out at least some of the
contextual forces that flowed through Dickens's pen along with the ink at the
moment when he sat down to the ostensibly solitary and private process of making
that series of black marks on white paper that we call novels."

"Suffering is a crucial part of the artistic process and the artist is seen as
quite different from the ordinary run of people through his possession of a
creative power akin to that of God in His creation of the world."

"This aspect of his career can be explored in a number of ways, in his deep
respect for his own activity as a novelist as well as in an intense concern
to extract his full pound of flesh financially from publishers and also, in a
sense, from the public."

"A dramatic opening and an exciting climax are desirable features of any
narrative, but the desire to impose them on historical narratives may distort
the flow that is an inherent aspect of historical process."

"But the facts and arguments of this chapter show that the point at which
Pickwick Papers came into being was one of turbulence in publishing which
carried with it, as periods of turbulence always do, possibilities of movement
in a variety of directions."

"The serial violates the decorum appropriate to high art and the imagery of the
passage embodies a distate of profusion which could be likened to a class-based
disdain for the crowded urban environment and dislike of such new-fangled
phenomena as the railway."

"Public school meant the classics and, in England, university spelled Oxford or
Cambridge, 'advantages' which Dickens conspicuously lacked."

I could wisecrack about each of the above sentences, but I'm in a more-in-
sorrow-than-in-anger frame of mind.   Why oh why do academics feel they have
to write this way?  Such woeful prose and trumpeting obviousness compromise
the reputations of sober scholars and teachers.

Does the author of this book realize that he's bamboozling himself?    Does
he know how ridiculous he is?

Source: 2010/12/seasons-greetings

Title: Season's Greetings
Date: December 08, 2010

In the summer of 1963, we were somewhere in southern Illinios on our first
cross-country adventure (the first of many).  I was not an experienced
driver and the Nash Rambler was not a superb-handling car.  We were driving
a two-lane, and it was raining hard , and something happened (can't remember
what) that caused me to brake much too hard. The car spun out of control,
first swinging into the oncoming lane (empty, thank you very much) and then
rotating into a three or four foot ditch on the right side of the road.

I was grateful to be alive but I knew that I was in a predicament.  How to
get the Rambler back on the road?

Within a minute, a small truck pulled up behind me.  A hale-fellow Elks-Lions-
Rotary-Presbyterian kind of guy stepped out, assessed the situation, hitched a
cable to the Rambler and winched us out of the ditch.  Took him two minutes
max.  He said, "you OK?" and drove off.

Many thanks to that man.

In 1984, I had to fly from Lebanon, New Hampshire to Salt Lake City through
Boston.  We were fogged in at Lebanon and I didn't arrive at Logan until a few
minutes before my next leg was about to leave.  Logan consisted then (probably
still does) of half-a-dozen separate terminals linked by a bus line.  I
went up to a man in a uniform and I asked him where, in the jumble, would
I find Continental.  I told him that I had less than twenty minutes to
board.  He said, "wait right here.  I'll get you there on time."  He was
not a policeman, as I thought, but a uniformed chauffeur to some Rich Person. 
After a few minutes he returned, having launched his employer.  He took me
to his extra-long Cadillac limousine and speeded me to my terminal.

Many thanks to that man

And to all the other anonymous people who have helped me with life's travels
and travails.

Am I becoming sentimental?

Source: 2010/12/favorite-garments-lifetime

Title: Favorite Garments,  A Lifetime List
Date: December 10, 2010

Sometime in the early 1950s I was given a great gift: a hand-knitted gray-and-
white Norwegian sweater. It may have been a bit too large for me, but I wore it
almost every day through high school and college and for many years thereafter.
True, it became a little ratty around the waist, but my mother-in-law, a skilled
knitter, was able to repair it, and did so, more than once. The leather elbow
patches were my own contribution, and if they were not exactly symmetrically
placed, so what?  I disagreed with those who felt that the beauty of the
garment was compromised by the vivid mustard stain on the right sleeve. I was
still wearing the sweater in the 1980s, when my daughter begged it. Of course
I gave it to her, but I now believe that she was in surreptitious league with
other members of my family to get the sweater out of my hands and off my back.
I've never seen her wear it.

It was in the 1970s that I received another gift of an important garment -- a
Guatemalan shirt -- a camisa -- of the sort worn in Todos Santos: a multicolored
embroidered --  or is it brocaded -- piece of fabric attached to a blue-and-
white striped shift that hung down to mid-thigh -- very convenient for use as
towel or hot cloth. I loved that shirt and wore it even to work. It's possible
that some people dismissed me as an eccentric or that others presumed that I
was making an anti-colonial statement, but in fact I just thought the shirt was
comfortable and handsome. I remember overhearing  a student -- one of the
brainless ones -- who hated college, hated literature, and hated me -- mumble
under his breath (in those days I could still hear), "Well, at least he's not a
dull dresser." I don't know what became of the camisa. I suspect that it was
desaparecida.

Another favorite garment was a yellow leather shirt jacket which I wore until
it shredded. This jacket ran into trouble on a cross-country trip when it was
packed on top of the car, under a canvas. It lay too close to a dyed leather
coat (not mine) and during a flash Nebraska rainstorm was thoroughly  soaked
and acquired a large purple stain. I didn't mind, because the stain was in
the back, but I bowed to social pressure and gave it up, which was a shame,
because I didn't get more than twenty years use out of it.  And then there
was that lovely orange-brown corduroy jacket that I bought at the Presbyterian
thrift store for $2.00. That was real beauty.  So was the tailored denim suit
coat which I have vainly tried to replace -- they just don't make them like
that any more.

Still another memorable garment: a green hooded cotton sweatshirt that, after I
had worn it for a decade or so, was nicely broken in. It had lots of wear left
in it, but I made the dreadful error of mentioning to  my daughter-in-law
that, wearing it, I had twice been taken for a homeless person. She snatched
the sweatshirt away from me and threw it into the garbage (I rescued it for
rags). She then immediately went out and bought me a perfectly lovely new
Carhartt hooded sweatshirt, very high quality, with a zipper and everything,
which I have worn every day during the cold months for two seasons and which
will, within a dozen or so years, no doubt become quite comfortable.

Source: 2010/12/pickwickhorse

Title: Nineteenth-Century Vehicles Yet One More Time
Date: December 13, 2010

In order to illustrate the precarious social standing of Mr. Smouch, who takes
Pickwick into custody for debt, Dickens described his carriage as neither one
thing or another.

"The vehicle was not exactly a gig, neither was it a stanhope.  It was not what
is currently denominated a dog-cart, neither was it a taxed-cart, nor a chaise-
cart, nor a guillotined cabriolet;  and yet it had something of the character
of each and every of these machines.  It was painted a bright yellow, with
the shafts and wheels picked out in black, and the driver sat, in the orthodox
sporting style, on cushions piled about two feet above the rail.  The horse was
a bay, a well-looking animal enough;  but with something of the flash and dog-
fighting air about him, nevertheless, which accorded both the vehicle and his
master."

The original readers of Pickwick Papers would have known exactly what is meant
by a "guillotined cabriolet."  I suspect that there's a joke there, but the
joke has perished.  I certainly don't get it.

Is there also joke in "bright yellow?"  What is the usual color of a gig or
stanhope?

There might be all kinds of jokes in the following list of socially-
crepuscular horsedrawn vehicles, none of which precipitate hilarity, but
of which the sum amuses me greatly:  barouche, basket carriage, berlin,
britchka, brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall,
chaise, chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon, curricle, cutter,
daumont, dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, fourgon,
four-wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty car,
jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau, patache, phaeton, pill-box, post-chaise,
rockaway, shandrydan, shay, sociable, spider-phaeton, spring-van, stanhope,
sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika, victoria,
vis-a-vis, wagonette, and wurt.

Source: 2010/12/what-we-watched-in-the-fifties-rebel-without-a-cause-1955

Title: What We Watched in the Fifties:  Rebel Without a Cause (1955)
Date: December 20, 2010

I watched Rebel Without A Cause last night in a state of constant twitching
puzzlement.  Why has this film become a cult classic?  How can we account
for the iconic appeal of James Dean, who moves me not the least bit?  How did
thirty-five-year-olds manage to pass for high school kids in 50s movies?  Why,
in those ancient days, did every male seem to wear a tie and jacket round the
clock?

The movie seemed like a period piece, dug up from some archive  --  which
is odd, because I was 16 and a high school student in 1955 when Rebel
Without a Cause was released.  It should have spoken to me then, or now.  But
didn't and doesn't, not a bit.

The Eisenhower decade was the great age of suburban "juvenile delinquency,"
so- called.  What do these kids want?  They all have their expensive cars and
the war is over.  The teen-agers, all of them, are utterly inarticulate. 
They're also shockingly unfeeling.  When Buzz Gunderson dies in the "chickie
run," he is not mourned, even for a femtosecond, and within a few hours, his
girlfriend Judy has fallen in love with Buzz's rival, Jim Stark.

Nor, in this film, is the adult generation is any more admirable -- the wives
and mothers are shrews, the men grotesquely henpecked.  The film has a strong
gay subtext throughout -- most apparent in the Jim Stark-Plato relationship. 
I'm sure that I wouldn't have noticed it in 1955, but it kind of jumps at you
nowadays.

1950s juvenile delinquents came in two categories:  urban deprived and rich
suburban alienated.  I was of neither one class nor the other.  True that we
had to be constantly on our toes to keep clear of the one group, but the other
(those depicted in this film) might just as well have been living on another
planet.

A dangerous planet, as it turned out, for the makers of Rebel Without a Cause. 
James Dean was already dead when the film was released, having been killed in an
automobile accident.  Sal Mineo was murdered in 1976.  Natalie Wood, drunk,
drowned in 1981.  Nick Adams died of a drug overdose in 1968.  The film's
talented director, Nicholas Ray, discovered his wife, Gloria Grahame, in bed
with his thirteen-year-old son, whom she later married.  Ray died prematurely
of drugs and alcohol.

Source: 2010/12/nightmare

Title: Every Directional Dyslexic's Worst Nightmare
Date: December 21, 2010

In Pickwick Papers, Pickwick checks into the Great White Horse Inn in
Ipswich, is shown to his room by a chamber-maid only to discover that he's
left his watch downstairs.  He retrieves it but then cannot find his way back
to his room.  He's utterly, hopelessly lost. "Rows of doors... branched off
in every possible direction.  A dozen times did he softly turn the handle of
some bed- room door which resembled his own, when a gruff cry from within of
"Who the devil's that" caused him to steal away....  He was reduced to the
verge of despair when an open door attracted his attention.  He peeped in....
There were the two beds, whose situation he perfectly remembered."  Pickwick
steps inside and has removed his clothes when another person enters the room. 
He conceals himself.  Bad turns to worse.  "Mr. Pickwick almost fainted with
horror and dismay.  Standing before the dressing-glass was a middle-aged woman
in yellow curl-papers, busily engaged in brushing her hair....    'I never
met with anything so awful as this,' thought Mr. Pickwick, 'what a dreadful
thing.'  Uncertain how to proceed, Pickwick 'ha-hums.'  "Gracious Heaven!"
said the middle-aged lady, "what's that?"  "It's -- it's -- only a gentleman,
ma'am."  "A gentleman!" said the lady, with a terrific scream.  "It's all
over!" thought Mr. Pickwick."

The expected complications ensue.  At last, Pickwick flees, carrying his
clothes and dropping his shoes.  But the nightmare continues because he still
can't locate his assigned chamber.  Fortunately, he runs into his servant, Mr.
Samuel Weller, who escorts him back home.

Clearly, Mr. Pickwick is directionally disabled.

Am I the only directionally-challenged person for whom Pickwick's story is a
horrible fear.  I've had repeated nightmares of exactly this complexion.  In
fact, I've dreamed this very dream dozens, perhaps scores of times.  I check
into a hotel, go for a walk in a strange city and then, for some reason, the
elevator doesn't go to my floor, or the staircase comes to a sudden end, or the
room numbers go from 401 to 405 when I know that my room is 403.  I wander
endlessly until I wake up in a sweat, heart pounding.

And now I have to admit that I once narrowly dodged this embarrassment.  In
real life.  I was staying at a bed-and-breakfast somewhere in the west of
Ireland.  There was no private bathroom -- the facilities were down the hall
and a half a flight downstairs.  In the middle of the night, after obeying a
call of nature, attempting to return to my room, I stepped into a room that
was not mine.  I was just about to get into bed with a strange party when I
realized my predicament.  Fortunately, I was able to escape without waking
anyone.  I found my own room (good thing there were only two to a floor) but I
was in quite a state for an hour or so.

As I'm writing this, I'm guessing that most of my readers will harrumph their
feelings of superiority.  "Couldn't happen to me." My directionally dyslexic
friends, however, will understand.  And they will also know why I sympathize
and empathize with poor Pickwick.

Source: 2010/12/secession-ball

Title: Secession Nostalgia
Date: December 22, 2010

The Sons of Confederate Veterans celebrated themselves with a $100-per-person
Secession Ball on Dec. 20 in Gaillard Municipal Auditorium in Charleston. 
The event centered on a play highlighting key moments from the signing of
South Carolina’s Ordinance of Secession 150 years ago.  Jeff Antley, who
organized the event, said that the Secession Ball honors South Carolinians who
stood up for their rights.  “The secession movement in South Carolina was a
demonstration of freedom,” said Antley. “What I’m doing is honoring the
men from this state who stood up for their self-government and their rights
under law."

Is the act of secesion a "demonstration of freedom?"  What sort of freedom? 
Let us now read from South Carolina's Articles of Secession, which asserts that
the federal government has impinged upon states' rights.

"The right of property in slaves was recognized [under the Constitution] by
giving to free persons distinct political rights, by giving them the right to
represent, and burthening them with direct taxes for three-fifths of their
slaves; by authorizing the importation of slaves for twenty years; and by
stipulating for the rendition of fugitives from labor. We affirm that these ends
for which this Government was instituted have been defeated, and the Government
itself has been made destructive of them by the action of the non-slaveholding
States. Those States have assumed the right of deciding upon the propriety of
our domestic institutions; and have denied the rights of property established in
fifteen of the States and recognized by the Constitution; they have denounced
as sinful the institution of slavery; they have permitted open establishment
among them of societies, whose avowed object is to disturb the peace and to
eloign the property of the citizens of other States. They have encouraged and
assisted thousands of our slaves to leave their homes; and those who remain,
have been incited by emissaries, books and pictures to servile insurrection. For
twenty- five years this agitation has been steadily increasing, until it has now
secured to its aid the power of the common Government. Observing the forms of
the Constitution, a sectional party has found within that Article establishing
the Executive Department, the means of subverting the Constitution itself. A
geographical line has been drawn across the Union, and all the States north of
that line have united in the election of a man to the high office of President
of the United States, whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery. He is
to be entrusted with the administration of the common Government, because he has
declared that that "Government cannot endure permanently half slave, half free,"
and that the public mind must rest in the belief that slavery is in the course
of ultimate extinction. This sectional combination for the submersion of the
Constitution, has been aided in some of the States by elevating to citizenship,
persons who, by the supreme law of the land, are incapable of becoming citizens;
and their votes have been used to inaugurate a new policy, hostile to the South,
and destructive of its beliefs and safety."

Yes, it's true.  Citizens of some states have not captured fugitive slaves or
returned them to their owners, have denounced slavery as sinful, have elected
a president who is hostile to the "peculiar institution," and have (horror of
horrors! even granted citizenship to former slaves.

The South Carolina document is extraordinarily clear.  Can anyone fairly doubt
that there would have been no secession and therefore no need for a Secession
Ball except in defense of slavery?  The "demonstration of freedom" is nothing
more than a celebration of the  freedom of one person to own another.

Nowadays, when slavery is no longer defensible, "conservative" South Carolinians
are reduced to protecting their guaranteed right to make life difficult
for gays and immigrants.  And keep women in their places.  A far cry from
their glorious past.

But they continue to nurture that nostalgia for the great old antebellum
days.

Source: 2010/12/zester

Title: What Have We Come To?
Date: December 31, 2010

Just back from the post office, where I mailed the granddaughter her gift, a
zester. What is a zester, you ask?  It's a kitchen device designed to remove
the "zest," that is, the outermost skin of a citrus fruit.  The granddaughter's
zester is an inch and a half wide and thirteen inches long, including its five
inch handle. Essentially, it's a hand-held grater, very useful if you're a
cooking enthusiast. And why, you ask, would I venture out in 15F, snowy weather
to mail the zester to California, when the grand-daughter could have put it in
her backpack when she returned home? Because, I was creditably advised, the
zester would certainly be confiscated by airport security.

What have we come to, when, rightly or wrongly, we seriously entertain the
idea that an eleven-year-old child could hijack an airplane armed only with a
zester?  What would she do, abrade the pilot to death?

Source: 2011/01/rio-grande-1950-then-and-now

Title: "Rio Grande" (1950) Then and Now
Date: January 03, 2011

Last night, on the big HDTV, with the collaboration of Netflix, and peering
through our toes, we watched the John Ford cavalry movie "Rio Grande." I
first saw this film in the year of its release (I was eleven years old) at the
Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue.

In days of yore, it was the custom for the neighborhood urchins to take in a
double bill on a rainy Saturday afternoon.  It was a good way for our harried
mothers to dispose of us for four hours -- and on the cheap, inasmuch as the
price of admission was only fourteen cents.

"Rio Grande" was a perfect kind of urchin movie. Good guys (cavalry) versus bad
guys (Indians), lots of action, no overt sex. It offered much too much singing,
but the slow periods would have been enlivened by hoots, whistles, popcorn-
throwing, banging the head of the kid in the seat in front of you with the heel
of your hand, primitive pre-flirting, and chasing in the aisles.

In 1950, Maureen O'Hara (John Wayne's estranged wife), was puzzling if not
inexplicable  -- merely an impediment to the action. Sixty years later, she is
beautiful, dignified, even majestic. The poor Apaches, who for me and for my
heedless comrades were nothing other than targets for cavalry bullets, are now
unutterably tragic. John Wayne was then an immensely heroic figure, but with the
passing of years. he has become a rigid incompetent dope.

The West, in those days, was part Monument Valley, part myth;  now I live in a
West that has nothing to do with Coney Island Avenue, even less with John Ford.

Source: 2011/01/predictions

Title: Predictions for 2011
Date: January 09, 2011

I've been inspecting the entrails of slaughtered oxen and also observing the
flights of birds.  I've studied the movements of planets and tea leaves.  I
can now announce my predictions for the coming year.

1)  there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and/or lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known athlete will be accused of taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be involved in a sex scandal;

5)  questions will be raised about America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia--perhaps all three;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East;

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sexual
scandal (perhaps both);

10) the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq will not end.

You read it here first.  Not for nothing that I've acquired the reputation of
an inspired mystic, or shaman, or something.  Nostradamus redux.

Source: 2011/01/whores

Title: Whores
Date: January 13, 2011

This reminiscence will not mean much to anyone but my born-and-bred-in-Brooklyn
readers.

One of my smart schoolyard buddies, Jimmy Nolan, won a scholarship to Columbia.
He was a year or two older than I, and the first of our gang/crowd to venture
out of the neighborhood. The summer after his first college year, we were
sitting in front of the candy store, drinking egg creams and practicing our
spitting, when someone asked Jimmy "what's it like up there." "Up there" was the
far north, Morningside Heights, in Manhattan, where Columbia was located -- the
end of the earth, kind of. Jimmy said, "You might not believe this, but up there
they pronounce "hua," "hor."

I remember thinking, why would they do so?  Don't they know any better?

Source: 2011/01/amnesia-in-film-the-crooked-way-1949

Title: Amnesia in Film:  The Crooked Way (1949)
Date: January 16, 2011

Eddie Rice has served in World War II, won a silver star, but lost his memory
to a piece of shrapnel buried in this brain (the x-ray is flashed onto the
screen). It's an "organic" rather than "psychological" amnesia and therefore
incurable. Released from a hospital, Eddie returns home to L. A. to find that
he was once Eddie Riccardi and that he was a no-good, double-crossing hood,
hated by both police and former gang members and also distrusted by his ex-wife.
Eddie Rice is a Dr. Jekyll, but his pre-amnesia self was a Mr. Hyde. It's a
curious and unexplained transformation -- from evil to good. There is almost no
psychological continuity between his ante- and post-trauma personality. Eddie
the amnesiac is utterly untroubled to discover that he was once a monster. He
extricates himself from the mob, jettisons his past, and starts a new life. His
amnesia is a thing apart.

The direction (by Robert Florey) and the noir cinematography are splendid.
John Payne, a fine, underappreciated actor, (as Rice/Riccardi) cannot possibly
convey the psychological complexity that should have been, but wasn't, written
into the script.

Source: 2011/01/is-sarah-palin-jewish

Title: Is Sarah Palin Jewish?
Date: January 19, 2011

Certainly not either by inheritance or conversion or moral stance. Yet Sarah
Palin seems to imagine that she's Jewish -- in a peculiar, one-dimensional way.
It's not always easy to guess at what's going on in that soup of a brain, but is
it possible to determine what Sarah means when she claims to be a victim of a
"blood libel?"

The actual targets of the "blood libel," it is no secret, are not overpaid Foxy
commentators but ordinary Jews who, according to pious medieval preachers, Henry
Ford, Nazi propagandists, and contemporary Syrian statesmen, make it a practice
to drain innocent babes of their blood, which they then bake into matzos.

Here are the exact words in which Sarah invokes this hideous accusation:
"journalists and pundits should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only
to incite the very hatred and violence that they purport to condemn.” It's
a confusing sentence, hard to explicate. Can we be confident that Sarah is
learned enough to know that "blood libel" is a phrase with a long and agonizing
history?  Are the "hatred and violence," which she claims are visited upon
her, designed to recall the pogroms (and worse) that have been precipitated by
the "blood libel"?  If her sentence is to be taken seriously, Sarah believes
that she is the victim of an attack analogous to the worst kind of anti-Semitic
ravings. Just as Jews are accused of killing Christian children, so has Sarah
herself been unjustly accused of killing Representative Gabrielle Giffords. In
her scenario, in her analogy, she herself, Sarah Palin, is the Jew.

In her daily deeds, Sarah Palin does not seem to understand or embrace aspects
of Jewish tradition such as compassion, the centrality of community, a deep
reverence for education and learning, fierce and informed intellectuality,
and robust philanthropy. Pure and simple, she sees herself as a victim -- a
condition or state of mind, which, in my opinion, is not only incorrect but
dangerous to the polity and to her own self-regard.

In short, she's scammed herself.

Source: 2011/01/muff-and-spot-once-again

Title: Muff and Spot, Once Again
Date: January 25, 2011

Every little once in a while, a mountain lion creeps into the fold and snares
a lamb, a calf, or a German shepherd. At even more infrequent intervals, a
mountain lion attacks a human being (usually a child).  Whenever there's a
human-lion interaction, there comes a deluge of letters to the local newspaper
demanding that the authorities exercise “lethal control" over the big cats.
Killing catamounts is neither hard nor dangerous. They were hunted nearly to
extinction in the nineteenth century. Dogs chase the animal up a tree. The brave
hunter takes aim and fires.

But Is it a good idea to extirpate the mountain lion? In the United States,
there’s an average of one death by mountain lion a year. Here in our county,
there’s been one such death in the last hundred years. One is a very low
number, especially when, in the country as a whole, snakes cause a dozen deaths
each year, lightning claims seventy-five, bee and wasp stings a hundred. Dogs,
when they’re not out hunting mountain lions, account for between twelve to
twenty deaths a year – a couple of hundred a decade-- many of these, it's sad
to say, infants in the crib. Given the numbers, It’s hard to believe that
calls for the extermination of mountain lions aren’t motivated less by facts
than by fear.

Domesticated dogs are responsible not only for a dozen to a score of deaths,
but also for an estimated 4 to 7 million (that’s right, million!) cases of
dog-bite a year, almost 800,000 of which require medical attention. Dog bites
cause 368,000 emergency room visits, or (do the math!) one thousand such visits
a day.  The social cost of dog bites is estimated variously, but the Center for
Disease Control in Atlanta claims that the direct medical costs of dog bites per
year is $165 million, with many more millions in ancillary expenses.

Mountain lions, which are relatively harmless, inspire terror, but dogs, which
are far more dangerous, are our sacred cows -- loved, in my opinion, beyond
all propriety. It’s hard not to cringe when otherwise sensible people –
good decent people --tell me in all seriousness that Towser is a full member
of their family, or that Fido is about to undergo surgery to replace a hip --
an operation the cost of which is more than the annual medical budget of whole
villages in Africa or Asia. The run-of the-mill doggie in America enjoys a
better diet and better medical care than half of the human beings on the planet
-- a thoroughly indefensible skewing of resources. Dogs are not human beings,
and it’s immoral sentimentality to treat them as such. It’s embarrassing.

The ancients, following Aristotle, divided their possessions into three
categories: an object was an instrumentum mutum, an animal was an instrumentum
semivocale, and a slave was an instrumentum vocale.  By eliding the differences
between humans and animals, the Greeks and the Romans made slavery both easy and
natural. Aristotle's notion underlay serfdom.

I used to worry that people who treated animals as humans would be tempted to
treat humans as animals. But it's not so; the people I know who are sentimental
about animals and "animal rights" are extraordinarily sensitive to human rights
-- but then, perhaps my sample is skewed. All of my friends are sensitive to
human rights; if they weren’t, they wouldn’t be my friends.

I wonder whether the love of dangerous dogs and the fear of the cats who are
by and large indifferent to us isn’t an instinct acquired slowly over the
last half million years. Our ancestors, armed, at best, with flint-headed
spears, spent countless millennia at the mercy of feline predators larger, more
powerful and more terrifying than 100-pound mountain lions (the extinct European
lion, panthera leo fossilis, was taller, stronger, and and a foot and a half
longer than the modern African lion). It was only some 50,000 years ago that
an ancient Einstein conceived the idea of domesticating wolves and selecting
their population for useful traits. Humans and proto-dogs started to cohabit;
dwellings and caves came to be littered with coprolites. Co-evolution began, and
over the course of time, dogs and humans came to be sensitive to each other's
traits. Those early dogs were our first allies on this lonely, hostile planet.
They could raise a ruckus when a couple or three lionesses prowled about the
entrance to the cave.

We're indebted to dogs and so we tolerate their bad habits.  By the same token,
we have inherited from our ancestors a primordial fear. Hence the over-hasty cry
to exterminate the mountain lion.

Source: 2011/01/puccini

Title: Puccini, Marion Morrison, John Wayne
Date: January 28, 2011

Yesterday we watched and heard Puccini's La Fanciulla del West imported
digitally from the big apple's Metropolitan Opera. It was shown on the enormous
screen at our local Century Theater. I was overwhelmed. I usually watch opera
from the nosebleed seats, which are expensive enough. With the new technology,
and with the telescopic close-ups, I could look right up Deborah Voight's
nostrils and into her mouth. I swear I saw her well-trained uvula vibrating.

The Girl of the Golden West is a fascinating cultural stew.  t's set in the
gold-rush California of the dime novels. The play on which it's based was
written by David Belasco, a London-born Sephardic Jew. The "West" is not real
but mythological -- replete with gunslingers, a big-time bar room brawl, poker
cheats, a cringe-making Indian squaw and papoose, a tough, mustachioed sheriff
and a Calamity Jane-style heroine. Yet it's sung (sung!) in Italian. "Dick
Johnson," the romantic lead, was performed by Marcello Giordani, a chubby
tenor from  Augusta, Sicily.  Interviewed during one of the far-too-long
intermissions, Giordani was asked if he had any trouble playing a last-century
horseback westerner. "Not at all.  I grew up watching John Wayne movies." I
admit to giggling at his answer, even though giggling is always inappropriate
in Grand Opera. Giordani also claimed that he tried to walk like Wayne.  He
didn't  -- he sashayed.

John Wayne himself didn't walk the John Wayne walk until Raoul Walsh and John
Ford transformed him from Marion Morrison, a furniture mover from Winterset,
Iowa, into a mythological figure.

Nothing in La Fanciulla del West actually touches ground. Or touches any ground
that I recognize.

Except that there are people who don't know it's a myth. Witness the recent
events in Tombstone -- I mean Tucson -- Arizona. At this very moment, the Utah
legislature is about to select its state weapon. The 1911 Browning pistol seems
to be the gun of choice. In neighboring Arizona, it would probably be the Glock
9mm 30-round semi-automatic.

Source: 2011/01/amnesia-in-films-the-bourne-identity

Title: Amnesia in Films: The Bourne Identity
Date: January 30, 2011

Jason Bourne has contracted the worst case of amnesia in movie history and it's
going to last for at least four long films (three of them already released).
Bourne's type of amnesia is very convenient for plotting because he doesn't
know who he is but yet retains an astonishing range of martial and intellectual
skills. He's a born-again innocent (a murderer with a newly minted heart of
gold) who is shocked to discover that before he lost the marbles of memory, he
was a professional murderer. He's rather charming in an idiot-savant-assassin
way, but I suspect that his particular variety of amnesia is not very well known
to non-Hollywood neurologists.

It's a curious idea -- that an individual can be cleansed of his previous sins
by losing his memory. And yet The Bourne Identity doesn't make much of this
interesting moral question. "Who am I" is not investigated in the vocabulary of
tragedy, as in Lear's "Who is it who can tell me who I am" but as in "what's my
name, what's my address, what's my phone number." Pertinent questions, surely,
but not profound ones.

On the other hand, King Lear never climbed down the outside of a building,
handholds in the cracks between blocks of marble, nor, as far as I can remember,
did he plummet his Fiat down a series of flights of stone stairs while being
chased by a posse of sirening motorcyclists .

Source: 2011/02/more-noir-otto-premingers-laura-1944

Title: More Noir: Otto Preminger's Laura (1944)
Date: February 01, 2011

Laura is a stylish noir mystery that maintains its fascination even after the
passage of sixty years. It is cleverly written and handsomely cinematographed
but it also comes with some murky psychological baggage. At the heart of the
enigma lies Waldo Lydecker (played by Clifton Webb). He's so head-over-heels in
love and so ferociously jealous of Laura (the ingenue Gene Tierney) that he'll
resort to anything, even murder, to keep her from other men. The premise is good
whodunit fare, but it would make more obvious sense if Lydecker weren't both old
and gay.

Clifton Webb was fifty-five when the picture was made, but he looks and acts
ten or fifteen years older. He may be a bachelor, but he's not an eligible one.
There's a story that Webb had a clause in his contract with Twentieth-Century
Fox that barred the company from alluding to his homosexuality, but the
prohibition, if it existed, didn't stop him from playing Lydecker with a
pronounced gay affect. He's fussy, he's bitchy, he's a queen -- in short a
stage homosexual in every aspect except that he's not obviously interested in
men. Well, not overtly;  but it is a surprise that he exposes himself to the
detective Mark McPherson [Dana Andrews] when he steps out of a bathtub and asks
McPherson to throw him a robe.)

A clue to Lydecker's character occurs in the film's first scene. He spies on
Detective McPherson, who's wandering around Lydecker's apartment, browsing an
extensive collection of fragile objets d'art. McPherson goes to pick up a piece
of glass and Lydecker calls out "Careful, that's very valuable" (I'm quoting
from memory). From this incident we learn two things:  that Lydecker is a
collector of beautiful works of art, and that he's willing to let people look
but not touch. These same two traits control Lydecker's relations to Laura: he
cherishes her beauty and molds her in a Pygmalion-like way, but he's hyper-
protective. For him, she becomes an untouchable work of art (the portrait of
Laura, on which the camera focuses so obsessively, is the metaphorical signifier
of her place in his mental world).  His cool sexuality (he's perfectly content
with twice-a-week dinners) and his age (he's more interested in fathering Laura
than in making love to her) are less powerful than his pygmalionism.

By transforming Laura into a work of art, Lydecker attempts to preserve her
virginity. He therefore shoos away her potential lovers. He destroys the career
of Jacoby, the painter, by writing a vitriolic attack on him; he collects
revealing information about the southern gigolo Carpenter (Vincent Price). He
competes with McPherson.  t's a neat turn that to do so he becomes a detective
himself -- loitering in the snow outside Laura's apartment, eavesdropping behind
a post in a night club, etc.  Eventually he comes to understand that he can't
preserve Laura's "purity"; it's then that the film turns to violence. After all
is lost, he gives away the game when he says to McPherson, with visceral horror,
"I suppose you'll have a disgustingly earthy relationship" [i.e. with Laura].

It's fascinating that McPherson, though he has all the outward marks of the
macho gumshoe, is himself tepid about sexuality. He lacks charisma, emotion,
lust. The film allows him and Laura only one slight awkward peck of a kiss. The
detective is not a creature of passion, but he may be, like Lydecker, a lover of
art;  it's revealed, climactically, that Laura's portrait will be auctioned and
that McPherson has put in a bid on it.

Source: 2011/02/life-with-charles-dickens

Title: Life with Dickens
Date: February 03, 2011

Charles Dickens and I are intimate friends and have been so since 1952,
when, delighted and astonished, I zoomed through David Copperfield -- the
first of ten or a dozen readings. At this very moment, I'm renewing our
long asymmetrical friendship by re-reading the fifteen novels (fourteen and
a half, actually, inasmuch as Dickens collapsed while Drood was still in
process). It's my third pilgrimage through the collected works; first in
the summer of 1969, again sometime in the early 1980s, and now once again
(no doubt the last). I know a couple of the novels almost word for word --
Great Expectations, for example, -- but others, such as Barnaby Rudge  --
gosh, I don't think that I could say any more about it than that it's a
historical novel and that it contains both riots and a conspicuous cherry
ribbon. I don't know any more about Barnaby Rudge than your average man on
the street. Despite these blank spots, my relationship with Dickens has been
enduring and satisfying. Troubled, some of the time, but always rich and
complex.

He's the best of novelists; he's the worst of novelists. Dickens' formula is
"make 'em laugh, make' em cry, make 'em wait." Waiting must have come easier in
previous centuries. It's a good thing that I'm a patient person, because these
800-pagers can wear a reader down. There are times in almost every one of the
novels in which I would be happier if there was a trifle less waiting. On the
other hand, laughing and crying have remained a splendid part of the Dickens
experience. No matter how much I steel myself against the obvious tearjerker
death or disaster looming at chapter's end, I still fall into the Dickens trap
and besprinkle my Penguin with hot tears -- not as plentiful, I think, as those
that I let fall when poor David's mother died in 1952, but no less genuine. And
when Aunt Betsey threatens to tread on Miss Murdstone's bonnet or when Trabb's
boy lashes himself with his empty blue bag -- well, even after all these years,
I can't help but break into loud laughter. When he goes after Chadband and
Creakle and Podsnap, he's unequalled. No one can equal Dickens for comedy.

I am convinced that the finest moment in all of nineteenth-century literature
occurs just in Bleak House, just after the death of poor Jo the crossing
sweeper, when Dickens stops the novel right in its tracks and directs the full 
force of his indignation at his own indifferent country: "Dead, your Majesty.
Dead, my lords and gentlemen. Dead, Right Reverends and Wrong Reverends of every
order. Dead, men and women, born with Heavenly compassion in your hearts. And
dying thus around us every day."  There has never been another writer who had
the magnificent effrontery, the bravura daring, to so attack his readers, high
and low. Dickens is a force of nature, not to be judged by ordinary canons of
literary excellence.

But Dickens can also be awful -- sentimental, gooey, repetitive,
obsessive. Sometimes the satire is ill-aimed. Why is it so ridiculous to
be concerned with the victims of imperialism?  Perhaps the denizens of
Borrioboola- Gha, on the left bank of the NIger, need all the help they can
get. Why should Mr. Guppy or young John Chivery to be so pilloried, just
because they dare to love above their stations?  Why does Dickens have so
much trouble with ambitious or wronged women?  Don't Miss Dartle and Miss
Wade have a right to be angry? And what about Dickens' Jewish problem? His
bigotry disfigures the page and makes the philosemitic Mr. Riah even more
offensive than horrid old Fagin. And then there are all those monsters of
goodness: the weak-tea Brownlows and Clennams. Dickens is sometimes faulted
for his caricatures, but his grotesques are a thousand times more realistic and
more interesting than his faultless, blameless, bowel-less goody-goodies. And
there are moments of high stupidity, such as Mr. Krook's death by spontaneous
combustion. Goodness gracious -- the greatest of hearts supported by the most
ordinary of brains.

Up next in my final passage through the novels, already two-thirds of the way to
the finish line: Dombey and Son,  where I'm going to cry at Paul's death, be
offended by perfect Walter Gay, giggle at Mr. Toots, marvel at Edith Grainger,
and spend far too much time transfixed by Carker's teeth.

Source: 2011/02/footlocker

Title: Ducks/ Bad Corporate Names
Date: February 23, 2011

It is possible that in the entire history of capitalism in America, the
silliest name that has ever been devised for a business is "Lady Footlocker."
I understand the reasoning behind the name: "Footlocker" was a successful
athletic goods store for men and the geniuses in charge wanted to hive off a
parallel enterprise for women. How to do so? Well, right here, in our state,
as all basketball enthusiasts know, we have the Colorado Buffs and the Lady
Buffs; why not, by analogy, Lady Footlocker -- except for the intractable fact
that footlockers don't exhibit gender. A female footlocker? Goodness gracious.
Not that the name "Lady Buffs" is at all is satisfactory -- although inasmuch
as a female buffalo is properly a cow -- well, things could be worse. Which
inevitably calls up the question of what to call the distaff version of Oregon's
famous Ducks. Lady Ducks? The obstacle here is that "duck" is already female
("drake" the male "duck"), so Lady Ducks would be excessively hyperfeminine.
The finest solution to this onomastic puzzle would be to change the men's team
to Drakes -- and then the female version would be immediately obvious. But what
about the related question: what to do for a mascot for Drake University of Des
Moines, Iowa. My choice would be Drake Monks, but I would accept Drake Drakes.
No such luck; in defiance of all mascot logic, they're the Drake Bulldogs --
and I'm going to guess that the women's team is called the Lady Bulldogs, but
I don't know for sure. It's a horrid moniker, but still orders of magnitude
superior to Lady Footlocker.

But is Lady Footlocker the worst corporate name, as I've asserted? I can offer
two other nominees. The first is Unisys (formerly Sperry-Rand); "siss" is
a syllable that should never be found in any corporation's name (except in
conjunction with -tem) especially if it expects to be taken seriously. My
other nominee:  a cleaning product that I use, which is called "Mr. Leather."
Entirely too S & M for my taste.

The question of worst corporate name is the kind of  topic for which the
internet is designed. If you google "worse corporate names," you find several
lists. Here follow some of my favorites: Casket Basement; Chainsaw Cottage;
Hung Fat Lingerie; Stiff Nipples Air Conditioning (you think that  I'm making
this up; check here; Blood's Seafood and Caterer; B. S. Liquidators;  Dodo
Mortuary; Cramps Liquors; Beaver Cleaners; Lynch Tree; PMS Firearms; Master Bait
and Tackle; Knobs and Knockers. There are dozens more, but none, I think, quite
so quintessentially absurd as Lady Footlocker.

Source: 2011/02/duck

Title: On the Telephone with Ella (8) and Lola (17 months)
Date: February 24, 2011

Ella:  "Say 'duck.'"

Lola:  "Duck"

Ella:  "Say 'ball.'"

Lola:  "Ball."

Ella:  "Say 'hair.'  (Pause.) No, no. Don't touch your hair. Say "hair."

Source: 2011/02/baseball-facts

Title: Baseball Facts
Date: February 24, 2011

In 1968, the average AL batter hit .230 and Carl Yastrzemski won the batting
championship, hitting .301; in 1930, the average NL batter hit .303. In 1904,
87.6% of starting pitchers completed their games; in 2004, of 4854 starts, only
150 were completed (3.1%). In 1997, the Texas Ranger franchise was purchased
for $252 million; The Ballpark in Arlington was built for $191 million;  in
2000, Alex Rodriguez signed a ten-year contract with the same Texas Rangers
for $252 million. In 2004, the New York Yankees sold 3.78 million seats at an
average ticket price of $27.34;  in the same year, the Montreal Expos sold
750,000 seats at an average price of $10.82. In 1976, the average salary for
a major league baseball player was $51,501; it's now $2,632,655. In the new
Comiskey Park, built in 1991, the first row in the new upper deck is farther
from the field than the last row in the old park. In 1932, the Giants' shortstop
"Doc" Marshall was nicknamed the "ancient mariner," because "he stoppeth one of
three." In 2004, the Colorado Rockies hit .305 at home; they hit just .258 on
the road. In 1904, Jack Chesbro introduced the "spit ball."  He won 41 games, a
record that has never been surpassed.

Source: 2011/02/biophilosophy

Title: An Old Lesson Learned Once Again
Date: February 24, 2011

A good friend, a distinguished biologist, asked me to read his cancer
manuscript.

When I read science books (popularizations, for the most part), I usually do
so with only half a brain. I'm lazy; I skip the hard parts. But because I was
being asked for a serious opinion, I read this book closely. In all honesty, 
It hurt my head. The hardest chapters were those on the workings of the cell. I
last studied cells in high school biology class with Miss Goetschius.  It was
1957, before there was anything known about DNA.  We copied elementary pictures
of cells from the textbook. "You don't know how to stipple," Miss Goetschius
complained. There's a thousand times more known about cells than back then in
the dark ages, and I haven't gotten any smarter.

Cells are spectacularly complicated  -- no wonder it took billions of years for
them to evolve. Once the single cell had achieved a level of efficiency, the
rest of evolution -- even including us -- was piece of cake.

Reading about the lives of cells and about cancer (which is what happens when
cells go wrong) confirmed and strengthened my ideas about life and death. 
Life,our life, is almost entirely an accident. It's an accident that cells
incorporated pieces of bacteria to form mitochondria; it's an accident that they
agglutinated in the way that they did to form multicellular creatures; it's an
accident that we're here. But more than that: the success and the deterioriation
of the cells that make us are part of the same process. The end of life is
implicit in its inception. Cancer is exactly as natural as breathing.

It's trivial;  t's what everyone knows, it's what we've always known. It's a
cliche: "death is a natural part of life." And yet it's strangely comforting.
Whatever comes next -- cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's -- is perfectly
natural. Of course it will lead to death. But it's also life.

Source: 2011/02/conversation-with-our-congressman

Title: Conversation With Our Congressman
Date: February 26, 2011

I went to a forum, sponsored by local Dems, with our congressman. Fifty or
sixty of my friends and neighbors were in attendance. Our congressman is a
good person -- smart, informed, energetic, and progressive. He described the
situation in the House of Representatives -- the difficulty of serving in the
minority, especially when so many members of the majority side aren't serious
about governing. The audience was sympathetic but there was an undercurrent of
impatience. Why can't the Dems make it clear that cutting taxes and cutting the
deficit are incompatible goals?  Why do the Dems always lose the messaging
wars? Our congressman's answers were not always satisfactory to his liberal
constituents.

I understand his plight;  i's easy to stand outside and criticize. But I also
felt that he didn't appreciate how damn dangerous these right-wing Republicans
and tea-partiers have become. The gap between rich and poor is becoming larger
and less ameliorable. We could lose our democracy to the corporations.

Afterwards, I asked him, semi-privately, if the new Republican congressman can
be educated. Will they ever come to realize that governing is a hard job that
can't be done with slogans and a simplistic ideology.  He didn't think much of
my question and didn't answer it.

I was filled with foreboding when I left for the forum. I returned home even
more pessimistic about the future.

Source: 2011/02/conversation-with-our-state-representative

Title: Conversation with our State Representative
Date: February 28, 2011

Dr. M:  "Do you think that these tea party Republicans can be educated?"

State Rep:  "I'm not hopeful. They don't know much about governing. They don't
want to know anything.  They're very disciplined -- they vote exactly the way
they're told to vote. And they're not very intelligent."

Source: 2011/03/random-harvest-amnesia

Title: Amnesia in Films:  Random Harvest (1942)
Date: March 04, 2011

In Mervyn LeRoy's Random Harvest (1942), amnesia is not merely a plot gimmick.
The amnesia of Charles Rainier, a shell-shocked World War I veteran, is the
principal subject of the film. Rainier (Ronald Colman) begins in Condition A
(amnesiac but solid citizen and loving husband) but is hit by a cab in Liverpool
and transitions to Condition B (aristocratic, efficient, but passionless, and
with no knowledge of the three years between the war and the cab). Will he
remember the lost years and reintegrate the two parts of his hstory?  Well,
yes, he does, but only with the decades-long assistance of his patient-Griselda
wife Paula/Margaret (excellently played by the ageless Greer Garson).

It's kind of a soap-opera-y film and I'm embarrassed to confess that it moved
me. The last scene, in which Rainier finally remembers that he had long ago
loved and married Margaret under her real name Paula, is a curious kind of
anagnorisis. Although they've known each other for decades, true recognition
comes suddenly and joyfully. And I bought it, much against my will. Dropped a
reluctant tear.

Because of the amnesia, Charles has two different lives, but he doesn't, as
in other films, have two different personalities. He's kindly, steadfast, and
rather boring in both states. The film offers little in the way of a theory
of amnesia. "As one door opens, another closes" says a friendly but passive
psychiatrist, whose expertise is validated only by his middle-European accent.

In most films, diseases resemble their manifestations in real life. Amnesia,
on the other hand, can be anything the screenwriter says it it is. It's a
mighty elastic phenomenon, unmoored to medical experience or knowledge. However
imagined, the total amnesia of characters in films is a great plot device.
The audience is always in the know and therefore feels superior to the poor
character/actor who stumbles toward an understanding of his own self. It's hard
to believe that Shakespeare was able to write forty plays without ever resorting
to amnesia.

At a social event a few days ago I met a psychologist who works at the AFB in
Colorado Springs with veterans of Afghanistan and Iraq. I asked her if she
had ever encountered a case of amnesia. She said that many injured personnel
can't remember the moments just before they were wounded, but that she'd never
enountered a case of movie-style amnesia. Or heard of one. And, she added, trust
me, I've dealt with many kinds of mental disturbances.

Source: 2011/02/something-going-on

Title: How Long Has This Been Going On?
Date: March 06, 2011

I have a favorite moment in Diner (1982), the first of Barry Levinson's quartet
of Baltimore movies, and it's not the scene in which I made my silver-screen
debut. It's when two of the working-class guys who hang out at the Fells Point
hamburger joint find themselves taking a drive in the Maryland countryside. They
happen upon a rich, well-tended young blonde woman riding an elegant horse (in
her own spacious meadow). They stop the car try to chat her up but she's clearly
out of their league. When she gallops off, one of the guys says to the other:
"Do you ever get the feeling that there's something going on that we don't know
about?"

I was thinking about that scene when I read that Moammar Ghaddafi's son Seif
threw himself a birthday party at some spectacular resort in the West Indies and
paid the pop singer Mariah Carey $1,000,000 smackerootis to sing four songs. You
read it right -- one millions bucks. The article didin't say whether she had to
pay for her own motel and continental breakfast and transportation but I'm going
to guess that expenses were extra.

I tried to calculate whether I had earned $1M in my working life. I can't
remember and I don't have the records, but I know that I started at $3600 and 
by 1966 I was already pulling down $7800. I think that in my first decade of
employment I earned well under $100,000. Yeah, I know, them was different
dollars -- but still.

A working guy who makes $40,000 would take 25 years to earn what Mariah Carey
took home for twenty minutes of effort.

But it's not what she earned so much as what he paid. The Ghaddafi clan of
brutes, lunatics, oil-bloated twits, and kleptocrats has been looting the
Libyans for forty years. No wonder that the family is willing to commit mass
murder to hold on to their hoard. (In his defence, Seif claimed that it wasn't
him; it was his brother Muatassim.) Here's a question: how many years does it
take your run-of-the-mill Libyan to earn $1M?

I think that the average Libyan would understand the point of view of the diner
guys. There's something going on out there, and it ain't all good.

Source: 2011/03/funny-thing

Title: A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Arena
Date: March 07, 2011

Thank you, thank you. (Applause)  You're a terrific audience. (Applause). 
Hey, did you see what's going on in basketball.  A Brigham Young player
was thrown off the team for having pre-marital sex. (Audience groans).  No
kidding.  Doesn't look good for BYU.  They got rid of the only kid on the team
who could score.  (Laughter)  Wouldn't it be great if Duke played BYU in the
NCAA finals?  The Blue Devils versus the Blue Balls.  (Laughter) Thank you,
thank you.  Actually, the team isn't named the Blue Balls.  They're called
the "Cougars."  Who would name a team "cougars?" Unless out there in Provo,
Utah, they think that "cougars" means "mountain lions?"  (Knowing laughter) 
Did you know that the official airline of Brigham Young is Virgin Atlantic? 
(Hoots) And that Brigham Young players don't have numbers on their Jerseys; 
they use letters.  The team color is scarlet.  (Audience groans). Hey, just
checking -- did Wilt Chamberlain go to BYU?  (Audience is mystified)   How did
the coach find out about the sex?  I don't know but there's a rumor that the
girlfriend, a BYU volleyball player, is pregnant.  No one knows whether she is
or not,  because they can't see under her burqa. (Confusion, jeers, embarrassed
tittering)  OK, we have a great show lined up. We'll be right back. (Hysterical
laughter and applause)

Source: 2011/03/sticker-shock

Title: Sticker Shock
Date: March 14, 2011

In the old days, when I'd whip up a big batch of spaghetti sauce, I'd add a
pound or so of ground beef and a generous portion of hot Italian sausage. But
that was B. C. (before cholesterol). Nowadays, it's all vegetarian. Not nearly
as tasty, but acceptable -- and appropriate, in its blandness, to these latter
days.  To enrich the meatless mixture, I add a couple of cuisinarted carrots
and a grated zucchini or two.

At our local food market, a 6" zucchini costs $1.00. An entire buck. I'm not
usually one to complain about the price of things. It's not helpful or cheerful
to do so.  I pay the freight and and I'm glad to be able to do so.  I don't
grieve about the cost of cars or insurance or potatoes. Nevertheless, I'm
appalled when I plunk down that dollar for a short, skinny zucchini.

The zucchini is an abundant fruit.  Production is measured in cornucopias. In
August and September, at harvest time, it's impossible to keep up with them. 
Just two small hills and there are so many zucchinis that we can't possibly eat
them, can't give them away, and have to get out the backhoe and dig a trench to
dispose of them. (In our part of Vermont, there's a local saying that in late
summer you must keep the door of your car locked or someone will open it up and
throw in a zucchini.)  And then there's always the hidden zuke that, hiding
under an enormous leaf, has grown to the size of a three-year-old child, only
heavier.

I know that it shouldn't be so, but that dollar for a measly little zucchini
irks me.

Source: 2011/03/dickens-joke

Title: An Amusing Joke by Charles Dickens for Knowledgeable Insiders Who Are Aware of the Amazing Proliferation of Names for Horse-drawn Vehicles
Date: March 15, 2011

"'I know what's to be the end of it, as far as I am concerned' replies Mrs.
Pipchin, 'and that's enough for me.  I'm going to take myself off in a jiffy."

'In a which, Mrs Pipchin,' says Mrs. Chick.

'In a jiffy,' retorts Mrs. Pipchin, sharply."

More on Charles Dickens and vehicle amusement here.  More on life with
Dickens here.

Source: 2011/03/egyptian-religion

Title: Phallophagia
Date: March 16, 2011

I was informed that the granddaughter had become interested in Egyptian
mythology, so I decided to buy her a book on the topic. It's hard to know what
to put in the hands of a young lady whose reading level is astonishing but who
is just eight years old. I visited the "young adult" quarters at our local
library and withdrew four books on the subject. Which one to buy?

The first book that I looked at was clearly inappropriate. It read as though it
had been condensed out of the 11th edition of the Encyclopedia Brittanica. Hard
words, unelucidated, and a patronizing, paleocolonialist point of view. The next
book was too simple -- all pictures and treacle. The third book, a retelling of
the story of Isis and Osiris, was moving along nicely until Seth tore the body
of Osiris into fourteen pieces and scattered them all over the landscape. "When
Isis heard this, she paddled over the swamps in a little boat looking for the
fragments of Osiris to put them back together again and make them whole. After
much searching she found all the parts of Osiris except his phallus which had
been swallowed by a fish." Can this story be recommended for eight-year-olds.
Would it be appropriate for Sesame Street or Mr. Rogers?

Call me squeamish if you must. Diagnose me with an advanced case of castration
anxiety. Stigmatize me as indifferent to the profound Jungian significance of
this gruesome story. Say what you will -- I do not want to explain phallophagia
to the young lady. Frankly, I don't even want to explain "phallus."

Book number four seemed to be acceptable and I have purchased a copy of it.
I hope I made a good decision. Book number four is about Egyptian religion,
not Egyptian mythology ("mythology" is an unquestionably loaded and derogatory
word).

The book might be a little hard for the granddaughter and it might be a little
too detailed. I'm hoping that she skims or skips the section of the book that
describes Egyptian embalming techniques. "Inner organs were usually dried after
removal and placed in special containers called canopic jars. The embalmer's
tools included a spirally curved copper hook for breaking the ethmoid bone in
the back of the nose to remove the brain, which was then discarded."

Eeew, as they say nowadays.

Perhaps I am just a tad squeamish.

Source: 2011/03/what-my-father-ate

Title: What My Father Ate
Date: March 24, 2011

Sardines, by the tinful. Herrings, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed
never to eat tongue again, and I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken liver.
Steak, when we could afford it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen
meats -- salami, baloney, corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of
Heinz. Apples, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially
white chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, covered with gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. No alcohol, nary a drop. On hot days,
no beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee. Cheese, either Velveeta or
swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb cake direct  from Ebinger's
Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat.
Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning, bagels and rolls, warm from the oven,
eaten while reading the Times (25 cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream,
the more exotic the flavor the better.

Source: 2011/03/haircuts-a-lifetime-of-sweating-in-the-chair

Title: Haircuts: A Lifetime of Sweating in the Chair
Date: March 25, 2011

When I was a child, haircuts were perpetrated at Joe's Barber Shop on Coney
Island Avenue. It was a pleasant place: there were wall-to-wall mirrors on
either side of Joe Montuori's shop, and a boy sitting in the chair could lose
himself in the series of infinitely-regressing images. Joe always had a friend
or two in the shop with whom he spoke incomprehensible rapid-fire Italian. The
haircutting itself was an ordeal. Joe charged 75 cents a head, but my mother had
driven a bargain: three haircuts (myself and my two brothers) for $1.80. Joe
revenged himself on me by a) working the electric buzzer as rapidly as possible,
and b) frequently re-arranging the angle of my head with a blow from the heel
of his hand. Back home, my mother would sigh and say, "Turn around. Let's see
what he did to you this time."

I'm not big on personal adornment, and, perhaps because of my early hair-
chopping experiences, I've never been comfortable in the barber's seat. As soon
as the cloth is fastened around my neck I feel hogtied and hopeless. "What
are they going to do to me today?" Once, on the west side of Manhattan,
in the late 1960s, when my hair was rather long (it seems absurd that you
could signal your opposition to the war in Vietnam by letting your hair
grow, but such was the case), I walked into a shop and asked the barber to
"leave it long." He immediately transformed me into a rabid supporter of
carpet-bombing. Also in New York: when I naively wandered into a shop with a
specialized clientele, a hair technician employing a razor and a variety of
gels and lotions turned me into someone whose hair was giving off signals with
which the rest of his body was not in accord. In Hanover, New Hampshire, in
an upstairs 'salon,' the barber suddenly stopped work, drew back, studied me
for fifteen or twenty seconds, and asked, "Are you Jewish." I mumbled something
about not really wanting to discuss my ethnicity with him, whereupon he launched
into a disquisition of which I understood not much and remember less, except
that that it involved prophecy, the Book of Isaiah, and The Hatching of the Egg.
He hauled out his heavily annotated King James Version and pointed me to various
passages underlined in coded colors. As it happens, I'm more conversant than
most people with scripture, and so I can assert with moderate authority that his
reading of the Bible was -- how shall I say -- original. It took me an hour to
extricate myself from his insistent and wayward scholarship: fifteen minutes of
hair-cutting and forty-five minutes of exegetical enthusiasm.

For a decade or so, when our finances were perilous, my wife cut my hair. There
were some benefits (a guy could cop a feel while being ministered to) but I
must admit that although my good woman was earnest and effective, she never
fully mastered tonsorial technique. She had the habit of yanking upwards on the
strands with the scissors, with the result that each snip produced a stab of
pain -- although nothing more intense than might have been alleviated by the
injection of a dozen or score shots of novocaine directly into the scalp. And
then there were the ear nicks.

After a while, I returned hair responsibility to the world of commerce. I
had success for many years with Liz of Chicago Hair across town. Liz was
good at her work and respected my multiple cowlicks. But then she started to
raise her prices. When she reached $20, I would just hand her the Visa and ask
her not to tell me what she charged. When she went to $30, I retaliated by
spacing the haircuts further and further apart in order to keep my annual cost
constant. But when she broached the $40 barrier, the puritan in me rebelled. I
started to patronize the cheap ($14) barbershop across the street from the
college. There's a rotating staff and it's hit-and-miss: sometimes the results
are acceptable, sometimes disastrous.

When I come home from the expedition, my wife says, "Let's see what they've done
to you today."

And then she sighs.

Source: 2011/04/ferdinand

Title: What We Read in the Forties:  The Story of Ferdinand
Date: April 02, 2011

Yesterday's NYTimes reports that it's the 75th anniversary of the first
publication of The Story of Ferdinand by Munro Leaf.  This brief novel about
a pacific bull was the first book that I knew and loved. It was The Book of
my first few years on earth and I've probably read it, to myself and to my
children, twenty times more than I've read King Lear and Hamlet combined. I've
never tested myself, but I might be able to recite it from beginning to end with
only an occasional prompt. I believe that several leaves from my 1942 codex are
still the the family archives (and by archives, I mean those plastic boxes in
the basement),

I did not know that "Ferdimam" (as the kids call it) was thought by many to
be a subversive, unpatriotic allegory and that it had been banned by Franco
and burned by Hitler. As a child, it never occured to me that Ferdinand was
a pacifist -- I thought he was sensible.Why be killed in a bullfight when you
can sit and smell the flowers?

It was the book's language that engaged me, especially the one sentence that
was my first taste of pure, immortal, transcendent poetry: "Flags were flying,
bands were playing... and all the lovely ladies had flowers in their hair." 
Not even Shakespeare ever composed a more glorious succession of iambs.

Source: 2011/04/certified-dialogue-transcribed-verbatim-from-real-life

Title: Certified Dialogue Transcribed Verbatim from Real Life
Date: April 02, 2011

Telephone conversation with an eighty-two year old cousin.

"Evreryone down here, all they ever talk about is their pains, their doctors,
their diets, their diseases.  Now I have something to talk about.  For
years I went to this doctor, maybe forty years, he's almost as old as I am 
Every time I go into see him, with a sore knee or pains in the chest or
whatever, he'd look at it, and he'd say, 'what can you expect at your age? 
You're lucky to be alive.'  I'd go in with a sore throat.  He'd say, 'Can you
swallow. So what it hurts. You're too old to worry.' If I had a headache,
he'd say, 'whatever happens, happens.  You're old, enjoy the day.' Finally
he retired. He took a job as a dance instructor on a cruise ship. I'm not
kidding. He leads exercises or something. So I went to a younger doctor. He
listens to me breathe, pokes around a bit, puts me in the hospital, and now I
have three stents."

Source: 2011/04/a-very-distressing-memory

Title: A Very Distressing Memory
Date: April 08, 2011

There's been a re-birth of nativism in the "give me your tired, your poor" land
that I love. The right-wingers, who need someone to hate, have decided that
anti-Hispanic and anti-Muslim noise-making is just what our beleaguered country
needs right now.

All of which brought to mind a painful memory. Sometime in the 1970s, I was
sitting in a coffee room at the U. -- a rare event for me -- and a group of
people were recalling happy moments from their various childhoods. One of the
participants was a grey-haired woman perhaps 15 years older than I. She was a
secretary or administrative assistant at not mine but some other department. She
was a kindly, competent, unpretentious woman with whom I occasionally exhanged a
few words of greeting or business.

I can't remember exactly what the other participants ibn the discussion
remembered from their early days -- probably hunting trips with dad, hitting
the winning single in a softball game, a romp with the family dog -- but I will
never forget what Masako recalled: "When I was in the internment camp in Utah,
one day Marian Anderson came to sing for us."

Source: 2011/04/lolas-language-at-eighteen-months

Title: Lola's Language at Eighteen Months
Date: April 09, 2011

Her language consists mostly of nouns: "baby" -- both herself and her beloved
doll; "wawa" (water);  "mommy";  "daddy"; "ayi" (Chinese for aunt);  "didi"
(Chinese jiějie, older sister); "paopao" (Chinese, grandmother); "pock"
(pocket); "book"; "ball": "eye"; "nose" etc.  Her words are occasionally less
specified than they will soon become; for example, "duck" seems to mean "bird."
At the zoo, she identified an emu as a duck. Similarly, "gogo" (Chinese for
dog), means mammal, even including the zoo's llama. "Up" can mean either up or
down; it seems to signify a change of position. "No" occasionallly means "yes";
she seems to conceive it as a response to a question. There is, however, no
ambiguity to her very definitive "mine."

When she slid down the slide in the park, her audience exclaimed "whee."  Lola
responded, "I do whee," understanding "whee" to be the name of the action rather
than an exclamation of pleasure.

Source: 2011/04/howtoharvestme

Title: How to Harvest Me
Date: April 12, 2011

Yesterday I renewed my expired driver's license. I was worried about the eye
exam because of the cataracts, but I passed easily. Believe me, the bar for
visual acuity is not set very high.

On my previous license, "hair" was "brown";  this time, it's "gray."

The clerk asked, "Are you willing to be an organ donor?"  "Sure," I answered,
"but I don't know whether  anyone would want my organs."

Surely no one would want my myopic, be-cataracted eyes. Nor my ears (although
they would be  supplemented with an expensive set of hearing aids at no extra
charge). My heart?  Well, if it came with a "Use at Own Risk" label and a whole
library of erratic ECG printouts. Certainly not my spine, which was a "second"
or "factory reject" right from the womb. I would not recommend it even at a
severe markdown. My liver -- I think I can recommend my liver. It's barely been
used and should command a premium. My prostate -- now there's a bargain in the
making. A prostate is supposed to be the size of a walnut, but mine is more like
a potato, perhaps a Yukon Gold -- and yet as far as I know it is cancer free. It
could be chopped up and transplanted into three or four men.

My best organ, if it's an organ, is definitely my knees, both right and left. 
I'm at the age where knee-replacement is commonplace, but I have the knees of a
twenty-five year old: flexible, functioning, pain-free, even if somewhat prone
to hyperextension. Some linebacker who's abused his own would be overjoyed to
extend his career with a perfectly wonderful set of knees. Or a basketball
player, preferably someone who wants to regain his "hops." Maybe, in someone
else's body, my knees could finally win the trophies and renown that they
deserve.

Source: 2011/04/the-most-obscene-word-in-the-english-language

Title: The Most Obscene Word in the English Language
Date: April 14, 2011

The foulest, most obscene word in the English language, at least as far as
sound is concerned, is, by all odds, "kumquat."  It's hard to say whether
it's the "kum" or the "quat" that is more reprehensible, but the two together,
o my goodness gracious! "Kum" is linked to Fr. "con" and ME (Middle English)
"queynte" as well as to the common colloquialism for sexual climax. "Quat"
recalls Shakespeare's "quatch buttock" and also "quatch" in its exceedingly
vulgar modern urban signification. Readers attentive to language will also hear
in "quat" an echo of Robert Browning's famous "twat." (PG-13 rated note: Having
encountered in an anonymous 1660 poem the couplet "They talk'd of his having
a Cardinall's Hat; /They'd send him as soon an Old Nun's Twat," Browning took
"twat" to refer to article of clothing and so composed the following: "Then owls
and bats/ Cowls and twats/ Monks and nuns in a cloister's moods/ Adjourn to the
oak-stump pantry."  It would appear that Browning was insufficiently alert to
obscenity.)

"Kumquat" should properly be used in formulations such as "why don't you shove
it up your kumquat?" or "eat my kumquat," or "your mother is a kumquat."

If only Kobe Bryant hadn't called the referee a "fucking f-gg-t" but had called
him a "fucking kumquat" instead. He would not been fined $100,000 and he would
have enjoyed a far more satisfactory vituperative experience.

Incidentally, one of the most popular varieties of kumquat is the "fukushu."
Honest.

Source: 2011/04/butterfly-mosque

Title: Book Report:  G. Willow Wilson's The Butterfly Mosque
Date: April 25, 2011

It's bad enough to be born into and involuntarily indoctrinated into a
religion, but if a person has the good fortune to be born into a family of
non-believers, why should he or she regress to dogma and doctrine and fantasies
of the afterlife?

But then, I'm tone deaf and colorblind to religion.

Nevertheless (you can trust me here, dear blog-reader), I've read more than my
share of the kind of autobiography called the "conversion narrative" in which
the writer describes how he or she came to locate and embrace some particular
god or creed. "Conversion narratives" generally take one of two shapes. In
some of them, the subject experiences a sudden blinding insight (after the
style Saul/Paul on the road to Damascus); in others, the author endures
a long dark night of the soul that is painfully and gradually superseded
with "enlightenment" (Newman's Apologia is the archetype).

G. Willow Wilson's memoir The Butterfly Mosque (New York, 2010) describes a
conversion of a sort that I've never before encountered -- it lacks not only
a voice from the clouds and but also a scalding of the heart. Wilson simply
sets out with a desire to convert and then hunts for an appropriate religion
-- a most odd and unusual  procedure. In college, Wilson reports, she was "in
the market for a philosophy." Soon after, she became a Muslim -- essentially
because she wanted to be something and couldn't think of anything better.

Here's the key paragraph: "I discovered I was a monotheist....  That rules
out polytheism.  I also have a problem with authority, which rules out any
religion with a priesthood.... And I cannot believe that having given us these
bodies, God thinks we should be virgins unless we desperately feel a need to
reproduce. That rules out any religion that is against family planning or sex
for fun....  Islam is antiauthoritarian, sex-positive monotheism."

It's a series of reasons so quirky that it's hard to take seriously.  If
I were G. Willow's spiritual counselor, and she came to me with such a
shallow argument, I would have said, "go home, young lady, take a couple of
years and try to think more deeply."

"I discovered I was a monotheist"? Mere mysticism, no more more persuasive
than "I discovered I believed in only one angel." Islam has no priesthood? 
Depends on how you define priest, doesn't it. No Roman-style priest who acts
as an intermediary to God, but a heck of a priestly establishment nonetheless
-- boatloads of imans and mullahs and ayatollahs all laying claim to special
forms of knowledge. Is Islam sex-friendly?  Perhaps in theory, but in practice
it's hard to find a more misogynist or homophobic operation out there in
monotheismland -- and I suspect that sex is more cheerful when it's shared by
equal partners.

On the whole, Islam does not meet Wilson's three criteria nearly as well as the
Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster, which is monotheist to a overcooked
fault, supports not a single priest (only a website), and as far as I know,
expresses not the slightest antagonism to sex in any form or coloration.

The Butterfly Mosque offers its readers some very sensitive insights into
Egyptian society and especially into American-Muslim relations. It's also a fine
little love story -- a young American woman finds a sweet young man in Cairo
and tactfully negotiates the profound cultural barriers that might have divided
them. Sometimes it seems a little like Romeo and Juliet gone all sentimental
and gooey -- as though the young lady would be secretly happier if her marriage
had caused a Montague-Capulet feud. It doesn't because both Omar's family and
G. Willow's parents are urbane, sophisticated, open, loving, practical and non-
ideological  and offer no resistance whatsoever to the exogamous marriage. And
Wilson is honest enough to admit it.

I worry about the stability of this conversion.  When a new religion is
embraced for such superficial reasons, it can be shucked equally as easily.  It
wouldn't surprise me if G. Willow returns, some day, to the steady rationality
of her parents. Let's hope so.

Source: 2011/04/see-the-ball-hit-the-ball

Title: "See the Ball, Hit the Ball"
Date: April 28, 2011

When Manny Ramirez visited George Washington High School, his former baseball
coach, Steve Mandl, asked hm to say something to his players about the art of
hittiing.  Ramirez, one of the most spectacular batters of all time (555
home runs, .585 slugging, .313 batting average), thought for a few moments and
then pronounced "see the ball, hit the ball."  From which we can derive that
he is not looking at a post-retirement career as a hitting coach.  He may be
the idiot savant of hitting.

Good thing the coach didn't ask him about fielding.  "See the ball, fumble the
ball."

"See the ball, hit the ball" is universal  wisdom that transcends its baseball
context -- like Wayne Gretzky's famous "skate to where the puck is going to be,
not where it is."

I've heard the masterful sentence ascribed also to Pete Rose.  But it's more
far more appropriate to Manny.

Source: 2011/05/gauguin

Title: Carving by Paul Gaugin
Date: May 02, 2011

I visited the quirky but impressive Gauguin exhibition at the National Gallery.

Some of the Tahitian paintings are genuinely "iconic" but certainly worth
viewing in real life, where they're a ton more wonderful than in the familiar
reproductions.

In my great ignorance, I had not a shred of knowledge of Gauguin's carvings,
and was frankly, dazzled by their beauty. Illustrations do scant justice. Even
more than the paintings, the sculptures need to be seen. (They also need to be
handled, but art galleries don't exactly encourage tactile familiarity. I hate
the nasty beeper that goes off when you I bring my near-sighted eyes close to
the object.)

"Soyez amoureuses," one of Gauguin's most interesting carvings, is made of
painted linden wood.  It's a hefty 97cm x 75cm. Here's what the artist said of
it:

I have been working for 2 months on a large (painted wood) carving and I'm bold
enough to believe it's the best thing I've done up to now as far as strength
and balance are concerned (although the literary side of it seems crazy to many
people. A monster, who looks like me, is holding a naked woman by the hand --
that's the main subject.  The spaces are filled by smaller figures.) At the
top there's a town, some sort of Babylon, and at the bottom the countryside with
a few imaginary flowers (a desolate old woman) and a fox, the prophetic animal
of perversity among the Indians... Despite the inscription, the people look sad,
in contradiction to the title.

Like Blake and Yeats, Gauguin had developed his own private mythology.

The sculpture was exhibited in Brussels in 1891 and provoked a "critical storm"
-- but what sort of tempest my catalog don't say.

This carving was lent to the National Gallery by the Museum of Fine Arts in
Boston which apparently has other Gauguin sculptures.

Now I have an incentive for another visit to New England.

Source: 2011/05/talk-about-upscale

Title: News from the "Hair Industry"
Date: May 02, 2011

While indulging a long, pleasant walk this morning, I happened upon a shop I
had never before noticed.  It's called Juno's Studio of Contemporary Hair
Artistry.  I ws curious as to whether a "hair artistry studio" was what we
called in the old days a "barber shop" or a "beauty shop." I tried to peek
inside the shop but the situation was a tad too "architectooralooral" (in
Mr. Joe Gargery's phrase) for me to feel  comfortable doing so. Nevertheless,
I was sufficiently intrigued about "contemporary hair artistry" to
visit Juno's website. I am now prepared to "share" with my readership what I
have learned. The following paragraph comes to you absolutely verbatim.

"Jules Juno’s passion for the hair industry pulses through her life and work
at every turn and every look, as her creative spirit is continuously fueled by
the rhythms, themes and movements of the subtle and deep rich nuances of the
world around her - from the street to the flora, feathers and fur of nature,
to the lines of fashion and art in all its forms. Aligned closely with the
powerful totem of Raven and ready to celebrate newness in light of every full
moon, she dwells in the magic of change and transformation. Often called the
“Hair Shaman” and “Keeper of the Hair” by her devoted clients, Jules
believes in the sacredness of being trusted to work her creative magic on the
high chakra space of one’s head."

I can tell you one person whose brilliant (though graying) mane Juno's not
going work her creative magic upon (even though the hair industry pulses
through every deep rich nuance of its rhythms, themes and movements). Mine,
that's who's. Keep your ever-loving hands off my high chakra space, Hair
Shaman!!

Upon further investigation, Juno (her real name?) turns out to be a disciple
of Minnesotan Horst Rechelbacher -- under whose tutelage she taught "for a
triune of years before adventuring her creative genius as a platform artist." 
In our town, she plans to "keep the fires of inspiration burning and push the
edges of hair design."

And while here, she will also "push the edges" of New Age Bullshit.

By the way, what the heck is a "platform artist?"  And what distinguishes a
"triune of years" from "three years?"

Source: 2011/05/holbein-rugs

Title: "Holbein" Rugs
Date: May 04, 2011

What is this remarkable object? It's a seventeenth-century Turkish rug that
now resides in the Philadelphia Museum of Art. It's of a type called a
"Holbein."  And just why, pray tell, should a class of rugs be named after
a sixteenth- century German painter? Was Holbein a closet weaver? Or
an importer of rugs?  No. The answer is that rugs of this sort appear
prominently in paintings by Holbein, and, inasmuch as textiles deteriorate
more rapidly than oil paintings, much more is known about early Turkish rugs
from their representation in European art than from the bits and fragments that
have managed to survive. Hence "Holbein."

It may be not be easy to see in the picture (rugs need to be seen and handled
in person) but on closer inspection, it's clear that there's a repeating
geometric pattern in the field within the rug's borders.  That pattern is the
hallmark of the "Holbein" rug.

Look again at Holbein's best-known picture, "The Ambassadors."

The canvas is loaded with realistic and iconographic detail, and,
moreover, it's easy to be transfixed by the floating magic-realism-ish
anamorphic death's head that dominates the bottom quarter of the canvas. But
look, on the table, under the very up-to-date scientific instruments, a Turkish
rug!  Look again.

The rug that's depicted is comprised a series of squares of which the right
side of one and the left side of the other are clearly visible.  It's a very
handsome "Holbein."

There's an even clearer example in Holbein's "Darmstadt Madonna." There it
is, in its full anachronistic glory -- a lovely example of a "Turkey carpet"
enriching the very  bottom of the picture.  The repeating geometric pattern
is fully revealed.  It's not the same rug as the one in the "Ambassadors"
portrait, but it's clearly in the same style.

"Holbein" rugs don't just appear in Holbeins.  There's a great example
in Andrea del Verrocchio's "Madonna with john the Baptist and Donatus" (c.
1480).

A sixteenth-century Turkish rug right at the feet of the madonna and child    .
Anachronisticissimus                                                           .

I pause here for a bit of autobiography. in the summer of 1968, Mrs. Dr.
Metablog, struck by a sudden infatuation, bid for and won at a country auction
in rural Vermont a small geometric ( 4' x 5') rug. It's been with us now these
forty years and  has been a constant source of visual pleasure. No, it's not
a Holbein, but it's in the same phylum. it's a Konakghend prayer rug, perhaps
dating from the late nineteenth century, and like many Kuba or Shirvan rugs,
it's geometrical (rather than swirly or floral) in design. Something like a
"Holbein" but not quite. I would love to have a "Holbein" on one of my otherwise
blank walls. There's something mighty intriguing and suggestive about their
cross-cultural links. But in the matter of antique rugs (as in other areas of
art), my taste is infinitely in advance of my wallet. Instead of purchasing,
we gratify our enthusiasm for rugs by going to exhibits, visiting the museums
(including the almost unknown Textile Museum in DC), wandering into the better
rug stores (NOT the ones that are declaring bankruptcy and in which EVERYTHING
is now 70-80% off) where we pretend to be wealthy, and we study the rug books.
Let me testify: "oriental" rugs are one of the great, great, great art forms.

Are genuine "Holbeins" still available?  (I mean old Turkish ones, not new
sweatshop or machine made jobbies from India or China.)  Here's one that was
recently sold on Ebay.

It's a mid-nineteenth-century beauty and, to judge from the picture, in
remarkably fine shape for its age. It's described as a "Yuntdag," which is a
region in West Anatolia. If I had the cash or even the credit, I'd jump on it.
And then I would let a photographer take my picture while I pose in front of it,
and by doing so connect myself to Holbein and Verrocchio-- to the aesthetic part
of the tradition, that is, not to the Virgin part.

Source: 2011/05/real-dialog

Title: Fragment of a Genuine Telephone Conversation
Date: May 08, 2011

The grand-daughter (now age eleven), studying the Darmstadt Madonna (1528) by
Hans Holbein the Younger that is reproduced in q previous post:  "It doesn't
look like Madonna."

Grandpa:  "I think it may be a different Madonna."

Source: 2011/05/joke

Title: My Life in Jokes*  **
Date: May 11, 2011

Why did the moron throw the clock out of the window?  Because he wanted
to see time fly. &&&  How do you say "refrigerator" in Italian?  Ice-a
box. &&& Why do fireman wear read suspenders?  To hold their pants up. &&&
Knock-knock. Who's there?  Anita. Anita who?  Anita borrow a pencil.
&&&  "Over the Cliff" by Hugo Furst. 'The Russian Surgeon's Revenge" by
I. Kutchakokoff; "The Yellow Stream" by I. P. Daley?  &&& Guy is walking
in the woods and meets a friend. The friend has a black eye and a bloody
nose. "What happened to you?  "Guy beat me up." "Why?"  "I don't know. I was
looking for hotel I'm supposed to stay at, and I came upon this man lying
on top of a woman. I asked him, how far is the Olde Log inn and he jumped up
and hit me."  &&&  Horse wants to try out for the Dodgers. Leo Durocher
says, sure he's a horse but the Dodgers are in the dumps; let's see what he
can do. "Can you throw?" Horse picks up a ball, walks to the pitching mound,
and throws a 105 mile fastball right down the middle of the plate. "Can you
hit?" Horse picks up a bat and steps to the plate. On the first swing, he
hits a tremendous line drive off the scoreboard in right field. "Run," says
Durocher. "Run," says the horse. "Why do you think I'm here?  If I could
run I'd be at Hialeah." &&& Man is knocked down by a bus. He's lying in the
road, bleeding to death. A friend comes by, says, Solly, how you doink? Solly
says, "I make a living." &&&  Truman, Churchill, and Stalin are driving in a
car down a narrow road. There's a cow in the middle of the road, blocking the
way. Churchill gets out of the car, waves his hands and screams at the cow,
but he can't get it to budge. Truman gets out, picks up a stick and starts
beating the cow. It still won't move. Stalin gets out, walks up to the cow
and whispers something into the cow's ear. The cow bolts and disappears into
the woods. They get back into the car. Truman and Churchill say to Stalin,
"What in the world did you say to the cow to get her to run like that. Stalin
says, "I told her I'd put her on a collective farm." &&& Man is in a nightclub.
Everyone's singing and dancing. He gets an urge to take a dump. Can't find the
toilet. He's having a hard time holding it in. Waiter tells him the bathroom
is upstairs.  He goes up to the next floor, can't find the toilet. He's about
to explode.Finally he sees a hole in the floor. He squats and lets fly with a
tremendous load. He gets dressed, goes downstairs. Everyone has disappeared; no
music, no dancing, no drinking. He finds the waiter. "What happened?" Waiter
says, "Where were you when the shit hit the fan?"  &&& The mayor of Muncie,
Indiana is scheduled to preside at a ceremony honoring a local girl-made-good
now called Lolita Lamour, but who grew up in Muncie under the name Flora Faye
Fluck. But he's worried that he might mispronounce the name and embarrass
himself. He practices:  Flora Faye Fluck. Flora Faye Fluck.  Finally, the
big day arrives. The mayor makes his speech. "And here she is, ladies and
gentleman, Lolita Lamour, known to all of her friends here in Muncie as
Flora Faye Klunt." &&&  A man is walking on a beach. He comes upon a
naked woman lying on the shore. He jumps on her, screws her, and continues
on his way. After a half-a-mile he meets three or four members of a search
party. One of them says, "A woman has drowned. Have you seen a dead body on the
beach." Man says, "O my god. Was she dead?  I thought she was English." 
&&&  A scorpion say to a turtle, "I need to get to the other side of the Dead
Sea.  Let me climb on your back and you swim across."  Turtle says, "But if
you're on my back, you could sting me." Scorpion says, "Why would I do that? 
If I sting you, we'd both drown." Turtle says, "OK, get on my back."  They
get to the middle of the Dead Sea, and the scorpion stings the turtle. Turtle
says, "Why did you do that?" Scorpion answers, "Because this is the Middle
East." &&&  An airplane is flying over the Atlantic Ocean.  Suddenly, the
loudspeaker comes on. "This is your pilot. If you look out of the window on the
right side of the plane, you can see smoke coming out of the #1 engine. If you
look out the left side, you can see flames coming out of the #2 engine. Now
look down. If you look closely, you can see a small life-raft floating in the
ocean. I am speaking to you from that raft." &&& Searching for the meaning
of life, a man travels to Tibet, climbs the highest mountain, comes to a
monastery where the wisest man in the world lives. He asks the monk, "What is
the meaning of life." The monk says, "life ... is a barrel."  The man goes
back to Cleveland, thinks about it for five years. What does it mean, life is a
barrel?  He can't figure it out, so he gets back on the boat, travels to Tibet,
climbs the mountain, finds the monk, and asks him, "What did you mean, life
is a barrel." The monk shrugs his shoulders. "OK, so life isn't a barrel."
&&&  Old guy, maybe a bluesman, bottle of hooch in a brown paper bag, sits on
a bench in the middle of the night, downtown, playing air-sax, nodding. Young
fellow comes by, cheerful, asks him, "Crosstown buses run this way?"  Blues
guy looks up, pauses for a second, and then drawls, "Doo--dah, doo-dah." &&& A
man, 93, and his wife, 91, go to the rabbi and tell him that they're miserable
and want a divorce. The rabbi says, "You've been unhappy all these years and
you wait seventy years to get a divorce. What are you thinking?" Man says, "We
wanted to wait until the children were all dead."  &&&  "My brain!  My second
favorite organ." (W. Allen). &&&  Man goes to the rabbi in distress. He says
that his wife is trying to poison him. "How do you know that?  "I saw her
putting stuff in my coffee." Rabbi says, "It's got to be a mistake. I'll talk
to her." Two days later, the rabbi calls him. "Your wife came in. I talked
to her for three hours.Three hours straight I talk to her." "So what's your
advice?" "Drink the poison." &&& Man goes to see his doctor. The doctor says,
"I have good news and bad news. The bad news is that you have terminal cancer
and you're going to be dead in a month." "So what's the good news." "Well," the
doctor says, "You see that cute nurse over there. I finally fucked her." &&& An
older guy is walking down the street. He meets a friend and they chat for a few
minutes. Man starts to leave, turns back to his friend, and says, "By the way,
when we met, was I walking north or south?" "You were going south." "Good,"
says the guy, "then I've already had my  lunch." &&& George W. Bush goes for
dinner at the ADL where he's served a bowl of matzo ball soup. He looks at
it suspiciously, but then, remembering all the strange foods he's eaten at
ceremonial dinners, takes a bite. Not bad. He turns to his host: "Tell me," he
says, "do the Jews eat any other part of the matzo, or only the balls?" &&& Two
old guys are ritually washing a corpse.The first one says, "Look at the schlong
on this guy. He's a horse." The second guy says, "It's just like mine." First
guy says, "You have a dong like this. I don't believe it. I've never seen
anything half as large."  The second guy says, "I said it was like mine. I
didn't mean mine was just as large.  I meant mine is just as dead."  &&& 
Knock-knock.  Who's there?  "Yo mama."  "Yo mama who." "Yo mama. This is no
joke. Open the damn door and let me in."

* All jokes are as remembered.  No websites or other research tools have been employed.

**  All jokes are genuine historical artefacts and many not conform to the highest standards of contemporary taste.

Source: 2011/05/a-great-moment-in-sportscasting-history-

Title: A Great Moment in Sportscasting History
Date: May 13, 2011

Rajan Rondo is knocked down by Dwayne Wade and falls awkwardly dislocating his
left elbow.  Even though it's gruesome, the tape is repeated over and over
again. We see Rondo's arm bend backwards and we see him writhe in pain.

Jeff Van Gundy:  "It's horrible. I can't watch."

Mark Jackson (a Brooklynite who doesn't like Van Gundy):  "You can't look?  I
always wondered where you were from.  Now I know.  You're from the suburbs."

Later, Rondo returns and heroically plays the fourth period with just one
working arm.

Source: 2011/05/why-we-hate-wells-fargo

Title: Why We Hate Wells Fargo
Date: May 13, 2011

The New York Times says that former employees of Wells Fargo admit that
they "systematically singled out blacks in Baltimore and suburban Maryland
for high- interest subprime mortgages."  "These loans," Baltimore officials
have claimed in a federal lawsuit against Wells Fargo, "tipped hundreds of
homeowners into foreclosure and cost the city tens of millions of dollars in
taxes and city services."  Why did the bank act with such malice?  Because
Wells Fargo "saw the black community as fertile ground for subprime mortgages,
as working-class blacks were hungry to be a part of the nation’s home-owning
mania. Loan officers pushed customers who could have qualified for prime loans
into subprime mortgages. Wells Fargo employees picturesquely identified these
transactions as "ghetto loans" made to “mud people.”

The city of Baltimore has filed a suit against Wells Fargo.  "The toll taken
by such policies, Baltimore officials argue, "is terrible. Data released by the
city as part of the suit show that more than half the properties subject to
foreclosure on a Wells Fargo loan from 2005 to 2008 now stand vacant. And 71
percent of those are in predominantly black neighborhoods."

It's called reverse redlining -- systematically marketing the most expensive and
onerous loans to black customers.

So here's the deal.  The city of Baltimore loses, the neighborhoods lose,
individual families are financially crippled for a lifetime, and the CEO of
Wells Fargo gets a 50% raise to $21,000,000 a year. What a deal!

What's going to happen to the suit?  It was filed in January, 2008.  Three
years later, after a predictable spate of legal wrangling, a federal judge
has allowed the suit to go forward, but not before Wells Fargo "succeeded in
limiting the pretrial discovery the city has been able to get and in limiting
the allegations and damages the city could claim if the case makes it to trial."
A bank spokeswoman said Wells Fargo will “continue to defend ourselves
vigorously.”

Here's what's going to happen. The bank, which has far greater resources
that the city,  will assign a couple of hundred lawyers to the case and wear
down Baltimore with various hair-splitting motions.  Judges will retire
and/or die. The case will be in the courts for an unknown number of Jarndyce and
Jarndyce units of time. After a generation or so, when most of the aggrieved
will have long since left the earth, Wells Fargo will settle for a slap on the
wrist and pay a nominal fine, but admit to no guilt. The bank will trumpet its
vindication. Justice will not be served.  It will be bought.

Can we possibly imagine what will have happened to the many thousandes of no-
longer-occupied houses and to their one time oh-so hopeful purchasers?  Nothing
good, trust me.

Source: 2011/05/all-about-eve-erasmus

Title: Erasmus Hall in All about Eve
Date: May 15, 2011

"Phoebe," she calls herself, but in the script she's just
"girl." It's the last scene of Joseph L. Mankiewicz's (Stuyvesant '24) All
about Eve. "Phoebe" has sneaked into Eve Harrington's hotel room and has
pretended to fall asleep. Eve accosts her and is about to call the police
when the intruderess proclaims herself a fan of the actress. Here's their
conversation:

"GIRL You know the Eve Harrington clubs - that they've got in most of the
girls' high schools?EVE I've heard of them.GIRL Ours was one of the first.
Erasmus Hall. I'm the president.EVE Erasmus Hall. That's in Brooklyn, isn't
it?GIRL Lots of actresses come from Brooklyn. Barbara Stanwyck, Susan Hayward -
of course, they're just movie stars."Phoebe might also have mentioned that both
Barbara Stanwyck (Ruby Stevens) and Susan Hayward (Edythe Marrener) were not
only from Brooklyn, but also from Erasmus Hall High School. Why doesn't she say
so? Or is being a native of Brooklyn disability enough?

Phoebe might have added to her list and mentioned that Mae West was also an
alumna of the same high school. Cheers to Erasmus Hall, mother of actresses --
even though Erasmus's Barbra Streisand '59 was still in braces and still in
P. S. something or other when All about Eve was being exhibited at the Leader
Theater on Coney Island Avenue.

Supposed Erasmian "Phoebe" was played by the young Barbara Bates, who was highly
credible as an upwardly mobile Brooklynite. Her small part includes an iconic
moment when, in the film's last scene, she appears in full narcissistic glory,
preening in front of a triptych of mirrors as she tries on Eve's clothes. She
is reflected in multiple, infinitely regressing fragments. Bates, a native of
Denver, Colorado, did not, alas, live up to her early promise, but soon after
the completion of this film fell into bouts of insanity that came to an end only
when she took her own life in 1959.

But why Erasmus?  Because its graduates had achieved a reputation for fierce
ambition? Perhaps, but also because Erasmus (as Mankiewicz would well have
known) was even more provincial -- as only the outer boroughs of New York can
be provincial -- than Eve Harrington's childhood Wisconsin. "Phoebe" is another
Eve and equally naive and countrified. She's a doppelganger on deck, a secret
sharer in ovo, a Mr Hyde in the making; she's also defensive, megalomaniacal,
unsophisticated, slightly loony, and ruthless. And so it was an excellent
decision to root her in EHHS, where at least 20% of the students, if I remember
correctly, had almost exactly the same traits of character.

Source: 2011/05/shattered

Title: Amnesia in Film: Shattered (1991)
Date: May 20, 2011

The "neo-noir" film Shattered (1991) was directed by Wolfgang Petersen, who
elicited a mumble-mouth performance by Tom Berenger and an incoherent one from
Greta Scacchi. It's another in the endless parade of amnesia movies. In
this variant, the central character, Dan Merrick, goes over the cliff in his
Mercedes and emerges not only disfigured but, it seems, without the least
knowledge of his own person or past. The film clearly demonstrates that movie
amnesia can be just as flexible as a tricky plot demands. Amnesia in Shattered
has nothing to do with the real human brain and its gesture to the facts of
existence  is mighty perfunctory.

DOCTOR (authoritative, bearded): "We call it psychogenic amnesia. Patient
doesn't know his name, his family, his personal history. Everything else he
remembers. The year, who's president. He can drive a car, he can function
professionally, but anything personal is out of reach."

And now the gimmick (major spoiler coming up, so if you plan to see the movie
[which I cannot recommend], please avert your innocent eyes). Not only does
Dan Merrick not remember anything of his pre-accident past, he's not even Dan
Merrick!  He's Judth Merrick's lover, Jack Stanton, transformed by plastic
surgery into a simulacrum of Dan. And he doesn't have the least clue that he's
someone else.

There's a exceedingly complicated plot which involves voluntary and involuntary
impersonations, a private investigator out of Cliche Central, two murders and
three car crashes. The incredible upshot is that the villain (the temptress-
wife) is killed and that Jack permanently assumes the role of Dan.

Jack's amnesia is cured in the last scene, but not before it has been
mysteriously promulgated among  his friends, acquaintances, and business
associates, all of whom are utterly deceived by the plastic surgery and
seem not to notice that there have also been changes to his voice, his
walk, his manner, and his personality. These poor folks suffer from a
devastating manifestation of Hollywoodish forgetfulness. It could be called
"contact amnesia." An absurd idea, but not more absurd than the plot of
Shattered.

Source: 2011/05/eruv

Title: Reposted:  Antimylarmonofilamentarianism
Date: May 23, 2011

In 1895, my wise and courageous grandparents left the abysmal, backward Ukraine
and struck out for the new world. Nine years later, my father was born in a
cold-water flat in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. The date of his
birth: December 22, 1904, exactly at the winter solstice. "And they called his
name, Emanuel, God with us." If he had been born in the old country, before the
Russian authorities imposed legal cognomina upon us, he would have been named
Emanuel ben Isaiah -- his father's name appended to his own as a patronymic.

Despite his traditional moniker and his commitment to the essence of Judaism,
my father was fiercely hostile to the irrationalities of religion. His view --
and my grandfather Isaiah's even more strongly -- was that for a thousand years
our lineage had been kept in poverty and darkness not just by the czars and the
Cossacks but also by the rabbis. In politics my father and grandfather began
as socialists and became New Dealers; in philosophy, they rejected theological
doctrine and were among the children of the Enlightenment whom Moses Mendelssohn
had led to the promised land of evidence and reason. I doubt that any of my
ancestors knew Karl Marx's sentence that "the criticism of religion is the
beginning of all criticism," but they spoke and acted as though such wisdom
had been absorbed from the cradle. My brothers and I were taught to resist
the exclusivity, superstition, and ceremony and especially the triumphalism of
religion.

We now have a religious controversy in our peaceful, progressive, and largely
secular western town. A group of orthodox Jews have petitioned the city council
for permission to construct an eruv. What is an eruv? It’s a “symbolic
boundary that allows orthodox Jews to carry things, including their own
children, outside their home during the Sabbath." (Carrying is considered work,
and orthodoxy's strict interpretation of religious law prohibits sabbatical
labor.) A latter-day eruv is constructed out of fishing line that is strung on
utility poles; curiously, it may incorporate functioning electric and telephone
wires. If you're within the lines, you're "in" your home.

I know that my forbears detested eruvim and similar expressions of
irrational piety. I myself am not enraged by these useless but harmless
superstitions. Constructing an eruv does not endanger our species; it's not
like opposing contraception or prohibiting stem-cell research. An eruv consoles
the believers and doesn't much bother the rest of us. Yet if there is a spirit
in the sky, which I very much doubt, I would hope that he would not be so small-
minded as to issue ukases about carrying infants on Saturdays; infants should
be carried as much as they want, which is just about everywhere and always.
And if the god of Abraham and Isaac has become so narrow as to promulgate an
inside/outside-the-home rule, I would also hope that he would be intelligent
enough not to be flummoxed by such transparent trickery as hanging mylar
filament on poles.

I have no intuitive conception of god, but I think that the orthodox trivialize
our human and shared longing for transcendence when they sanctify such petty
practices. It would be far more pious for the orthodox to take every nickel
spent to appease the Ancient of Days and bestow it on a poor Jewish family from
Tashkent. If the eruvim-makers can't locate eligible Jews, there are Hondurans
and Sudanese a-plenty who deserve their attention. When the believers re-direct
their enthusiasm and their resources toward truly charitable enterprises, they
will honor the universal immigrant experience and they will also practice the
very worthy Jewish virtue of compassion. The effort spent to construct an eruv
is a foolish waste of time.

Here's my father's view:  "It took us hundreds of years to fight our way out of
the ghetto and they want to put themselves back in jail. If the rabbis had their
way," he would say, "Mahler and Bernstein and Gershwin would play accordion in a
klezmer band in Bialystok, Einstein would balance the books for a caftan maker
in Kiev, and a hundred and fifty Jewish Nobel Prize winners would squander their
intelligence davening in a dismal Vilna synagogue."

I think it’s in a Wallace Markfield novel that an old Jewish guy confronts
a group of twenty-something Jewish hippies/slackers in Miami Beach. After
a heated discussion, he admonishes them:  "And don't ever be ashamed that
you’re Jewish. It’s enough that I’m ashamed that you’re Jewish."

Which is pretty much how I feel about the eruvistas.  Well, not exactly
ashamed.  Embarrassed, perhaps, by their superstitious infatuation with the
"dark backward and abysm of time."

Source: 2011/05/reposted-philip-roths-pseudo-pastoral

Title: Reposted: Philip Roth's Pseudo-Pastoral
Date: May 25, 2011

A couple of years ago, when I had journeyed through roughly half of his
writings, I made some preliminary observations about the fictional world
invented by Philip Roth. In the course of discussion, I advanced two hypotheses.
The first was that Roth hated children, whom he regarded as encumbrances to male
freedom and pleasure. The second is that although Roth had invented a boatload
of adult male narcissists, he had not created a single mensch -- a caring,
responsible, mature man. In Roth's vision of the world, I suggested, "only a
schmuck would be a mensch."

After a pause for rest and rehabilitation, I've now resumed my upriver voyage to
the heart of the Rothworld. I've just finished reading American Pastoral (1997),
a novel set during the difficult, still-controversial Vietnam war. I must boast
that my hypotheses about children and menschdom are fully confirmed by the new
evidence provided by American Pastoral. In this novel, children are indeed
hateful, and the mensch who has at last made an appearance is nothing more than
a schmeggegy. Roth has given us Seymour "Swede" Levov, an archetypal mensch, and
behold, what a poor naive schmuck is he! Levov nurtures everyone he encounters,
but Roth works it so that his virtue leads directly to his downfall. Poor Swede
owns and manages an exemplary factory but he is betrayed by his workers; he's
loyal to Newark, so Newark riots and pillages; he loves and supports his fragile
wife only to discover that she's sleeping with his friend. Most of all, he
adores his daughter, unamusingly called Merry, who turns out to be, just as we
might expect, a devil child. She screams unaccountably from the moment of birth
and stutters through her awkward childhood (Roth seems to think that colic and
speech impediments are signs of inherent viciousness). At adolescence, Merry
transforms into an unhandsome Patty Hearst clone who participates in several
senseless but deadly political bombings. She then goes underground, only to
return secretly in Newark to haunt Levov all the more. Under this succession of
attacks, Swede Levov's carefully-crafted menschdom is little-by-little exposed
as naive schmuckhood. If only Levov had taken the Zuckerman route: love only
thyself, fuck 'em and forget 'em; abort when all else fails.

And now, for the benefit of younger readers, I pause for a few refresher
sentences about the historiography of the Vietnamese catastrophe. The
significance of this period is highly contested. For those on the left, the
war was a foolish attempt to block a peasant uprising against neo-colonialist
overlords. The Bundys and Lyndonites and Kissingers squandered fifty thousand
American and two million Vietnamese lives (plus moral authority and treasure
uncountable). Nevertheless, as the left sees it, the war provided an
opportunity for heroism: for the first time in human history, a free and
patriotic people, making use of peaceful assemblies, petitions, political
activism, boycotts, and resistance to the draft, succeeded in turning an erring
government from its mistaken path. On the other hand, the right wing knows an
entirely different Vietnam war. For conservatives, the war against communism
was lost because squishy liberals lost their nerve. Conservatives remember only
the excesses of the anti-war movement: the culture of drugs, the sexual freedom,
the violence, and of course, the bombings.

American Pastoral is firmly of the right-hand file. Roth has performed a
amazing piece of legerdemain.  He has written about the period of Vietnam,
but he has omitted (or suppressed) both the atrocities of the war and the
organized, largely peaceful opposition to it. In American Pastoral, resistance
is not political but personal. It's embodied in Swede's daughter Merry Levov,
who is vacant, violent, angry and disgusting. By stripping the novel of its
historical context and coloration, Roth reduces the opposition to the war to
an oedipal conflict between a demon child and her well-meaning but ineffectual
father.The novel lacks even the decent ambiguity that Roth might have created if
he had given Levov other and perhaps more reasonable children. But it's a good
guess that in a novel by Philip Roth, more children would have led not to a
widening of focus or to a richer novel, but only to more tsouris.

It's a shame that so skillful an artist (and one who is not generally a right-
winger) has written a novel that's only inches away from neocon propaganda.

Source: 2011/05/drood

Title: Re-reading Drood
Date: May 25, 2011

I can't remember when I last read The Mystery of Edwin Drood, but I'm certain
that it was before 1997.  It was in that year that I passed the age that
Dickens had attained when he left our planet, leaving Drood undone.

This time, I read Drood with a sense of Impending Doom. I think it's because
Dickens died far too young -- in the prime of his age.  Not, however, in
the prime of his genius  -- although one never knows what he would have
produced if he had lived to his allotted three score and ten. The novel struck
me as a tired and eneravated performance.  Too many of the characters are
recycled from the Dickens repertory company, the humor is too strenuous, the
clues and the red-herrings too obviously contrived.  It's only very near the
moment of truncation, when the splendid Mrs. Billicken makes her appearance,
that the novel feels inspired in the old Dickens way.

I also read in sadness. When we commit to reading a long, densely plotted
novel, we take it for granted that all its mysteries will eventually be
resolved.  Such is the bargain that the novelist makes with his readers. But
this novel is different, because Dickens didn't make it to the end. And so, we
read it always tentatively, knowing that its mysteries will remain mysteries
forever and ever. So this time, alas, Drood was a memento mori -- and goodness
gracious, I already have enough of those.

Source: 2011/05/my-new-campaign-for-city-council-

Title: My New Campaign for City Council
Date: May 30, 2011

It's election season once again. I'm thinking of making a run for city council
in our progressive western town. Here's my revised platform, voters.

1.  NO LEAF BLOWERS.  Rationale: it's a horrible noisy unecological machine that can easily be replaced with a broom. And everyone knows that single-stroke engines are major polluters.

2.  ALL MALL PERFORMERS MUST BE JURIED. Rationale: no more off-key singing. No more bad juggling.  No more ugly balloon animals. No more noisy drummers or whining didgeredoos.

3.  EVERY RESTAURANT MUST KEEP A PIG. Rationale: a perfect, ecologically-sound solution to the waste food problem. Come to think of it, let's require a piggery of all institutions with lunchrooms, such as high schools and hospitals. Let's fatten up those porkers, turn them into bacon and savory spare ribs.

4.  NO "HOLIDAY" LIGHTS. Rationale: waste of electricity and other scarce resources. Global warming. Bad taste. Bad theology. Bauble-olatry.

5.  NEW ANNUAL HOLIDAY: Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12. Rationale: uncontroversial celebration of a great thinker. (I reject out of hand those extremists who propose to celebrate Darwin's birthday on December 25. I'm a uniter, not a divider.)

6.  NO MUSIC WRITTEN AFTER 1897. Rationale: obvious. Why 1897?  Death of Johannes Brahms. Also, no amplified music of any kind in an automobile that is audible outside the vehicle. Higher fines and jail terms hip hop and for excessively patriotic "country."

7.  NO SMOKERS.  Rationale:  lung cancer, heart attacks, emphysema, ashes, disgusting odor, cigarette litter on the sidewalk. Note: not "no smoking"-- "no smokers." No going outside of city limits to light up and then re-entering.

8.  NO VISIBLE TATTOOS. Why only "visible "tattoos?  Because whole-body inspections might be considered intrusive by squishy civil libertarians. Also, no nose rings, navel rings, or other bodily piercings. Except earrings. I rather like earrings. But no more than one per ear.

9.  ANNUAL JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL PRAIRIE DOG SHOOT AND BARBECUE. Let them kids exercise their Second Amendment rights; eliminate them pesky varmints;  learn to cook. One platform position, three social benefits.

10. NO DOGS PERMITTED WITHIN CITY LIMITS. Rationale: fatal dog attacks, dog bites, barking dogs, squealing dogs, ubiquitous dog "waste," dogs carrying on in parks and open space, the goopy indulgence of dog "guardians," the ecological disaster of dog food. But what about seeing-eye dogs, you ask?  Well, that's a slippery slope, ain't it. Sorry folks, no dogs (except for purposes of vivisection).

11.  NO MORE COLLEGE FOOTBALL. Rationale: I don't like college football.

12.  NO "FACILITATORS" WITH WHITEBOARDS OR FLIPCHARTS AT MEETINGS. Goodness gracious, am I ever tired of those things.

That's about it. I feel that I have my finger on the pulse of the
electorate. It's going to be a landslide. Tell me that life won't be better as
soon as we enact these new laws

Source: 2011/05/next-three-days-1

Title: The Next Three Days (2011)
Date: May 31, 2011

We watched The Next Three Days because we admired Paul Haggis's two previous
films -- Crash and In the Valley of Elah. This one is not quite as
innovative, but it's worth watching and is definitely the second-best English
teacher movie ever made in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Wonder Boys, based on the
Michael Chabon novel, is more engaging and original).  The story, in brief,
is that a woman is erroneously convicted of murder, her appeals fail, she's in
for life, but her husband breaks her out of jail.

The plot is hard to swallow, and is told with so much intercutting of pursuers
and pursued, red-herring clues, and car chases that it sometime seems like a
Bourne adventure. But it's also an endearing family values film -- husband
and wife and kid all cocooned up in the last scene.  Elizabeth Banks is
beautiful and expressionless and Russell Crowe is merely expressionless, but
they're sweetly devoted to one another. I fell for it, perhaps because I just
don't see all that many togetherness thrillers.

In Hollywoodland, 90% of English teachers are rigid, authoritarian jerks
who don't appreciate the brilliance of their eccentric students (who will
grow up to become successful script-writers), and exactly 9% are charismatic
and inspiring but a bit dangerous (Jean Brodie for example). Rare indeed
is the English teacher who outwits the cops, kills a couple of the bad
guys who get in his way, and makes it safely to Venezuela. Cop # 1 (with
admiration): "This guy's a teacher?"  Cop # 2:  "Yeah, at a community
college."

In the mandatory theme-enhancing classroom scene, our hero lectures
on Don Quixote.  As in quixotic. Get it?

Source: 2011/05/act-of-violence

Title: Act of Violence (1948)
Date: June 01, 2011

Act of Violence (1948) says as much about the immediate post-war years (and
my own first decade of life) as any film I know. In it, an ex-army-officer
who survived a German POW camp has acquired a pretty wife and a sunny suburban
California home, but he is guilt-ridden because while in the camp he
betrayed his fellow prisoners. He's pursued by a revenge-obsessed former
comrade. The film is not, for once, a melodrama.  Good and evil, innocence and
experience intermingle in the main characters, and, most rewardingly, in the
smaller parts. Mary Astor (otherwise Brigid O'Shaughnessy in The Maltese
Falcon) turns in a brilliant performance as a tired, opportunistic but
ultimately decent prostitute. In fact, women in this film (in addition to
Mary Astor, Janet Leigh and Phyllis Thaxter) are for once as complex and
cliche-free as the male leads (Van Heflin and the always pitch-perfect Robert
Ryan).

The story-telling is flawless and economical, the mood is sombre and
intense. The unsettling themes are the burden of the past, the menace of the
future, trepidation at the unknown, and the expiation of guilt.

Robert L. Richards, who wrote the spare screenplay, was fingered as a leftist
and blacklisted. He lost his promising career, became a carpenter, and
died, embittered, in exile. is it necessary to note that Act of Violence
is a not the least bit subversive?  It's a genuinely patriotic film. Fred
Zinnemann, the director, escaped from the Nazis but left both his parents
behind. They were murdered in the camps. Zinnemann was therefore
superbly positioned to bring to the screen an exploration of the "guilt of the
survivor."

Source: 2011/06/reposted-bezoars

Title: Reposted:  Bezoars
Date: June 08, 2011

I don't like gore. I’m the kind of person who won’t recklessly channel-surf
for fear that the changer gizmo will maliciously lock onto our 24/7 surgery
channel, where some poor soul's innards will be on garish hi-def display, And
yet, despite my squeamishness, I steeled myself and read right through Katrina
Firlik's Another Day in the Frontal Lobe,  which is a young neurosurgeon’s
bildungs-autobiography. Of course, I allowed myself the indulgence of zooming
through some of the more gruesome parts. How much does a guy need to know about
maggot infestations in the living brain?

I’m grateful to Firlik for her vivid stories, for the occasional moment of
black humor and also for offering a forthright glimpse into an alternative
world. Nevertheless, I'm sorry to report, Another Day is not a good book. It's
too transparently a package shaped by agent and editor for short-term commercial
appeal. The author is so anxious to be cute and to be loved –- she must have
been one of those front-row, admiring-eyes-glued-to-the-professor straight-A
pupils -- that whenever she comes up against a controversial topic, such as
the irrational funding of our medical system or the egomania of surgeons
or the morality of expensive, hopeless last-minute-before-dying surgical
interventions, she hints at concern but then swerves and punts. She doesn't
want to offend a single potential buyer.

Not a courageous writer, she is not an admirable being either: what can one say
about a highly-skilled professional who turns down job after job in the American
hinterland and elects to live in New Canaan, Connecticut, because, she admits,
it would be impossible to find a good Japanese restaurant in the sticks?, and
who in one sentence notes that her rich town has more neurosurgeons than all of
sub-Sahara Africa and in another reveals that she works on spines rather than
brains nowadays because spines are more lucrative.

Hey, Katrina, the next time you publish something, sacrifice some of that
royalty money and write directly from your heart (even though it's one cold and
stony organ).

Readers of this blague will not be surprised to learn that Dr. M. was much
intrigued by the book's medical vocabulary. Another Day serves up a feast of
beautiful and exotic words: venous infarct, dura, spicule, rongeur, neuroma,
glioma, glioblastoma (you don’t want one!), bone dust, debulk, pachygyria. The
ugliest of all: intubated.  My personal favorite, and a word that I've now put
in the running for Word of the Year: bezoar.

How could I have lived all these years without knowing the wonderful word
bezoar?  Could there be a surer index of my ignorance of medicine? A bezoar,
as everyone but me seems to know, is a concretion of indigestible stuff stuck
somewhere in the digestive tract – hairballs, medicines, bits of food.
Sometimes they can be dissolved, but on occasions they can only be removed by
surgery. A bezoar was formerly thought to be a magical antidote for poisons
–- so score another couple of strikes against our ignorant superstitious
ancestors. The most common kind of bezoar is the phytobezoar, which is a
collection of lignin, cellulose, or tannin of food fibers. Common sources
are celery, grapes, raisins, prunes, and pumpkins, all of which, if you’re
like me, you’ve probably unwittingly eaten without having given a thought
to their bezoar-potential and therefore neglected a splendid opportunity for
hypochondria.

A bezoar caused by eating persimmons (an especially dangerous fruit,
bezoarwise), earns its very own word-- diospyrobezoar -- an odd amalgam of
Greek and Persian linguistic roots and a word which, just as soon as a suitable
opening arises, I intend to enthusiastically insinuate into the conversation.

Source: 2011/06/another-great-moment-in-basketball-announcerese

Title: Another Great Moment in Basketball Announcerese
Date: June 09, 2011

It was an excellent win for Dallas. The series isn't over yet, but it's better
to be up 3-2 than down 2-3.  Terry, Kidd, Chandler, Marion, and Berea all
played beautifully. Dirk Nowitzki had another lovely game.

And in the booth, Jeff Van Gundy continued to mangle the language at a
yogiberra level: "Dirk Nowitzki is now a household name in every locker room
in the world."

Source: 2011/06/macbeth-ramachandran

Title: Brain Chemistry, Macbeth, Nihilism
Date: June 10, 2011

Our understanding of the human brain is mighty slim.  As a consequence our
therapies for insanity, for head injuries, and for dementia are primitive.

When John Donne was dying in 1633, his physicians tied pigeons to his
feet. Present-day medicine offers remedies for Alzheimer's sufferers that
are no more effective than pigeon tying. Brainwise, we linger in the dark ages
(which, by the way, has now been rebranded as "late antiquity"). Or the early
medieval period.

Not to say that nothing is known about the brain. There have been advances.

To bring myself up-to-date, I read The Tell-Tale Brain by V. S. Ramachandran,
a book which has been making a stir in pop-science circles. Ramachandran's
sensible thesis is that there are structures in the human brain that are either
undeveloped or that simply don't exist in the brains of apes. To posit so
is simply common sense. Human beings do things that apes don't: they study
themselves in the mirror, they compose and play piano sonatas, and they think
about their place in the universe.

Ramachandran is an ingenious experimenter but he gets beyond his depth when he
waxes philosophical -- which he does far too often. Here's an example of the
kind of thinking that rubs me wrong.

"I get chills," says Ramachandran, "whenever I hear Macbeth's immortal
soliloquy 'Out out, brief candle!/Life's but a walking shadow, a poor
player/ That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,/ And then is heard no
more. It is a tale/ Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/ Signifying
nothing.'"  He says that "these  words are one of the most profound and deeply
moving remarks about life that anyone has ever made!"

I don't question Ramachandran's chills, which are his own business, but I'm
bothered by his unthinking Bardolatry ("immortal solilquy"; "profound";  "that
anyone has ever made").  Poor Will doesn't need any more reverent cliches to
be shoveled upon him. He's already buried under heaps of them.

Bardolatry such as Ramachandran's obstructs thinking. What does it mean to say
that Macbeth's soliloquy is "profound... about life?"  Let's go to the tape.

When Macbeth says these words, he's under the spell of the witches, who are
"instruments of darkness."  At their suggestion, he's murdered his king,
murdered his closest friend Banquo and Banquo's son Fleance, and he's "savagely
slaughtered" Macduff's wife and children ("All my pretty ones...  All my
pretty chickens and their dam/ At one fell swoop"). Moreover, he's committed
uncatalogued atrocities innumerable: "Each new morn/ New widows howl, new
orphans cry." His brain is "filled with scorpions" and just before he utters
the soliloquy that gives Ramachandran the goosebumps, he learns that his wife,
burdened with guilt, has done herself in. Macbeth is not in a good way.

Macbeth is not a role-model and his philosophical ruminations are neither
insightful or profound. Quite the opposite. Though Macbeth is undeniably
eloquent, he's become a shallow nihilist. Life, in fact, is not "a tale told by
an idiot" and in Shakespeare's late-medieval religious universe, only someone
in the throes of the deepest despair, and certain that he is damned for all
eternity, would think so. Macbeth has learned exactly the wrong lesson. So,
apparently, has Ramachandran.

Gosh, great literature can sometimes be dangerous, can't it?

It's no secret that the universe with its billions and billions of galaxies
will go on very well without us.  Shakespeare, like everyone else, knew that
when looked at from the strictly scientific point of view, human beings are no
more than "many a thousand grains/ That issue out of dust."  But just because
we're tiny and it's enormous, we're not compelled to admire the despairing and
empty philosphy to which Macbeth subscribes.

Not while there are red wheelbarrows, winter love in dark corners, and "little
nameless, unremembered acts/ Of kindness and of love."

Source: 2011/06/my-teachers-1944-1956

Title: My Teachers, 1944-1956
Date: June 15, 2011

My first twelve years of formal schooling were pretty much a bust. I blame my
underachieving, unserious self. I was much more interested in punchball,
the Dodgers, comic books, and radio serials than in the lessons, which were
unchallenging and drab. At school I learned reading, writing and 'rithmetic,
for which I'm grateful, and also a little Latin. I was an autodidact, not a
student, right out of the gate. I liked to read and fortunately the Avenue J
branch of the Brooklyn Public Library (though only a storefront) was within
walking distance; so was the McDonald Avenue branch where, during high school,
I worked for 75 cents an hour shelving books. I was an omnivorous reader and
although I did not have a strong understanding or much of an imagination, I had
an excellent memory. Reading saved me. Reading rescued me. "If it hadn't been
for reading, we'd have been entirely at the mercy of sex."

I don't blame my teachers. A few had thrown in the towel, but most of them
tried their best. They were overworked, underprepared, unsupported, and in
occasional cases prodigiously ignorant even of the subjects they taught. The
conditions under which they worked were not propitious. At P. S. 217 classrooms
were designed (!!!) for 48 students (pupils, we were called in those days) but
on high-attendance days, there were always a few unenthusiastic kids lolling
in improvised seats by the window. In most classes, lessons were taught; but
in others, especially at Erasmus Hall High School, there was only disorder and
hubbub -- and sometimes a tad of danger.

My first grade teacher, Mrs. Callery was a diminutive gloomy woman. I remember
telling my mother, "Mrs. Callery doesn't like me." My mother said, "You must be
kind to her. She lost four of her boys in the war" (it was 1944). I remember
that I construed "lost" to mean "misplaced" and was therefore dumbfounded by
Mrs. Callery's forgetfulness. White-haired Mrs. Sherwood, in third grade, left
no impression except for her extreme old age (possibly 55), but Mrs. Cares
(Sarah Cares!!, great name for a teacher) was quite kind. Mrs. Finsmith in
fifth was a cipher, but Mrs. Donnelly, whose white hair was dyed a radiant
blue, made it her business to make life as miserable as possible for me, and
succeeded. My favorite teacher in those early years was extra-strict Mrs.
McNulty, who insisted that we memorize fractions, decimals, and percentages,
and taught us how to format a "friendly letter." In seventh grade, we went
"departmental." I remember Mr. Harry Shapiro ('the bald headed hero") who spoke
of "we scientists"; Mrs. Georgia Kieselbach, an aloof music teacher who had a
trained operatic mezzo; Mr. Maxwell Proshan, a pathetic incompetent, and the
twin (as I remember them) art teachers, Mrs. Nellis and Mrs. Ennis. At Erasmus
Hall, I had good instruction in Latin from old Miss Beulah Withee and even older
Mr. Gabriel Cussen (who I now realize must have been an ex-priest) but bad
lazy non-teaching from Harry Wedeck, a pretentious fake. Miss Edna Goetschius,
a biology teacher, complained to me more than once that I didn't know how
to stipple. Mr. Lindlar, an ineffectual physics teacher, would mysteriously
disappear between classes and return reeking of alcohol. My mathematics
teachers were competent (Mr. Ebersman), angry as all shit (Mrs. Altschul), or
suicidal (Mrs. Bonime). An English teacher who was well-read and competent,
Mrs. Harriet Felder, was an "Oxfordian" caught up in the conspiracy theory
that Shakespeare wasn't Shakespeare. Walter Balletto, who whiled away our time
teaching "Discussion English," was more interested in his own theatricality than
in any instruction he might have rendered. I later learned that he lived with
his mother and collected Kirsten Flagstad records, information which my 1950s
self could not even begin to assimilate. I remember also an art teacher, Mrs.
Schauben, who kept her protruding ears in check with a thin rubber band; perhaps
we weren't supposed to notice, but I've never forgotten. The gym teachers were
simple- minded jokesters, although I remember thinking even then that the
martinet Mr. Eis would have been more at home in the SS than at EHHS.

It was, in retrospect, quite a zoo. But I know that some of my coevals, who were
smart enough to choose their teachers wisely and take it all seriously, managed
to get themselves a decent education. I didn't; my only success was to get out
alive and then move on.

Here's a good picture of Erasmus Hall High School in the old days. A Gothic
pile.

Source: 2011/06/macbeth-brainswereout

Title: Why We Love Macbeth: Two More Reasons
Date: June 18, 2011

Pound for pound, Macbeth is of all Shakespeare's plays the most unrelenting and
horrifying.

One of its greatest moments occurs when Macbeth, seeking additional guidance,
pays a second call on the witches. "How now," he demands, "you secret, black,
and midnight hags!/ What is't you do?" The witches' response to his question,
though exceedingly laconic, is far scarier than anything the most computer-
aided-pixelbending horror movie could produce. They simply say: "A deed
without a name." Every member of the audience, and every reader, knows that
the witches are up to no good, but do they know how bad it is?  No. The
audience now learns that what the witches are doing is so loathsome that
there's not even a  word for it in the English language (and Shakespeare, of
all people, had English to spare). What could they possibly mean by "a deed
without a name?" Such a deed must be superlatively evil, worse than anything
that the most depraved reader or listener could possibly guess. The immensely
suggestive phrase "A deed without a name" pushes the limits both of imagination
and language.

Another magnificent moment comes when Macbeth imagines that Banquo, whom
he knows to have been murdered, has taken a seat at his feast. Macbeth
is startled and frightened, but he is also indignant -- so indignant that his
outrage becomes almost comic. He lapses into a reverie.

Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the
gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for
the ear: the times has been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their
crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.

Macbeth asserts that it used to be the case, both in olden times, before
Scotland became civilized, and even into recent days, that there was a natural
order to things. If you killed a man ("when the brains were out"), that person
had the decency to stay dead ("the man would die/ And there an end"). But
now, in these degenerate times, murdered men return and "push us from our
stools." Macbeth, who is under the spell of demons and who has committed
atrocity after atrocity, claims to be more "natural" than the spectre of
Banquo, who is "unnatural." In his eyes, killing people is the new normal,
and it goes against the grain when you kill a guy and he doesn't stay
killed. It's odd and lovely that Macbeth believes that he has a sincere
grievance with the world, especially when he's the one who has thrown things
completely out of whack. His exasperated complaint shapes itself into a weird,
ironic, perverse nostalgia for better days. We almost -- but not quite
-- feel for him.

Source: 2011/06/pazyrykrug

Title: The Pazyryk Rug
Date: June 23, 2011

I've been reading about rugs. I'm ignorant, but fortunately, there are dozens
of eaily-available and learned books, and I'm happy to say that our local
university library is going to keep me busy until my enthusiasm flags.

Everyone interested in rugs knows that the Pazyryk carpet (which I didn't
know about until a month ago) is the oldest known rug and about three thousand
years older than the next contender. It was discovered in 1949 near the
Mongolia-China border, in a Scythian tomb that had been flooded and frozen since
about 2500 BCE. It's magnificent and it's mind-expanding. It's been a long time
since something has created in me such a reverent sense of gaga-hood and wowage.

Although older than old, it's anything but primitive. Centuries, perhaps
millenia, of experimentation, learning, intelligence, craft, and effort
preceded its making. First our ancestors had to domesticate sheep, which,
I've learned, had to be selectively bred to become wooly rather than merely
hairy. Then came the invention of spinning and weaving. And dyeing, which is
a sophisticated and complicated art all of itself. Moreover, it's obvious that
the Pazyryk rug did not spring whole out of someone's brain --it's the climax
of a long artistic tradition. While some scholars detect Persian influences,
others think it wholly a creation of the steppes. The red dye, it's recently
been discovered, is Polish cochineal. How did the dye get to Mongolia?  I've
not read anything about the blue, but it looks like indigo, and if it is, the
process of getting wool to take indigo is extremely complicated.

The detail, though faded (fifty-five hundred years of refrigeration take
its toll) is worthy of the closest study: mounted horsemen, saddle blankets
and trappings, even the decorated manes of the horses, are rendered, knot by
knot, with great power.

And then there are the happy moose (or possibly elk, or some ungulate that I
don't know).

The rug now resides at the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg.  I intend to
visit it some day, but if the museum should want to put it out on permanent
loan to my living room, I would promise to treat it with the utmost respect and
appreciation.

Source: 2011/06/lessons-from-neolithic-malta

Title: Lessons from Neolithic Malta
Date: June 24, 2011

Neolithic Malta presents an exemplum and a warning. The island received
its first human inhabitants, who probably arrived from Sicily, some time
around 5000 BC. After about 3600 BC, trade and other links with  the outside
world waned. Over the next thousand years or so, the people of Mlata built
seventeen monumental stone temples unlike any elsewhere in the Mediterranean.

These are the remains of one of the seventeen.

Here's a view of another: There's something truly remarkable about these
megalithic temples, but it's troubling that a marginal and isolated culture
would make such a huge and economically unproductive investment. Indeed,
starting about 2300 BC, this native Maltese culture went into
precipitous decline. A major cause seems to have been the extreme
deforestation and soil loss when the population increased and resources were
overused. The best guess is that the Maltese experienced an economic and
spiritual crisis.

They did not, alas, confront the environmental problem; instead, the evidence
suggests that the people, probably led by an oppressive priestly caste,
continued to make greater and greater investments in religious worship, no
doubt hoping that their gods would rescue them from their predicament. "In
the end their expectations were not met and crisis ensued from which it took
centuries to recover" (Barry Cunliffe, Europe Between the Oceans, [Yale, 2008],
p. 172.) The population disappeared, the culture was extinguished and Malta
was deserted until the arrival of Bronze Age peoples around 2000 BC.

Let's go over this ground and make sure that we understand. The
neolithic inhabitants of Malta temporarily increased their population at
the expense of massive enviromental degradation, and then, as the standard of
living dropped, decided that the best way to deal with the crisis was to make
mammoth investments in priests and temples (rather than, say, birth control
and sustainable forestry and agriculture).

Is there a moral here.  We report, you decide. But I believe that I can hear
the debate. "We've already built fifteen temples and it hasn't worked. Perhaps
we should try something new, like planting trees."  "Nonesense, young
radical. We must look to faith. Faith will reward us. One more temple, this
one really huge. More stones over here!"

Source: 2011/06/a-brief-conversation-about-computers-and-also-about-good-and-evil

Title: A Brief Conversation about Computers and also about Good and Evil
Date: June 24, 2011

Vivian de St. Vrain:  "Why is my computer always breaking down. Why does it
get infected with these nasty viruses and trojan horses and stuff?"

NGP (my computer consultant):  "Because there are evil people in the world."

Source: 2011/06/carter-family-favorites

Title: Some Carter Family Favorites
Date: June 27, 2011

"Wildwood Flower," of course. The tune would have made Bach proud, the
story is classic, and the diction and metaphor absolutely perfect: "You've
gone and neglected your pale wildwood flower." "Single Girl, Married Girl,"
which I can never hear without tearing up (or coming very close -- depends
on my mood). No one has ever written a lyric that is more succinct or
more straightforward: "Single girl, single girl, she goes to the store and
buys,/ Married girl, married girl, she rocks the cradle and cries."  "Keep on
the Sunny Side," which is perfectly cheerful until it goes all faux-religious in
the last verse. If, on the other hand, you're looking for heartfelt religion,
there's "No Hiding Place Down Here," which was later and better realized by
Dorothy Love Coates and the Gospel Harmonettes. And also the very wistful and
lovely "Oh, I'm thinking tonight of my blue eyes/ Who is sailing far over the
sea/ I'm thinking tonight of my blue eyes/ And I wonder if he ever thinks of
me." But my favorite, nowadays, is, "Will You Miss Me When I'm Gone." The
lyrics are Victorian/goopy, written (by A. P.) in a highly artificial off-the-
wall literary and poetical style -- but yet, when accompanied by guitar
and autoharp, and song by Mother Maybelle, against all odds it comes out
quintessentially beautiful. "Will You Miss Me" taps into the common fantasy
of observing our own funeral. Her'e's the lyric:  Stanza 1: "When death shall
close these eyelids,/ And this heart shall cease to beat,/And they lay me down
to rest/ In some ?flowery ?boundary ?tree (the words are unintelligible).
(2) Perhaps you'll plant a flower/ By my poor unworthy grave;/ Come and sit
along beside me/ Where the roses nod and wave. (3) One sweet thought my soul
shall cherish/When this fleeting life has flown/ This sweet thought will cheer
when dying/ Will you miss me when I'm gone?  (4) When these lips shall never
more/Press a kiss upon my brow,/ But lie cold and still in death/ Will you miss
me then as now?" Chorus (after every stanza): "Will you miss me,/ Will you miss
me when I'm gone?" In its lugubriousitude, "Will You Miss me" is very like the
great Londonderry air, "Danny Boy."

There's something luxurious about a good gloomy wallow.

Source: 2011/06/new-words

Title: Words New to Me
Date: June 29, 2011

Regular readers of this blague know that Dr. M. is easily taken with odd and
unusual words. Well, the poor doctor has been enchanted again.

Here follows a wordhoard excavated from Barry Cunliffe's big book on
European archaeology. Perhaps some doctormetablogians know one or two of these
words, but I doubt anyone knows all of them, and I confess that each one is
absolutely new to me.

I'm embarrassed but it's the awful truth.

Dillisk,which sounds like a disk or circular form of dill, is in actual fact
a kind of sea lettuce or creatnach, an edible algae, much consumed during
the Neolithic. Carragheen, nowadays defined as "a family of linear sulfated
polysaccharides" was at one time the name of a food derived from red algae
-- apparently an ancient snackfood. Melitot is an alternative name for sweet
clover. Vetchlings are sweet peas. An ard is a early plough -- no more than a
spike that is dragged through the soil, most commonly by oxen. A lynchet -as
I'm sure everyone knows, is not a minor vigilante hanging but rather a "ridge
or terrace seen on the slopes of the Chalk,Oölitic, and Liassic escarpments in
various parts of England, especially in Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Wiltshire,
and Somerset." It's now public knowledge: Dr. M knows zilch about Oolitic
escarpments. A leister is a breed of sheep. A lur is not a way to catch fish,
but is an ancient bronze horn, precursor of the trumpet (though stopless). 
Here are a pair of lurs.

They look like high-end showerheads. I can't imagine what they sound like. A
cist is not a cyst. It is a small stone coffin or ossuary. An orthostat
is an upright stone used as a member of a larger structure (as opposed to
a menhir, which usually stands alone). Cob or cobb (or sometimes clom)
is a building material comprised of clay,sand, straw, water, and soil,
something like clench. A nuraghe is a megalithic structure found in ancient
Sardinia. Eight thousand nuraghi (mirabile dictu!) are still in existence.
Here's one:

A corbel is a stone that juts out of a wall to support a weight. If
it's not stone, but wood, it's called a "tassel" or a "bragger." A
currach is of course a kind of Irish boat, once constructed out of animal
hides, but now out of canvas. It is much smaller than a penteconter, an
ancient Greek galley which is the ancestor of the warlike trireme and the
fabled quinquireme. Strakes are the planks that compose the hull of a wooden
ship. Callais is a green stone used for bead-making in the early part of the
Bronze Age. Skeumorphism, my very favorite of all these exciting new words,
is "an element of design or structure that serves little or no purpose in the
artifact fashioned from the new material but was essential to the object made
from the original material." Archeologists apparently use the term in a more
restricted sense, as for example in the case of a bronze vessel which retains
and imitates features of an antecedent clay pot. Or, to take a wikipedian
example, "decorative stone features of Greek temples such as mutules, guttae,
and modillions that are derived from earlier wooden temples." What are mutules,
guttae, and modillions? I don't know, but they sure do set the logo-curious
mind all a-twitter.

Source: 2011/07/songs-my-mother-sang

Title: Songs My Mother Sang
Date: July 08, 2011

My mother had a pretty fair soprano and as a young adult performed in amateur
musicals. She sang in that high, quavering style that I associate with artists
of the 1920s and 1930s, such as Ruth Etting ("America's Radio Sweetheart").
I remember that sometimes, when she wasn't busy putting the laundry through
the wringer or scrubbing the sink or dusting under the beds, she'd sit at
the old Hardman piano and sing the songs of her youth. She sang tin pan alley
songs, Gilbert and Sullivan ballads, so-called "Negro spirituals," and
also what I now know to be Victorian parlor songs. Her taste was formed in
the earlier part of the century (she was born in 1905) and had as far as I can
tell ceased to change after about 1935 with the arrival of my older brother and
diapers. My mother sang, for example, 1919's "Look for the Silver Lining": "A
heart, full of joy and gladness,/ Will always banish sadness and strife./So
always look for the silver lining,/ And try to find the sunny side of life."
She sang "I've been Working on the Railroad" (first published in 1894) with the
refrain "Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/ Someone's in the kitchen I know/
Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah/Strummin' on the old banjo."  Neither
she nor I knew that "Dinah" was a generic name for a female slave, nor did we
speculate about what the heck was going on in that kitchen. She sang "Oh, the
old gray mare, she ain't what she used to be,/Many long years ago."  She sang
a version of what I can now identify as Ed Haley's 1894 hit, "The Fountain in
the Park", with the familiar lyric "While strolling in the park one day,/ In
the merry, merry month of May,/ I was taken by surprise/ by a pair of roguish
eyes..."  Sorry, but I can't remember the rest. She sang, "Shine on harvest
moon/ Up in the sky."  And also "Aint She Sweet." And "Home Sweet Home" ("Mid
pleasures and palaces though we may roam,/ Be it ever so humble, there's no
place like home").

But the song that stands most vividly in my memory was "Bill" from
Showboat. It's a lovely song, but I took it wrong. When my mother sang "I used
to think that I would discover/ The perfect lover some day," I  decided that
she was finding fault with my father, to whom I was most loyal. In my mind, my
father was noble and manly and intelligent, and I resented her singing about
"Bill, who's not the type at all/ You'd meet him on the street and never notice
him." The refrain was particularly painful to my seven-year-old self: "And I
can't explain,/ It's surely not his brain that makes me thrill./ I love him
because he's I don't know,/Because he's just my Bill."

I've since learned about fiction, and make-believe.  I can forgive her.

Source: 2011/07/amnesia-on-film-mister-buddwing

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Mister Buddwing
Date: July 10, 2011

This 1966 black-and-white oddity boasts a distinguished director (Delbert Mann,
celebrated for Marty) and a group of excellent actresses (Jean Simmons,
Katherine Ross, Angela Lansbury and Suzanne Pleshette). It's ambitious and
sometimes imaginative. But frankly, even more than your run-of-the-mill amnesia
movie, it's a mess.

The amnesiac in this case is a young and puzzled James Garner, who comes to
consciousness in Central Park (there are good historical shots of 1960s NYC
throughout) and takes the nom d'oubli Sam Buddwing. We're not told how he
found his way to a park bench but movie amnesia is so commonplace and so
flexible that the audience has no difficulty going along for the ride. The rest
of the film tracks Buddwing through various encounters until he recovers his
memory with no more fuss than he lost it.

Amnesia is merely a plot device and not the film's true focus. The theme
seems to be "identity," which, if I remember, was a subject much in vogue in
the 1960s. Buddwing says, more than once, "I don't know who I am." But
so did all of us say the same thing, in those ancient days, even without
the provocation of amnesia. Buddwing's specific problem, as it gradually
reveals itself, is that he has made a series of "inauthentic" (as we used to
say) choices. He should have composed the octet rather than have gone for
the commercial money. He shouldn't have encouraged his wife to abort the
baby. And he certainly should have prevented both himself and Grace (note
signficant moniker!!) from drifting into infidelity and alcohol.

More "don'ts." The writer and director shouldn't have tried to imitate
Ingmar Bergman (the excrescent scene with the beggar who thinks he's God is
embarrassingly derivative). And they shouldn't have indulged all the Bergman-
derived religiosity. When a prayer "O God, let her live" is followed
immediately by a resurrection, it's not a film -- it's propaganda. Come to
think of it, the creative team should also have put some distance between
themselves and the Kafkaeque surreal. Moreover, they should not have allowed
the film to slide into an easy, superficial allegorizing. Buddwing may say
"I'm not everyman" -- but the film desperately hopes that he will be taken as
such.

Amnesia, it would appear, has the power to soften the brain of both writer and
director.

Source: 2011/07/more-new-words-

Title: More New Words
Date: July 11, 2011

I've been reading about rugs and therefore learning all sorts of new words. For
example, a yastik is a small rug or bag for designed to be sat upon and
therefore serves a different purpose than a mafrash, which is bag for
transporting small objects.  Here's a mafrash:

I have discovered that many of the terms used to describe the patterns of
"oriental" carpets are derived from architecture. Moreover, it turns out that
many of these words are entirely unfamiliar to me. For example, an ogive is
"the roundly tapered end of a object" such as an arch. It's a peculiar word
whose etymology is anybody's guess. The adjectival form is "ogival." "Ogival"
forms are common on Turkish rugs.

A merlon on a medieval castle is "the solid part of a parapet." I think a
picture is called for here. Merlons:

Such forms, like giant teeth, frequently appear in the borders of rugs. A
crenelle is a notch or open space between two merlons. So in the picture above
it's merlon, crenelle, merlon, crenelle, etc. Merlon Crenelle sounds like
the name of linebacker at Tulane or Louisiana State.  An even odder word is
squinch, which doesn't seem as though it could possibly describe a part of a
rug, but does. It sounds like a palatalized variant of squint (or Shakespeare's
squiny), or some sort of exotic citrus (would you mind passing me a couple of
those squinches?), but it is in fact "a piece of construction used for filling
in the upper angles of a square room so as to form a proper base to receive an
octagonal or spherical dome." It's a filler of sorts, and as such is occasional
knotted into a complex carpet, though I rather doubt that the women who wove the
rugs thought squinchwise.

A spandrel is a space above an arch -- as illustrated here:

There are four blue spandrels in this fancy silk Heriz carpet:

Kufesque is another word used to describe rug patterns, but it derives not
from architecture but from writing. Arabic was anciently written in Kufic,
an angular, upright script. Illiterate weavers copied and recopied Kufic
inscriptions until they became meaningless but still remained beautiful. Many
rugs have kufesque borders.

Strange to say, I had recent occasion to employ the word "kufic" in
conversation. It was my annual visit to the opthamologist. "Read the next
line," I was told. "Looks like Kufic to me." I believe the eye guy understood
that I couldn't read the line, but I rather doubt that he fully appreciated my
inspired and accurate answer.

Source: 2011/07/a-fair-comparison

Title: A  Fair Comparison
Date: July 16, 2011

"I imagine," said Big Al, "that he knows as much about Shakespeare as I know
about chainsaws."

Source: 2011/07/ladystallions

Title: Lady Stallions!!!
Date: July 17, 2011

Lady Stallions!?! Not only a New Jersey soccer team, but an oxymoron of
Shakespearean achievement. Not a simple oxymoron either, like Romeo's "cold
fire, sick health," but a figure of speech on the far frontier of Oxymoronia,
along with such classics as Utah Jazz and Christian Science. What, pray tell,
is a Lady Stallion?  Even in an age of gender fluidity, it's hard to get a
grasp on this one. Oh, I understand the principle -- the men's team is the
Stallions, and therefore it follows as night the day that the distaff team
acquires the same name, prefixed with Lady. In the same way, we have, out here,
the Buffs and the Lady Buffs. I would offer not the slightest demurral if the
men's team was called the New Jersey Horses and women's team was the New Jersey
Lady Horses. It's awkward but logical. Lady Horses may not be either a poetical
or an intimidating moniker, but it doesn't boggle the grammatical mind. But
a stallion is archetypically male, the snorting captain of his harem-herd of
equine odalisques, groupies, wives, mistresses, and girlfriends. Against all
challenges, he bites and kicks and if necessary injects himself with steroids
and horse growth hormone in order to maintain his macho primacy. A lady stallion
is therefore utterly impossible both emotionally and linguistically. The term
is a travesty. Better to call them the New Jersey Mares, which makes linguistic
sense. Or even better, the New Jersey Geldings (which are, in an odd  kind of a
way, no-longer-male stallions).

Although I myself would reserve the name Geldings for institutions named after
gentleman who have made the sacrifice and earned the right: the Origen Divinity
School Geldings or the St. Abelard Preparatory School Geldings. But that's a
horse of another color.

Although particularly egregious, Lady Stallions do not stand solitary in their
linguistic purgatory. Also competing are the Lady Rams (suggested alternative:
Sheep), the Lady Bucks, and the Lady Bulls (alternative: Cows). No teams named
the Goats. No Lady Boars (or Pigs either, for that matter). In defiance of
all logic, there are the Oregon Lady Ducks, which is truly an impossibility,
because properly, the men's team should be the Drakes, the women's the Ducks
(or Lady Drakes). There are no teams, as far as I'm aware, named either the
Geese or the Lady Ganders; yes, there are the South Carolina Gamecocks, but I'm
going to guess that the distaff side is not named the Lady Gamecocks. Wait,
I'll google it. OK, the South Carolina women's softball team is named ... the
Gamecocks, which is bad enough, but could have been worse, because in my world
of propriety, "lady" and "cocks" should never inhabit the same sentence.

Dogs are a problem. No one calls their team the Dogs. But there are some breeds
who are allowed to play. Bulldogs and Mastiffs and Greyhounds are in, Poodles
are out. The University of Georgia proffers the Lady Bulldogs, but not one
college, high school, or club has thought to give us either the Lady Dogs, or
whatever is that word by which female dogs are denominated.

Source: 2011/07/barmagillion

Title: Barmagillion
Date: July 19, 2011

A:  "What's that stand of trees that are down there by the brook?"

Dr. M:  "Cottonwoods.  I planted one of them must be thirty-five years ago.
The big one. They reproduce like aspens, underground runners. Turned into a nice
stand."

A:  "When I was working the sawmill, sometimes the locals would bring in a tree
they called "barmagillion" or "bahmagillion." I could never figure out what it
was. I looked in all the tree books. Never found it. We treated it just like
poplar."

Dr. M:  "Was it a poplar?. Cottonwoods are poplars."

A:  "It took me twenty years to figure out what 'barmagillion' was. Actually,
I didn't figure it out. Neill was here with one of those telephones that does
everything. He looked it up. It's actually "balm of Gilead."

(I looked it up also. "Balm of Gilead" is another name for what most people
around here call "balsam poplar."  It's not uncommon but not plentiful either,
at least in these parts. I didn't know that the buds are covered with sticky
resin used by bees to plug holes in their nests and by humans as a kind of
perfume).

"Barmagillion" is distantly related to "folk etymology," as for example when
arthritis is called "Arthur Wright."

Source: 2011/07/destination

Title: Another GPS Tale
Date: July 25, 2011

Hackett Hill Road is two twisty, depopulated, uphill-and-down miles long. It
is unpaved and seriously washboarded. If you didn't know for sure that it was
a public thoroughfare, you might think that you had accidentally turned into
someone's long driveway.

Most of our guests arrive from the South Road side of things, which is an easier
passage. We're just .2 from South Roadm a much easier ride than the long route,
off of Route 25. The GPS, which most people use nowadays, takes people the long
way.

Directly adjacent to the graveyard, which is the only obvious remnant of the
old community of West Bradford, lies our narrow driveway. It's inconspicuous
and steep, but we've posted a wooden sign with our street number. The number is
an innovation;  we didn't have one until 9/11 -- nor did we need one, because
there's no mail delivery on Hackett Hill. (We go to town to pick up mail; Muriel
at the post office takes good care of our occasional packages and flyers and
medical bills.)

Some friends, new to rural Vermont, traveling from Denver with their two teenage
daughters, came to visit us the other day. They were a bit intimidated and
possibly a little anxious as a consequence of their slow passage along Hackett
Hill Road. Although they were carefully following Sheila, which is what they've
named their GPS (ours is Dorcas) they missed our sign and overshot their mark.
Sheila, the idiot-savant, nevertheless announced, "You have arrived at your
destination, on left." On the left, of course, was only the cemetery with its
lichen-encrusted marble gravestones. They were surprised and amused --their
vehicle, I'm told, filled with hilarity -- but were poised enough to continue to
the end of the road, make a U, and initiate a most pleasant visit.

Source: 2011/08/hemlock-tale

Title: Hemlock Tale
Date: August 02, 2011

Dr. M.:  "The John Deere guy was over here the other day and he told us a story
about a fellow who had a 450 just like ours. He had the forks on the tractor,
the kind you use for picking up the round bales. He was working in his woods,
trying to bring down a big hemlock. He notched and cut it, but left a hinge and
the tree got hung up and wouldn't go over, so he tried to push the tree over
with his forks. Somehow or other, he got the forks on either side of the tree.
The hemlock came over, picked up his tractor, spun it 180 in the air, knocked
off the canopy, drove the upright right into his chest, killed him on the spot."

Big Al:  "I knew the guy. It was Howard Beck up in North Monroe. He was a low
wattage kind of guy. It's amazing he lived as long as he did."

Source: 2011/08/more-on-lolas-language

Title: More on Lola's Language
Date: August 09, 2011

Lola and I brought some windfall apples to the horses. The horses are Morgans,
very friendly, but intimidatingly large to a 22-month-old child. We stood on
one side of the gate, the horses trotted up to the other side as soon as we
announced our presence. They like to lean over the fence and look in our pockets
for apples.

Lola said, and I quote, "Back Mommy." I contrued this opaque construction to
mean "I believe that I would now like to rejoin my mother back at the house as
quickly as possible."

Lola is succinct, but she sure knows how to make herself understood.

Source: 2011/08/things-ill-miss

Title: Things I'll Miss
Date: August 10, 2011

I'm reconciled to the idea that death comes to all, but nevertheless, there are
a few earthly things that I'm genuinely going to miss.

Is there anything more wonderful, when you've been out early in the morning
in the rain or in a heavy dew, and your feet are wet and cold, than returning
home and putting on clean, dry socks, especially those excellent white cotton
ones that they sell at Costco?  Definitely a moment that makes life worth
living. And also: purchasing, opening and playing a new music cd -- preferably
one that you've thought about acquiring for a long time. Another: watching
young healthy athletic people run down the street, especially women with
long ponytails a-bobbing. Also: the perennially pleasurably sound of a bat
(wooden, not aluminum) connecting with a high, hard one. Rum raisin ice cream.
A well- made glazed donut. The sight of the first soft, red peony of the year
just as it breaks the ground. The waxy pink flower of the tamarack, always a
surprise. My Swiss Felco #2 hand pruner (which our cousins across the sea
call it a secateur), a friend for many seasons, which fits my hand perfectly
and which if you give it an occasional oiling and sharpening, cuts absolutely
true. The sound of rain on an uninsulated metal roof -- and also like the
clickety-clack and pinging of the roof on a cloudy day when the sun comes in and
out and the roof alternately expands and contracts -- it's an all-percussion
symphony. The old downtown of an old city that I'm visiting for the first time.
A one-year-old boy or girl learning to walk, at the stage when the strides
are of unequal and inconsistent length, the child hovered over by admiring
young parents, she with a hand outstretched, he recording the moment on tape;
the child the center of the universe, thoroughly doted upon, as is exactly
appropriate. A deep, luxurious weekend afternoon nap, so profound that when you
wake up you don't know, for five seconds, where you are or what day it is. A
sleep so deep that somnus imago mortis kicks in;  nothing more satisfying: the
kind of thing that makes a guy want to live a few more years.

Source: 2011/08/a-message-from-god

Title: In Which God Speaks Directly to Me
Date: August 13, 2011

The number of Republicans who are waiting for a signal from God about whether
or not to run for president  of the USA continues to grow. They're waiting and
waiting and waiting.

And meanwhile, surprising is it may seem, God the Father revealed himself to me
-- me! --just last night. He woke me out of a sound sleep (which is a kind
of miracle in itself because I had taken a double dose of Ambien). I have no
idea why I was chosen as the Vessel of His Wisdom, but, you know, God moves in
mysterious ways. I swear as I hope to go to Heaven that it was the one true God
Who spoke to me.

God said, and this is a direct, verbatim quote, "I do not want Rick Perry to
run for President." I asked Him why, in His Infinite Majesty, he was so
opposed to a Perry candidacy. He said (and here His Voice became so strong,
so 'out-of-a- whirlwind', that it actually rattled our windows --but they're
old windows and the points and putty could stand replacing), "because he's
a doofus, and also because of he could only earn a "D" in the Shakespeare
course at Texas A & M. Imagine that. A "D" in Shakespeare?" God was clearly
outraged. "You are aware," he intoned, "that according to Victor Hugo, 'after
God, Shakespeare has created the most?'"

It was interesting to me that God didn't look the way He does in the inspired
Michelangelo ceiling, which is what I would have expected. He looked more
like Shazam in the old Captain Marvel comic books. Old and bald, and kind of
indistinct. But it was definitely God. I could feel it in my gut. Trust me.

I asked Him if He had any other preferences in the upcoming
election. He sighed. "I don't want either Bachmann or
Palin either. They're doofae."  I wasn't surprised that God was so
adamantine about B and P, because of their shallow religiosity and deficient
knowledge of history, but I was truly shocked that God called them by the
faux-Latin feminine plural "doofae." I mean, doofus isn't even a real Latin
word, despite its -us ending, and so there's no singular feminine "doofa."  I
would have thought that God would have a better command of His Latinity. I was
so taken aback that I forgot to ask Him how he felt about Newt, whom I myself
would definitely prefer to be the Republican candidate. He's so adorable.

But the grammar of the Godhead is beside the point. The absolute true fact
is that He has spoken quite plainly. We mortals need to know no more but
simply to walk humbly in His ways, which means that Perry and the two ladies
should take heed of this authentic Divine Intervention and decline to pursue
elected office. For them to continue to press forward, at this juncture and
with this revelation, would be nothing short of blasphemy.

Source: 2011/08/downtown-bradford

Title: Downtown Bradford
Date: August 24, 2011

When we arrived in Bradford, Vermont in 1967 (during the troubled waning years
of the LBJ presidency), I remarked to Mrs. Dr. M., "this "downtown" looks like
it hasn't changed a bit since the 1920s." The downtown was one block long then;
it's no more extensive now, forty-four years later. And not much different.

We sat in the window of the Local Buzz, one of our newer enterprises (real
coffee comes to Bradford, at last!) and watched the folks go by. Couples, the
guy way too skinny and the lady way too fat. Young blonde guys, tattooed, trying
desperately to grow their scruffy beards. An occasional suit -- a lawyer or
insurance agent. Tourists in campers, looking mighty skeptical. An occasional
gaggle of bicyclists, coming from somewhere, going elsewhere, all a-helmeted and
bespandexed. But very few guys in "farmer greens."

Nor have there been any new buildings to compromise the 1920s time-capsule.
Stores have changed owners and purposes, of course. Gove (pronounced as in rove,
not as in glove) and Bancroft was an independent pharmacy (the kind of place
that had big old colored bottles in the window) that disappeared must be a
quarter of a century ago and has been superseded by the new Kinney's out at the
four corners (where also resides Orange County's only four-way traffic light).
Similarly, Gove and Morrill, an independent hardware store, has been replaced
with a shiny new Aubuchon (a northeastern chain). The old Gove and Morrill,
three decades dead, was a great place of a young fellow to purchase his hardware
needs. Lester Wakefield and Bart Morrill knew everything and gladly would they
teach. They also had a bit of a machine shop in the basement and would drill
out that rusted part for you, no charge. Their shop was a shrine of Yankee
frugality. The Aubuchon employs what looks like minimum wage help -- the kids
know how to run the Visa through the slot, but they know little else, so you're
pretty much on your own. I'm sure that Kinney's and Aubuchon make a better
profit than the stores that they replaced.

And speaking of chains, we now have a Subway, which, I must be the most
impoverished looking Subway in existence. Other eateries: Chan's House (the
poorest, least authentic Chinese restaurant in the entire occident).  And
another house, the House of Pizza, which replaced, many years ago, The Chimes
(a semi-glorified diner). In between the Chimes and the pizza place, there was
for a few controversial years at that corner location a breakfast shop that was
run by very very young, robotic Stepford girls, reputed to be members of the
harem of some charismatic off-brand far right Christian cultist. The food was
marvelously inexpensive but the place was o so creepy.

There's a second-hand bookshop, Booked Solid, that is loaded with romances
and "genre" paperbacks; trade books that find their way to the shelves are
accidental tourists.

Two banks where there used to be just one.

The Paradise Cafe, Bradford's first venture into culinary artistry, lasted a
year or two but then devolved into the Richardson Insurance Agency, though it is
my impression that Kermit Richardson himself has long since collected on his
policy. Taylor-Palmer insurance is  still in the same white clapboard house
that it inhabited half a century ago, and Hod Palmer, after a brief foray into
gourmet cooking, has been restored to the world of his fathers. The Colatina,
an out-of-the-can red-sauce Italian restaurant, is still in business, still
enticing those Dartmouth boys to drive half an hour for some north of Hanover
pizza. Perry Oil, which dominates its side of the street, is still going strong,
still filling those propane tanks, and still run by genuine Perrys. Hill's, a
kind of old-fashioned notion shop, like a Woolworth's  -- how come it hasn't
been obliterated by a Target or a K-Mart? The Bradford Public Library, now
reroofed, is a handsome Victorian Gothic building, but lacks books.

"All is flux," Heraclitus used to say. But then he'd never been to downtown
Bradford.

Source: 2011/08/advice-for-married-folk

Title: Advice for Married Folk
Date: August 27, 2011

Reposted from January, 2007, and just as pertinent now as it was then:

High on the list of The New York Times' "most e-mailed articles" is one that's
catchily titled "What Shamu Taught Me About a Happy Marriage," by a writer named
Amy Sutherland. Apparently it's a well-regarded, influential essay. I think
it's misleading and wrong-headed, and I think that couples who heed its advice
will soon find themselves not in a happy marriage but in one that's sterile and
empty.

Amy's column is at this address, and will be available unless and until the
strapped and greedy Times decides to put it behind a paid wall. A summary: poor
Amy is perpetually annoyed by Scott, her husband of twelve years. He loses his
keys and asks her help finding them; he keeps her waiting at restaurants; he
"hovers around her in the kitchen asking if she has read this or that piece in
the New Yorker." She's tried nagging, but it doesn't work. As it happens, Amy
is writing a book on animal training and she's watched people "do the seemingly
impossible," such as 'teaching baboons to skateboard" and "hyenas to pirouette
on command." She decides to adopt the animal model and "train" her husband. "If
he threw one dirty shirt into the hamper, I'd thank him. If he threw in two, I'd
kiss him." She rewards "approximations." She uses "least reinforcing syndrome"
in which the trainer doesn't respond in any way when an animal does something
wrong -- just stands and stares. When Scott loses his keys, she ignores his
pleas for help, and eventually he finds them by himself. By the end of the
article, Scott has changed. "After two years of exotic animal training, my
marriage is far smoother, my husband much easier to love."

What's so awful about this advice? Let's take the shirts-on-the-floor crisis.
Amy can imagine only two methods to deal with this problem. There's nagging,
which she now rejects, and there's re-training. But there are other responses.
The first is for Amy to gain a bit of perspective. Marriage isn't about whether
the dirty shirts are in the hamper or on the floor. People have had long and
happy marriages without resolving such issues. Amy seems to assume that getting
her way about the shirts is crucial. But when she and Scott married, they agreed
to love, honor, and respect each other; they didn't agree that every single
shirt would immediately find its way into a hamper. Perhaps Amy should re-think
her priorities and try to keep the larger picture in view. Secondly, Amy can't
seem to imagine any ground between nagging and animal training. But there is --
there's an enormous territory. There's discussion, negotiation, and compromise.
Amy: "It bothers me that you expect me to pick up your shirts." Scott: "I'll try
not to drop them. I'll pick them up myself." Amy: "And I'll try not to make such
a big deal out of it."

When Scott comes into the kitchen and wants to read to her from a New Yorker
article, Amy could say, if she had any imagination, "Oh, good. Scott wants to
involve me in his intellectual life. He wants to talk to me." But she doesn't
see it that way; she wants him out of the room so she can "concentrate on the
simmering pans." But what's important about marriage, or about life? Is it the
pans, or is it the conversation? Once again, Amy has it all wrong. She cares
about her cooking, and getting the soup exactly right, more than she cares
about the marriage. It shouldn't be beyond her ability to stir and to listen
at the same time; it's been known to happen. Amy is, let's face it, a bit of a
narcissist. She wants to make Scott into an extension of herself; she wants to
subordinate the marriage to her own convenience.

Readers and friends, here's my opinion. If your spouse comes to you and says,
"I've lost my keys, I'm distressed," you should stop whatever you're doing and
you should start searching. When you do so, you're treating your spouse with
respect and you're taking your marriage seriously. And if you happen to misplace
your own keys, it's perfectly fair to ask your spouse to help find them. Because
sometimes finding keys is a team activity. I'll go even further: sometimes it's
less important to find the lost keys than it is to search for them together.

But you should engage yourself with the problem of the keys, or the shirts, only
if you want a relationship of equals. If you think that it's so important to
train your spouse to stay out of your damn kitchen, then go ahead and follow
Amy's advice. But you might wind up with not with a husband or wife, but with a
pirouetting hyena or a skateboarding baboon.

Amy and Scott: here's some valuable advice. It comes to you courtesy of Mr.
Hart, who lived a couple of houses down from us. He died at age 90, in the same
month as his equally aged wife. The Harts had been married for 60 or so years.
"What's the secret of a long, happy marriage," he was asked. He said, "find out
what your wife wants and make sure that it happens." Which is, if you think
about it for a moment, only a variation of the traditional golden rule and of
its even more practical cousin: "do unto others as they want to be done unto."

Source: 2011/09/dog-faced-man

Title: Dog-faced Man
Date: September 15, 2011

Here's a sad childhood memory.

Just around the corner from us, on Ditmas Avenue, there lived the ugliest man
I've ever seen in my entire life. He was a small, always solitary old man. He
was not deformed, just plain ugly. His nose and mouth stuck way out, but his
chin receded; he had very long canine teeth and the world's saddest eyes. He
walked the ugliest little dog.

I confess that when we passed in the street, I looked away, even though I was
fascinated enough by his repulsiveness to steal a surreptitious backward glance.
I imagine that everyone else whom he passed averted their eyes as well, and that
the poor fellow lived in a world not only without friends, but even without eye
contact.

Later I learned that he made his living my exhibiting himself nightly at a Coney
Island freak show. He was the "Dog-Faced Man."

This was in the late 1940s or early 1950s. I hope that freak shows are a thing
of the past.

Source: 2011/09/trollope-on-the-kindle

Title: Trollope on the Kindle
Date: September 16, 2011

My first purchase for the new Kindle was a "set" of fifty novels by Anthony
Trollope for $4.95 -- or ten cents for each spacious, digressive, leisurely
book, many of which I have read in the past as three-volume baggy monsters.
Initiating a 21st-century electronic device with classic Victorian novels
tickles me.

The Kindle fits nicely with my latter-day anti-clutter neurosis. No need to buy
a new bookcase. No need, even, to dust the volumes.

It's a new way of reading, but whether for better or worse I can't yet say. The
Kindle is portable and easy on the wrist. There's a built-in light for cloudy
days and the middles of nights. But I'm used to knowing where I am in a novel.
How many pages I've read, how many to go are elements crucial to the experience.
I miss, frankly, the heft of the book, the gratification of accumulating all
those turned pages. (The Kindle notes the percentage of the book that you've
read, which is helpful but not satisfying. And when you buy fifty novels in a
bundle, the K tells you only that you started The Eustace Diamonds at, say, 26%
and finished at 29% -- information which is utterly useless.)

Can You Believe Her? clearly signaled that it was coming to an end, but Phineas
Finn, this time through, came to a conclusion that seemed to be far more
hasty than in previous readings. I was surprised that Trollope left so much
unresolved. But then, perhaps he had a sequel already in mind.

I need to remind myself that the first readers of these novels didn't read
them in book form. They read them as periodic installments in magazines. The
experience of reading a novel in the course of a year or eighteen months was
profoundly different from zooming through 800 pages in a few days. While
there's  nothing "authentic" about "kindling," the kind of Trollope-reading at
which I've had a lifetime of practice is  equally artificial.

Source: 2011/09/mr-kripke

Title: "Mr. Kripke"
Date: September 27, 2011

When I was in graduate school (fifty years ago, believe it or not), I enrolled
for a course called "Modern American Poetry." In the unthrilling days of
yesteryear, "modern" still meant the generation of Eliot and Pound. This
particular course, however, was so up-to-the moment that it might have been
called "last month's American poetry." Some of the poets whom we studied
turned out to be mere flashes in the pan, and none of them, I think, ever came
close to Yeats or Frost. Nevertheless, it was good to know about Olson and
Hall and Bly and Snodgrass and Levertov. There were major omissions to the
curriculum: Sylvia Plath had not yet flashed across the horizon, and Ginsberg,
Ferlinghetti, Corso and Duncan were far too rude to have been invited to this
particular party.

Our instructor was a genial man named John Lincoln Sweeney. Although he was not
a bristling-with-bibliography kind of academic celebrity, he knew everything
about the subject and was famous as a supporter of poets and artists. I knew
that he was "different" -- even my callow unsophisticated eye noticed the
elegant bespoke suits and the aristocratic mien. At the Woodberry Poetry Library
in Lamont, Sweeney was listed as "curator" but I have not doubt that he was also
patron. Woodberry collected not only books but also records and audiotapes and
films of poetry readings. It was a spectacular resource. There was a rumor that
there were poetry gatherings at Sweeney's mansion on Beacon Street, across the
river, but I was never invited. Why would I have been?

Here's a photograph of Jack and Maire Sweeney:

Sweeney's letters are now housed in the Trinity College, Dublin Library.
"Correspondents include Conrad Aiken, William Alfred, Padraic Colum, e.e.
cummings, Richard Eberhart, Leon Edel, T.S. Eliot, Robert Fitzgerald, Seamus
Heaney, Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath, Thomas Kinsella, Philip Larkin, Marianne
Moore, Edwin and Willa Muir, Wallace Stevens, and Richard Wilbur." The
paintings (Picasso, Modigliani, Matisse) were bequeathed to the National
Gallery of Ireland.

There were about twenty students in "Modern American Poetry." Nineteen of them
were regular; one was irregular. Whenever "Mr. Kripke," whom I remember as an
exceedingly scruffy young fellow, signaled that he wanted to participate in the
conversation, time stopped. Both the instructor and my classmates treated Mr.
Kripke, who spoke in halting, awkward, and oracular tones, with extraordinary
deference. "What's the deal?" I asked, privately. "He's supposed to be very
smart," I was told. I myself didn't understand a word that Mr. Kripke said
during the entire semester. Not a single word. When I don't understand, it's
hard for me to tell whether the speaker is spouting hot air, or I'm just not
smart enough.

"Mr. Kripke" dropped from my consciousness. But just the other day, I noticed
an advertisement in the NYRB for a colloquium honoring the achievement of Saul
Kripke, Distinguished Professor at Princeton and at the CUNY Graduate Center.

Here's the scoop: according to wikipedia, "a recent poll conducted among
philosophers ranked Saul Kripke among the top ten most important philosophers of
the past 200 years." Top ten?  This is no trivial praise. No wonder everyone
stopped to listen. It was like having Michael Jordan in your gym class.

Kripke was apparently a prodigy who made important contributions to modal
logic, whatever that is, while still in his teens. For example:

A Kripke model is a triple , where is a Kripke frame, and is a relation between
nodes of W and modal formulas, such that:

Which. frankly  I never doubted.

Mr. Kripke had a couple of branches of logic (and mathematics) named after him
before he entered college. No wonder I didn't understand (and still wouldn't)
what he was struggling to say. The most recent philosopher I can understand is
John Locke, and then only the easy parts.

In retrospect, that class in poetry had more drama than I gave it credit for.
Here was John Sweeney, civilized and be-boutonniered, acquaintance of Yeats,
friend to every important poet in America. And there was Saul Kripke, not
only a mathematical and philosophical genius but also the son of "the only
conservative rabbi in Omaha, Nebraska."

And then there was me.

Source: 2011/10/on-cults

Title: On "Cults"
Date: October 09, 2011

Megachurch Baptist pastor Robert Jeffress, an enthusiast for Governor Rick Perry
(the Texax governor for people who think that George Bush was way too bookish)
has labelled Mitt Romney's church (Latter-Day Saints) a "cult." Jeffress made
the charge while addressing a convention of right-wing "value voters."  (The
particular value which Jefress himself exemplifies is "smugness.")

According to Jeffress, Perry's church is a "religion" and Romney's is a
"cult."  By which he means, I suppose, that a "religion" is good and true and
"cult" is bad and false.

But to an outsider, like myself, it appears otherwise. It appears that
the one is older and the other newer.  The origins of Christianity (not
the Baptist part, but the religion generally) are decently obscured by the
mists of antiquity. The origins of Mormonism are o so transparent and
so unpersuasive. But on any rational scale, the religion (virgin birth,
bread-into- wine, three-in-one) and the cult (golden tablets, magic underwear)
are equally incredible. There's nothing that would allow one to claim
superiority to the other.

A cult is a new religion; a religion is an old cult. How does a cult get to be a
religion?  It absorbs a whole lot of converts. It becomes wealthy.  It asserts
authority -- such as the power to stigmatize newer religions as cults.

Similarly, a "myth" is an old but dead religion. A "superstition" is someone
else's religion.

Here's a related question:  what's the difference between a language and a
dialect?  The standard answer among linguists: "a language has a bigger navy."

Source: 2011/10/pride-and-prejudice-and-farts-

Title: The Famous First Sentences of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, This Time with Bodies.
Date: October 10, 2011

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a
good fortune must be in want of a wife, or at least a mistress, especially
if he does not wish to indulge with ladies of easy virtue, of which the
neighborhood enjoyed an ample stock.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first
entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the
surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property of some one
or other of their pining, inhibited, and frustrated daughters.

``My dear Mr. Bennet,'' said his lady to him one day, `have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?'' As usual, Mrs Bennet's stomach was
distempered with wind, which caused frequent eructations and annoying
flatulence.

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

``But it is,'' returned she; ``for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told
me all about it.''

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

``Do not you want to know who has taken it?'' cried his wife impatiently.

``You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.''  Mr. Bennet
was customarily cranky and irritable, perhaps because he had not enjoyed his
lady for the last fourteen years, or ever since the birth of his youngest
daughter, when Mrs. Bennet had declared that five pregnancies were sufficient.
He frequently retired to his room, where, pretending interest in his extensive
library, he surrendered to self-abuse.

This was invitation enough.

``Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a
young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on
Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it
that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before
Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next
week.''

``What is his name?''

``"Bingley.''

``Is he married or single?''

``Oh! single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or five
thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!''  He must be in the pink of
youthful vitality, and if we can only bridle his natural impulses until he has
been entranced by Jane or Lizzie, we might capture a prize.  Perhaps out of
excitement, Mrs. Bennet let fly an enormous, resonant fart.

``How so? how can it affect them?'' replied Mr. Bennet, pretending not to notice
that the air was rent with the sound and savor of the explosion.

``My dear," replied his wife, ``how can you be so tiresome! You must know that
I am thinking of his marrying one of them. He'll be so blinded by youthful lust
that he'll surely imagine himself to be in love.

More on Jane Austen and Sex.

Source: 2011/10/whats-with-the-necklaces

Title: What's the Deal with the Necklaces that Baseball Players are Wearing?
Date: October 11, 2011

What are those beads with which half of the players now accesorize?  Why,
they're magic titanium necklaces. "The necklaces... work by stabilizing the
electric flow that nerves use to communicate actions to the body. All of the
messages in your body travel through electricity, so if you’re tired or just
pitched nine innings, the electricity isn’t flowing as smoothly as it can,”
said Joe Furuhata, a Phiten (Phiten is the company that manufactures the beads)
spokesman. “Our products smooth out those signals.” Persuasive as all get
out, isn't he?  Nothing like smooth-flowing electric signals, though whether AC
or DC he doesn't specify. Here's some more science from the website: "Titanium
Necklace Benefits have been proven to be many. Some of these benefits include
alleviation from discomfort in your shoulders and neck, and it helps the whole
body to relax as well. Titanium necklaces are known to ease pains and aches of
the upper back, and also enhance the circulation of blood from the upper body to
the brain and other major organs. Included in the titanium necklace benefits are
that they have anti-radiation and anti-fatigue properties."  So it's not just
electricity: it's also pain relief and improved circulation, plus the beads ward
off radiation (a major problem in ballparks nowadays).

Gotta love the use of the passive voice: "Titanium necklace benefits have been
proven to be many."  Proven by whom?  Here I am searching for a citation, an
experiment, a demonstration, a study, even a minuscule perfunctory footnote.
But there's nothing. Not a whisper of evidence. Nor could there be: what sort
of double-blind experiment would it take to prove the efficacy of the beads. I
guess I'm a non-believer, once again. So is the chief of sports medicine at NYU,
who says, "it's all superstition."

OK, so baseball players are superstitious. No news there. But what are we
to think when Ron Washington, the manager of the Texas team, sports a magic
necklace?  Here he is:

Can you see the beads: trust me, they're not ordinary; they're genuine
"titanium-infused plastic."

Does "Wash" think that his beads improve the performance of managers, whose job
is of the brain rather than of the body?  "Wow, I never would have thought to
call for that double steal if I hadn't been wearing my magic beads!"

Altogether, the ubiquitous necklaces lead me into further despair about the
quality of American education.

Source: 2011/10/about-about-schmidt

Title: About "About Schmidt"
Date: October 16, 2011

I borrowed About Schmidt from our local library because I had seen and enjoyed
the Alexander Payne movie, even though it starred Jack Nicholson, who was once
again -- yet once more -- still another time -- reprising J. J. Gittes Redux.
There was however only the most marginal connection between novel and film.
In the film, Warren Schmidt is a insurance executive in Omaha whose nasty
wife has recently died and whose Denver daughter is about to be married to an
asbestos salesman. In the novel, Albert Schmidt.  an upper-class Harvard/New
York/Hamptons lawyer for a white shoe firm, has recently retired, and has lost
his beloved, talented and patient wife to a brain tumor. He fusses endlessly
about money, of which he has a more-than-ample supply. His major problem is
that he don't much like Jews, and that his daughter is about to marry one (a
young partner in his law firm). She (the daughter) teases her father with the
possibility that she's going to convert to Judaism. Schmidt has a nasty streak
but he's a good man underneath it all and one who can return blow-for-blow
and flirt for flirt. It appears that redemption from his narrowness will come
through an affair with a twenty-year-old Boriquena who doesn't much care about
money and who introduces him to a new world of modern sexuality. Just when
the novel seems unable to conclude, Schmidt receives a large enabling bequest
from his father's second wife and all his financial problems are solved.
Thesaurus ex machina, so to speak. Inasmuch as the novel seems to look askance
at Schmidt's money worries, it seems odd that it should end with a triumphant,
and I suppose comic, infusion of additional cash. I didn't find the conclusion
to be satisfying.

The relationship between Schmidt and his daughter is stressful and painful and
rings true -- it's the best thing in the book. It's a wonder that the movie
version neglected such rich material. My suspicion (I have no evidence to offer)
is that the perpetrators re-shaped the novel into a vehicle for Jack N. I hope
that Louis Begley, the author of this urbane tale, was amply rewarded for the
use of the novel's title, because the movie made almost nothing of the plot, or
the characters, or the dialogue, or the ambience.

It's a good book -- and  certainly intriguing enough to send me scurrying back
to the library for other novels by Louis Begley.

Source: 2011/10/slugs-two-reasons-not-to-eat

Title: Two Good Reasons Not To Eat Raw Slugs on a Dare
Date: October 18, 2011

Reason A.  Because slugs are hideous and disgusting.

Reason B:  Because slugs eat rat droppings which can carry a lungworm parasite
-- a nematode called Angiostrongylus cantonensis -- which causes fatal brain
swelling. According to the NYTimes, a 27-year-old Australian man "has been
hospitalized for more than a month after eating the slugs on a dare."

“We hope this will help to remind others to avoid eating raw slugs," said a
spokesman.

Source: 2011/10/re-thinking-slugs

Title: Re-thinking Slugs
Date: October 21, 2011

Yesterday's post was disrespectful of slugs. I'm chagrined to have been so
benighted and bigoted. After all, slugs have mothers too. In a comment, Mrs.
KKP --formerly Miss KKH -- (a food safety specialist) reports that many people
happily eat slugs, which are a great source of protein and surely taste just
like chicken when fried, or blended into a stew. They will no doubt serve
equally well in a fricassee or a ragout.

In my defense, I can only say that I've not enjoyed a good relationship with
slugs, so far. I remember my first encounter with the slimy tribe -- as a young,
innocent boy, in my father's garden on East 9th Street, where six-inch long
fat gruesome creatures violated the precious daylilies with trails of goo.
Slugs were unlike anything I had previously encountered and seemed to me to be
either extra-terrestrial or transplanted from a horror movie. "Just pick them up
and throw them into the bucket," my father said, optimistically. Squeamish, I
declined.

And then there were the foot-long slugs crawling up the outsides of the windows
on Mackinack Island and California's horrid banana slugs. They're all dreadful
and voracious beings.

Source: 2011/10/reposted-duke-duke-duke

Title: Reposted: Duke, Duke, Duke
Date: October 23, 2011

Ain't it shocking that Gene Chandler's excellent song is now almost half a
century old?  Seems like just yesterday.

This be the verse in its full splendor.

Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke,
Duke, Dukeof Earl

As I walk through this world Nothing can stop the Duke of Earl And you, you are
my girl And no one can hurt you, oh no Yes, I'm gonna love you Come on let me
hold you darlin' 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

And when I hold you You will be my Duchess, Duchess of Earl We'll walk through
my dukedom And the paradise we will share.

Yes, oh, I I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of
Earl.

Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl Duke, Duke, Duke of Earl

I'm gonna love you Nothing can stop me now 'Cause I'm the Duke of Earl.

1)  "Duke of Earl" is classic, though late, doo-wop. Therefore it's lineally
descended from songs in which a supporting male quartet sang meaningless
syllables: doo wop, wop, wop. In this revisiting of the genre, nonsense doo doo
doo de wop has been superseded by words that carry meaning of a sort: duke duke
duke of earl. Return we now to the pages of history: in their turn, doo wop
quartets were themselves secular offspring of gospel quartets, where a reverent
foursome would sing do lord do lord, do lordy lord (a good example: the unnamed
backup quartet supporting Georgia Peach in "Do Lord Send Me").

2)  It's a fascinating process: Gene Chandler's replacement of doo doo with
duke duke is in fact a return to the roots, except that the previous and
inherent religious content has undergone secularization. "Lord" has become
"Duke," while the heaven of gospel has transformed into the "dukedom" of doo-
wop.

3.  It's easy to deride the naive faux-aristocratic title "Duke of Earl";  but would the song preserve its meaning if it were "Duke of  Buckingham?" "Earl" may sound silly, but because it's a generic title  rather than a specific one it carries allegorical significance. "Duke of  Earl" is no one and therefore everyone.

4.  It's entirely likely that the word "earl" was chosen because of  it echoes "lord": liquids "r" and 'l" and unemphatic vowel.

5.  The first line of the lyric --"As I walk through this world"--  introduces a secularized religious motif (an inheritance from the song's  gospel forbears). Some will notice the echo of the initial phrase of the  most famous of all religious allegories, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1672):  "As I walked through the wilderness of this world." Gene Chandler,  walking through this world, is reborn just as Christian was reborn in  the classic allegory. Not religiously, but in a worldly way. He is not  saved; he is duked.

6.  Why the aggressive "nothing can stop me  now?" What obstacles stopped the Duke of Earl in the past, before his  duking? The triumphalist language is highly developed but the obstacles  remain vague and unarticulated. Audiences find their own meaning in  the lacuna, but indignities historically suffered by the black  underclass lurk only slightly below the surface of the lyric.

7.  The transformation from a previous but unknown and unarticulated  existence to an aristocratic, unstoppable Duke of Earl takes place  offstage, nor is any explanation offered for the metamorphosis.  It's  entirely magical.

8.  Because it's magic, it's pure fantasy. Pastoral fantasy in fact,  which, curiously, is simultaneously primitive ("paradise") and  sophisticated ("dukedom").

9. But it's a shared paradise: the duke along with his duchess. The  retreat to domesticity is almost Victorian: "ah love, let us be true/  To one another...."  This particular Duke does not know that "Two  paradises were in one/ To live in paradise alone."

10.  The Duke retreats to domesticity and yet he seems to stake  out ("nothing can stop me now") new territory to conquer, in which  regard the spacious lyric seems to embody contradictory or even  incoherent vectors of thought. However, the enthusiasm of the singing  obliterates the ambiguity of the lyric; in sum, the song is remarkably  optimistic -- which is just one of many reasons for its continued popularity.

Source: 2011/10/edward-gibbon-replacement-child

Title: Edward Gibbon -- Replacement Child
Date: October 28, 2011

By strict definition, a replacement child is one who is conceived because
an older sibling has died. According to the theory, such a child is at
psychological risk, especially if the dead child has not been adequately
mourned.

Because he was an oldest son, Edward Gibbon, the greatest of all modern
historians and the most brilliant prose stylist in the English language, would
not seem to qualify as a replacement -- except that in his own curious manner
of thinking, Gibbon “replaced” children who were born subsequent to him.

Gibbon preened himself on his status in the family. “From my birth,” he
said in his famous Memoir, “I have enjoyed the rights of primogeniture.”
But primogeniture was not so much a chronological fact as it was a pinnacle to
be defended. As he conceived it, Gibbon triumphed over would-be competitors to
his supremacy. “I was succeeded by five brothers and one sister, all of whom
were snatched away in their infancy.” Toward his dead siblings, and toward the
parents who endured the heart-breaking death of six of their seven children,
Gibbon was unnaturally cold and mercenary. “I shall not pretend to lament”
the loss of those who would “oppress my inheritance.” Gibbon lacked empathy
in part because he felt, with some justice, that his younger siblings were
favored over him by his father. How could this be?

The Memoir supplies an explanation. In an age of high infant mortality, Gibbon
was a very sickly child. His life was at risk while other, later-born children
seemed to be born healthier. As Gibbon himself puts it, “so feeble was my
constitution, so precarious my life, that, in the baptism of each of my brothers
my father’s prudence successively repeated my Christian name of Edward, that,
in case of the departure of the eldest son, this patronymic appellation might
be still perpetuated in the family.” This is odd indeed. In five separate
instances, according to the future historian, a male child saw the light, and
each time the child was named Edward. In one case after another, the outcome was
the same. The infant who might have “oppressed his inheritance” succumbed
and the heroic oldest son beat back the challenge. The first Edward therefore
“replaced,” so to speak, a series of subsequent Edwards who might have
superseded him. It's not hard to imagine that a sickly child, pursued by a
series of infants each christened with his very own name, would feel threatened
and might rejoice rather than mourn at their funerals.

Although Gibbon attributes the pattern of naming to his father’s
“prudence,” it is obvious that the phrase "my father's prudence” is an
irony that masks a true fury. Was it prudence or was it his father's hope that
the sickly child would be succeeded by a healthy one?  Hostility also shines
through Gibbon's jealous account of his mother: "to preserve and to rear so
frail a being [as himself], the most tender assiduity was scarcely sufficient;
and my mother’s attention was somewhat diverted by her frequent pregnancies,
by an exclusive passion for her husband, and by the dissipation of the world,
in which his taste and authority obliged her to mingle.” The irony of this
beautiful Augustan sentence conceals infantine rage: to translate into more
forthright English, Gibbon objects that his mother conceived other children,
claims that she should have preferred him to her husband, and asserts that she
should have withdrawn from society to nurse him.

To what degree Gibbon’s suppressed and ironic but still obvious anger toward
his parents contributed to his peculiar temperament is difficult to say, but
it is a fact that the bulk of his career was spent not only in tracing the
decline and fall of Rome, the father of all European civilizations, but also in
displacing an established patriarchal religion from its position of supremacy.
The irony that he directed against his parents in his Memoir is the exact
weapon that he learned to deploy against Roman failures and against triumphant
Christianity.

In addition, there's an untidy psychological wrinkle. Gibbon’s claim that
the male children who succeeded him were all named Edward is a crucial part of
his indictment of his parents. But it's an assertion that is not true and is
not substantiated by parish records. There was no endless series of Edwards.
Apparently, one succeeding child was so named but the rest enjoyed various
different appellations. The most scrupulous of historians either invented or
misremembered the dreadful slight that so wounded him. What psychological
mechanism caused Gibbon to yearn to be even more of a replacement child than in
fact he was?

Source: 2011/11/another-replacement-child

Title: Another Replacement Child -- Peter Sellers
Date: November 07, 2011

A "replacement child," narrowly defined, is a person who is intentionally
conceived because an older sibling has recently died. Such substitutes must
endure the lifetime burden of competing with a lost and often idealized
child. Because it is almost impossible for such persons to please their
parents, they easily become confused and frustrated, and in worst-case
scenarios, pathological.

One of the ways in which the "replacement child syndrome" manifests itself
concerns the matter of self-identity. An adult "replacement child" might
wonder, Who am I exactly?  He might find himself, especially if he has been
raised from his earliest days as if he were someone else, uncertain of his own
boundaries.

The great comic actor Peter Sellers, was a classic replacement child. At birth,
Sellers was named Richard Henry, but his parents, curiously, always called
him Peter, after an older stillborn brother. And Peter he remained. Why would
his parents do such a thing?  Would it not effect a child to be called not by
his own name but by the name of a missing brother?

Sellers is famous for his ability to subsume his identity into the role he
played.  He said that "If you ask me to play myself, I will not know what to
do. I do not know who or what I am" -- because even when not acting, he was
always Richard Henry playing the part of Peter.

To confuse him all the more, Sellers' father, who was Anglican, and his mother,
who was Jewish, sent him to Roman Catholic schools.

Source: 2011/11/even-more-on-lolas-language

Title: Even More on Lola's Language
Date: November 13, 2011

Let us understand what Lola (the exemplary two-year-old granddaughter) meant
when she cryptically observed, "Nay, no ba."

Nay --perhaps better spelled  neigh -- means horse or horses. "Ba" are of
course sheep. Lola watched them last summer when the two grazing animals shared
the same Vermont pasture. But when her father took her to a Virginia farm, she
noticed that there were no sheep among the horses. Hence her succinct formula:
"nay, no ba."

As Duke Vincentio says, "all difficulties are but easy when they are known."

Source: 2011/11/superlatives-meas

Title: "Paradise" in Measure for Measure
Date: November 14, 2011

The word to watch in a most riveting speech in Measure for Measure is
"paradise."

Young Claudio. whose head is scheduled to be lopped off tomorrow morning, is the
speaker. He panics -- and why shouldn't he? After all, his only slip is that
he has impregnated his ladylove Juliet. A venial sin, yet in newly-puritanical
Vienna, the act of love has led directly to the executioner with his ax and his
big black block. Although everyone, certainly including Shakespeare himself,
knew that there were many things far worse than to depart this vale of trouble
and tears, Claudio is so terrified by his imminent execution that he goes off
the philosophical rails. He argues the extreme position (and here comes the
speech and the crucial word) that "The weariest and most loathed worldly life/
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment/ Can lay on nature is a paradise/ To
what we fear of death." A "paradise?" Goodness gracious!

Although everyone can sympathize, no one should agree with
Claudio. Neverthless, the three-and-a-half lines of verse that contain the
climactic  word "paradise" (and indeed the long speech in which these lines
reside) are so brilliant and colorful that they almost persuade us to do so. One
of the reasons the sentence is so wonderful is because Shakespeare brings to
bear one of his favorite and most useful figures of speech. To depict Claudio's
hysteria, Shakespeare employs a full-throttle hyperbole.

The most transparently hyperbolical words are the grammatical superlatives
"weariest" and "most loathed." The hyperbole that resides in the word "paradise"
is less obvious but more potent. "Paradise" is the climax -- the word that any
good actor or reader must hit hard when he recites or reads the passage. An
hyperbolist less gifted than Shakespeare might have written "The weariest and
most loathed life is pretty darn good compared to dying," but our author pulls
out all the rhetorical stops. To lie in poverty, in pain, in prison is, Claudio
asserts, compared to death, a "paradise."

If, dear attentive and intelligent reader, you will now return to quotation, and
read Claudio's lines again, you will feel the hyperbolical power of "paradise."
Try it, please. And when you recite the sentence, you will also notice that the
initial "p" in climactic "paradise" is prepared for by the plosives in the words
that precede it -- "penury" and "imprisonment."

And if you are following instructions and reading aloud, you should be aware
that in Shakespeare's time, "ache" was pronounced "aitch" -- a pronunciation
that produces a strong and ingenious contrast between the affricates (age,
aitch) and the plosives (penury, imprisonment, paradise).

Claudio's hyperbolical lines bring to conclusion a speech which is querulous at
the start and panicky at the end.  Here they are in context.

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where.

To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;

This sensible warm motion to become

A kneaded clod, and the delighted spirit

To bath in fiery floods, or to reside

In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;

To be imprison'd in the viewless winds

And blown with restless violence round about

The pendent world; or to be worse than worst

Of those that lawless and incertain thought

Imagine howling.  'Tis too horrible.

The weariest and most loathed worldly life

That age, ache, penury and imprisonment

Can lay on nature, is a paradise

To what we fear of death.

("Cold obstruction" means that the body no longer moves -- as opposed to
"sensible" (i.e capable of sensation or feeling) "warm motion".  A "kneaded
clod" is what a "warm motion" is compressed or compressible into by death. A
"delighted spirit" is generally glossed as "formerly capable of delight" but is
better understood as "darkened" -- that is, de-lighted. "Viewless" means simply
"invisible.")

Shakespeare does not feel obliged to distinguish or judge between these
painful visions of an afterlife; instead, he prefers simply to heap together
naturalistic, Christian, pagan and "lawless" ideas.

Students of hyperbole will take note of the inventive phrase "worse than worst,"
where, it seems, "worst" is insufficiently superlative. Here Shakespeare pushes
against the limits of grammar. Bad, worse, worst suffices for most writers, but
Shakespeare invents a new adjectival category -- a comparative superlative.

Shakespeare's interest in the worstness of things will reappear in King Lear 
when Edgar, encountering his blinded father, realizes that he has not yet
touched bottom: "O Gods. Who is't can say "I am at the worst?'/ I am worse than
e'er I was." And then an worser insight comes to him: "And worse I may be
yet: the worst is not/ So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'" For Edgar,
of course, death, that so frightens Claudio, is understood to be a relief and a
liberation. Edgar's father dies "smilingly."

Source: 2011/11/goldbach

Title: Fermat's Room;  Goldbach's Conjecture.
Date: November 16, 2011

I reached my peak with numbers when I was a child at P. S. 217 (under the
tutelage of Mrs. McNulty).  Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division --
that's my area of expertise. Geometry, algebra, trig -- way too abstract for my
pedestrian brain. Calculus and up -- not the least chance.

Arithmetic yes, mathematics no.

Sometimes I try to read popularizations of mathematical theory, but I rarely
make it beyond the first few sentences. Once symbols start to appear, I'm done.
Especially Greek letters (in parentheses).

The consolation prize is that I'm better than most people at mental arithmetic .
I can do sums and approximations and other stuff in my head                    .

Last night, we watched Fermat's Room. It's the kind of movie that is often
called an "ingenious thriller."  It's also a member of a very small group of
films that concern mathematics or mathematicians:  Good Will Hunting, Stand and
Deliver, Antonia's Line, Straw Dogs.

Fermat's Room focuses on a possible proof of Christian Goldbach's Conjecture.
I suppose that I should have known about Herr Goldbach and his guess, but I
confess to ignorance. Goldbach's conjecture dates to 1742 and is apparently one
of the oldest unsolved problems in number theory. In brief, Goldbach theorized
that every even integer greater than 2 can be written as the sum of two prime
numbers. For example, 10 is equal to 3 plus 7, 20 to 17 plus 3 (or 13 plus
7), and 100 resolves into 47 plus 53. Although no one has found a number that
doesn't work, the conjecture can't be proved -- or, at least, hasn't been proved
because there are some very large numbers out there. In Fermat's Room, two of
the characters claim to have proved the conjecture. And they are consequently at
odds.

I had always thought of prime numbers as a kind of novelty or curiosity. But
if primes are a component of all even numbers -- well, that's something. 
Goldbach's idea raises the stature of primes in my perennially naive eyes -- in
exactly the same way that the Fibonacci series became more important to me when
I learned that the chambered nautilis is structured Fibonacci-wise.

While watching the movie (which is a good one), I ran through the even numbers
from 10 to 70.  Everything was in order. But why?

Later in the evening, I read that every even number can also be resolved into
the sum of a semi-prime (which is the product of two primes) and a prime. So 100
equals 77 (7 time 11) and 23. I spent a restless  night summing, in my bed,
semi-primes and primes from 10 to 100. All in order, once again.

Why should it be so?

Whether it should be, or not, it is.  I remember that I used to answer my
children and my students with the response, "That's not a why question?"
Goldbach's Conjecture is a fact, not a why.

It's like gravity. I understand that the apple falls to the ground and that
the moon doesn't head out into space and that it's harder to walk uphill than
downhill. But I still don't understand why. It works, and that's enough. For me.

Source: 2011/11/three-comments-on-books

Title: Three Observations on "Books"
Date: November 24, 2011

Charlie Dressen: "You  know something? I never read a book in my whole life...
I can read newspapers and magazines. But I never read a book. You think I
should?"

Jean Harlow (on her birthday): "Don't get me a book. I already got a book."

Anatole Broyard: "If it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely at the
mercy of sex."

Source: 2011/12/two-machines

Title: Landau versus Gottlieb
Date: December 02, 2011

While in the Bay Area, I visited SF's Museum of Asian Art,  where this
grotesque, beautiful piece of maximum conspicuous consumption was on display.

It's a silver Landau made for the Maharaja of Bhavnagar around the turn of
the last century.  Needless to say, I was utterly appalled by the waste and
extravagance though dazzled by the workmanship.

Afterward, I took a trip to Alameda's Pinball Museum. Here's a bank of classic
50's Gottliebs.

I played this magnificent piece of craftsmanship

and, still a master of the flipper, won three (3) free games.

I can't remember whether the silver coach was owned by this couple of dandies
(also in the Asian Art Museum) or one of their cousins,

but no one who looked like either a maharaja or maharani was playing with
Gottlieb's silver balls.  I didn't spy anyone at the pinball museum who was
nearly so well accoutered.

Source: 2011/12/newts

Title: Newt
Date: December 03, 2011

William Blake asks us to beware "venomous Newt" -- venomous because the skin
of this lizard-like creature contains the extraordinarily dangerous poison
tetrodotoxin  which it secretes through its granular skin glands. It is unwise
to befriend or embrace a Newt and they should never be swallowed. Tetrodotoxin
blocks sodium channels and can therefore cause heart arrhythmia or heart arrest.

Shakespeare did not love the Newt; among the ingredients in the witches' potion
in Macbeth, along with the fenny snake, toe of frog, wool of bat, tongue of dog
and owlet's wing is "eye of Newt."

In Timon of Athens, a list of "abhorred births" includes the "black toad and
adder blue" along with the  "gilded Newt." "Gilded," for Shakespeare, could
mean "gilt" but also "guilty" and sometimes even  "false."

In Monty Python and the Holy Grail, Second Villager claims that a witch has
transformed him into the most loathsome of critters: "She turned me into a
Newt." He then withdraws the charge: "I got better."

It's definitely better not to be a Newt -- or even to get too close to one.

Source: 2011/12/amnesia-on-film-blind-horizon

Title: Amnesia on Film: Blind Horizon
Date: December 05, 2011

For the record, Blind Horizon (2003) may be the most confusing, confused, and
derivative film ever perpetrated. It's a failed memory-assassinate the president
movie, a genre of which The Manchurian Candidate stands as head and font.

Blind Horizon offers one picturesque moment -- when a giant tanker truck
decorated with a Confederate flag and carrying a load of gasoline spills
across the highway and blows up. The truck could have driven through the
monstrous holes in the plot with room to spare. In fact, it would have been more
appropriate if the truck had been carrying a load of red herrings.

Once again, amnesia is whatever Hollywood says it is. In this case, the amnesiac
remembers that there's going to be an attempt on the president's life, but he
doesn't remember his own name, his occupation, or his fiancee -- an unlikely
scenario. He has flashes of memory that are copied, almost exactly, from the
Bourne series, which we must now anoint as the movie amnesia template of the
future.

Val Kilmer is wasted as the - wait, is he the would-be asssassin or is he the
Federal agent trying to prevent the assassination? I never did quite figure it
out. Neve Campbell is dark and mysterious and Amy Smart is blonde and perky --
that's the way women are packaged in this expensive turkey. If the writers (F.
Paul Benz, Steve Tomlin) were allowed to choose between remembering this film,
or amnesia, they should definitely go for the latter.

Hypothesis: the amnesia mcguffin liberates the screenwriter from any allegiance
to probability.

Source: 2011/12/occupied

Title: Being "Occupied"
Date: December 10, 2011

Here in peaceful, progrressive Boulder, two commissioners' seats are coming open
next election. Commissioners are important officers: they directly govern the
half of our citizens who live in unincorporated areas of the county, they employ
1800 people and administer a $300 million budget, they manage all the social
services, and they set policy on land use, open space, transportation, etc. They
also put out fires.

Even though we're six months away from the primary, campaigning is well under
way. And should be. Deciding on he right county officer is important. We're a
functioning democracy.

This afternoon there was a forum to allow the six candidates to answer questions
and state their views.  But just as the meeting was called to order, we were
"occupied."

About fifty or sixty people filed into the room, took up places around the
perimeter, interrupted the moderator and announced that they had a statement to
make, which they did in a peculiar and theatrical manner. Their leader read a
few words, and then the rest of the folks repeated the same phrase, in chorus.
Their demands were well known: control the big banks, put an end to corporate
dominance, stop the foreclosures, support the homeless, reduce pollution,
prohibit fracking, end uranium mining, and prevent any GMO crops from being
grown in Boulder County.

Then they left. Just vanished.

And so we got back to work.

What was so odd is that every single one of the candidates stated positions that
were at least as far to the left, and sometimes further to the left, than the
Occupiers -- which makes me wonder whether these very sincere folks wouldn't be
doing more good by helping us stuff the envelopes and do the lit drops and help
with the GOTV. To tell the exact truth, I found it just a little offensive to be
hectored so dramatically by political novices.

At very least, the "Occupiers" should give up the choral speaking, which sounds
not like thoughtfulness but rather like authoritarian groupspeak. A little
dictatorial.

As the political philosopher and social critic Doll Tearsheet long ago remarked,
"the word occupy... was an excellent good word before it was ill sorted."

Source: 2011/12/trollope-last-novel

Title: Trollope's Old Old Man
Date: December 10, 2011

Having just read the posthumously published An Old Man's Love (1884), I believe
I can now claim to have read every single one of Anthony Trollope's forty-seven
novels. Who would have guessed, when I encountered The Warden and Barchester
Towers back in 1958, that it would have taken fifty-three years to complete the
marathon?

I'm glad that I saved An Old Man's Love for last. It's very much a valediction
to love and to life.

William Whittlestaff, the "old man," is fifty years in age, which, to my
occluded septuagenarian eyes, seems barely beyond adolescence. He falls in love
with his ward, Mary Lawrie, who is a generation younger than he. She agrees to
marry him, but then her first love, John Gordon, returns from Kimberley, where
colonial diamonds have conveniently cured his poverty. Eventually, Whittlestaff
ungraciously concedes the bride to the younger man. Self-abnegation does not
come easy.

My interest focused on Mary Lawrie, who is so paralyzed by notions of duty and
honor that she cannot lift a finger in her own interest. It would be wrong,
in her conception (and in Trollope's), for her to imply, however slightly,
that her commitment to Whittlestaff ought to be re-assessed. In fact, to avoid
becoming the much-dreaded "jilt," she has to argue with herself against her own
inclinations. Gordon and Whittlestaff are allowed to be active in working out
their interests; Miss Lawrie remains entirely passive and therefore virtuous.

As is always the case in Trollope's novels, courting couples are not allowed to
engage in forthright conversation until after matters are settled.

Even after completing the forty-seven novels, I cannot help but marvel at this
strange Victorian ethic.

It's unfortunate that Trollope doesn't conclude by granting Whittlestaff an
avuncular or grandparental role toward the new couple and their putative
children. What would it have hurt him to have imagined a scene in which
Whittlestaff, a white-haired gentleman, walks the balmy Barset woods with nine-
year-old John and seven-year-old Mary Gordon?  No such event takes place, and
Whittlestaff therefore retains his gloom right to the end. Charles Dickens,
always warm-hearted, would have been more generous.

Source: 2011/12/onagers

Title: Onagers
Date: December 12, 2011

It's absolutely astonishing that I've lived all these years in total ignorance
of onagers. And would have presisted in abysmal onagerian oblivion hadn't read
David Anthony's fascinating monograph, The Horse, the Wheel, and Language
(2007). Anthony's thesis is that "proto-Indo-European" -- from which the Slavic,
Celtic, Germanic, Romance, and Indic languages, among others, are descended,
originated in the steppes north of the Black and Caspian seas. The inhabitants
of these areas domesticated horses and invented or adopted the wheel and the
wagon, which gave them the technological advantage to spread their culture
and language across the steppes eastward as far as China and westward to the
Atlantic. This same people also invented  the chariot -- a horse-drawn single-
axle vehicle, which, manned by a warrior armed with bronze-headed javelins, was
the principal engine of war for the thousand years that began about 1700 BCE and
ended about 700 BCE. It's a lovely hypothesis, bristling with the evidence of
hundreds of archeological digs.

Pre-proto-Indo-European speakers ate horses long before they domesticated them
and rode them before they learned to harness them to chariots and wagons.
However, horses weren't the only equid in the neighborhood.  There were also
onagers.

But all they could do with onagers was feast on them. The evidence lies in
the thousands of midden heaps that are loaded with onager bones. Here are two
onagers:

Onagers are half the size, or less, than the horses with which we are familiar.
They are apparently untamable, like zebras, but, uniike zebras, edible. (So
tasty, in fact, that fewer than a thousand of them survive in the wild.)

Anthony doesn't say so, but if there had been only onagers, and not those noble
and cooperative horses, we would certainly not be speaking and writing an Indo-
European language -- and, for that matter, we might still be trundling across
the wide Missouri in oxcarts.

From the Bronze Age down to the second decade of the nineteenth century, the
horse was the fastest and most reliable way to travel, the quickest way to
convey information, the backbone of armies, and the most conspicuous index of
wealth and status.

Horses are handsome and intelligent. Onagers are ugly, awkward, and stubborn,
and could never have taken part in the creation of complex civilizations. Poets
have celebrated "fiery Pegasus"  for millenia; no one, to the best of my
knowledge, has ever rhapsodized the onager.

Source: 2011/12/silly-dreams

Title: Silly Dreams
Date: December 16, 2011

In last night's dream, I was back in college anxiously sitting a final exam
in a literature course. I remember that the exam was titanically difficult
and unnerving but I can recall only one specific question. "Discuss Ernest
Hemingway's father's Buddhist leanings." I must say that my dreamatorium was
working overtime to come up with that one. Also on the exam: I was presented
with pictures and was asked to supply their literary significance. The one
I remember was a photograph of a generic urban street with five unoccupied
parking spaces. My answer to the question was this: "These spaces were left open
when Ernest Hemingway and four of his friends left for the bar in order to get
themselves soused." I remember thinking that my answer was pretty damn clever
and should get me full marks. I also dreamed a short-answer quiz. In this case I
can't recall the questions, but only that I gave as one of my answers the word
"praestorium." I have no idea what "praestorium" means, except that it sounds
like a portmanteau of the names of two ancient Roman officials (praetor and
quaestor) with an attached (and redundant) noun suffix.

It's sad that fifty years after the fact I'm still dreaming about examinations.
I'm thankful these recent dreams were foolish rather than nightmarish.
Nevertheless, I think it's time to read up on Hemingway, a writer to whom I've
clearly paid too little attention this last half-century. You never know when
someone's going to ask a hard question about Hemingway or his father.

Source: 2011/12/war-on-christmas

Title: "War on Christmas"
Date: December 18, 2011

If the profoundly Christian seventeenth-century founders of our country had
a single favorite Biblical passage, it might be the one in which the Lord
(speaking through His minor prophet Amos) severely condemned the empty vanity
of holidays. "I hate," said the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies." The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined
against the attempt to placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical
concern in Amos' time). "Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat
offerings, I will not accept them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts." Nor did He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but
He went on to condemn all musical tributes as well. Not for him any chants,
glees or carols: "Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not
hear the melody of thy viols." Our Puritan forefathers interpreted these lines
correctly and enthusiastically; they recognized that the Lord opposed not only
ritual sacrifice and music but all formal observance and rote piety. The Ancient
of Days made it abundantly clear that what moved him was not empty ceremony
but genuine morality. HIs solution: "let justice run down as the waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream." Taking these uncompromising sentences
as their guide, our founders dug in their heels against the ostentatious
celebration of all holidays, especially Christmas. Instead, they did as they
were enjoined: they looked into their hearts.

Would they not have been reduced to angry and impotent sobs by the grotesque
consumerism -- the burnt offerings and squeaking timbrels  -- that once again
this Christmas season displace justice and righteousness?  Could there be
anything more loathsome either to Amos or to our devout ancestors than "Silent
Night" amidst shopping-mall tinsel and gimcrackery? Or than the attempt to gin
up conflict or to gain a partisan political advantage by inventing a mythical
"war on Christmas"?

Further observations on the "holiday season" can be found here.

Source: 2011/12/birthday

Title: Birthday Gift Suggestions
Date: December 20, 2011

I've been studying (or more exactly being dazzled by) the illustrations in a
magnificent four-pound coffee-table extravaganza called The Horse From Cave
Paintings to Modern Art. It was first published in France (Cheval dans l'art)
in 2008 and came to me through the Abbeville Press on Varick Street in NYC and
also through the generosity of our local public library (it's too expensive to
purchase). The history of the horse in art begins with the Chauvet Cave and
includes thousands of years of wonders. But I don't write merely to extol the
book, however great it be.

I call it to your attention because I have a birthday coming up soon and
any number of my friends and relatives and readers of this blague have been
asking me what I would like as a gift. This book has given me a few ideas. At
the outset I'd like to say that I'm not really interested in the monumental
paintings that fill most of the pages of the book: battle scenes, hunting
scenes, royal processions. Not my cup of tea. Besides the fact that they are
too large for the condo, most of them are a little on the pretentious side, and
frankly. I don't think they'd work with our understated decor.

However, I'd like to suggest that friends, relatives and constant readers might
want to pool their pennies and present me with one of the smaller, more discreet
objects.

My first choice:

It's known as the Chariot of the Sun sculpture. It's bronze with a little bit
of gold leaf and was found a hundred years ago in a Danish bog, where it had
apparently sat for about 3500 years. It might be a little the worse for wear but
I don't mind. At three feet long and two feet high it would sit nicely on the
dining room table. No longer bog-bound, it presently resides in the National
Museet in Copenhagen but I'm sure the museum would entertain a reasonable
offer. I think you can assume that unlike the callous Danes, I would treat the
sculpture right and not stick it in a swamp somewhere.

If the Chariot of the Sun is unavailable, or the Museet (the phone number for
the "butikken" is 33 47 38 30) proves to be sticky to deal with, I have another
suggestion. It's not as good, but good enough.

It's Charlemagne.  A ninth-century bronze equestrian statuette. The picture is
misleading because the statuette is only nine inches tall, which makes it just
right for a window sill or the top of one of the stereo speakers. The rendering
of the emperor himself is a little stiff, and the sword that should be in his
right hand is missing, but the horse, imitating Roman models, is pretty damn
good. Charlemagne and his horsey are in the Louvre just waiting for an offer.
The statuette is so small that it shouldn't cost much.

And please, friends, no tacky reproductions.

Source: 2011/12/horsey-words

Title: New Horsey Words
Date: December 22, 2011

I'm sure that everyone but I knows these excellent words, but each one is an
absolute novelty to me.

A quadriga is a chariot drawn by four abreast horses. They must have been quite
a trick to control. Wide chariot, I guess, or skinny horses. Quadriga racing
was the nascar of the classical world. The "ga" in quadriga is from iuga, or
yoke, hence the biga, a word of predictable meaning that I would probably have
known if I did crossword puzzles or played scrabble. The ancient Greeks called
a quadriga a tethrippon, which was their privilege. I haven't encountered the
word, but I bet that there's also a triga, and if there is a triga, I imagine
that it's linked, somehow or other, to troika.

A cataphract was a heavily-armed horseman.  Here's an c. 440 CE Chinese statue
of a cataprhact.

I don't believe that horses had legs so stout in those days.  I suspect that
the medium (terracotta) required them.

Schabraque appeared in my horse book as an English noun, and perhaps it is, but
the only definition that I could find was in a French dictionary: nom feminin
singulier: 1  ancienne couverture de cheval de cavalerie 2  femme laide
ou sotte. I don't have the slightest idea how the two meanings are related,
but I'm glad to know them. And the next time that I encounter une femme sotte,
which isn't very often, I'm going to try to insinuate "schabraque" into the
conversation.

I'll try not to use the word quiff, which is a horse's forelock, especially one
hanging over the eyes, but which might easily be misunderstood by guys from my
old neighborhood.

And finally, the piaffe is a dressage movement in which a horse essentially
trots in place. A ridiculous word for a ridiculous performance. I don't know the
origin of the word and I doubt that it's related to French piaf, which, I think
I remember, is a demotic or slang word for sparrow.

Source: 2011/12/ghost-writer

Title: Polanski and The Ghost Writer
Date: December 30, 2011

The Ghost Writer, which I saw last night, is a very good "thriller." It's co-
written and directed by Roman Polanski and therefore inevitably dwells upon the
menace that lurks beneath quotidian events. Once again, Polanski offers us a
naif  who gradually comes to realize that the world is under the control of
dark, implacable, omnipresent forces of evil. In The Ghost Writer, it's the CIA
-- a most convenient bugbear.  Just as soon as the unnamed ghost writer cracks
the mystery, he's run down and killed in the street by a mysteriously summoned
agency vehicle. Ewan McGregor is convincing as the naive ghost, Jim Broadbent
is wonderfully malevolent as the string-puller behind the scenes, and Olivia
Williams steals the show as the intelligent angry betrayed wife the English PM.
But it's pure Polanski from start to finish.

In Shakespeare's Macbeth, the reign of the usurping tyrant is preceded and
succeeded by the benign and holy kings Duncan and Malcolm. In Polanski's 1977
Macbeth (in my opinion one of the few great Shakespeare movies), there's an
appended anti-Shakespearean coda: Donalbain (Malcolm's younger brother) goes off
to engage the witches. Polanski suggests that evil is not anomalous to the reign
of Macbeth but eternal and, so to speak, normal. The witches who control men's
fates are the medieval Scotland analogues of the CIA.

In Polanski's best film, Chinatown, J. J. Gittes is the naif who gradually
comes to discover that villainous Noah Cross controls all of Los Angeles.
Semi-demonic Noah takes bullet but like the witches and the CIA, he can't be
killed. In the original Robert Towne screenplay, Evelyn Mulwray had escaped with
her daughter/sister, but Polanski altered the ending to emphasize Noah Cross's
unassailable power.

And then there's Rosemary's Baby (witches) and The Pianist (Nazis).

Polanski's point of view cannot be a surprise to anyone who is familiar with the
story of his life.

Source: 2012/01/nugget-watching

Title: Nugget-Watching
Date: January 02, 2012

This year's Nuggets are now at 3-2 and each game has been worth watching.
Because there are no superstars, there's a different plot every game. The ball
moves and doesn't stop as when, in the old day, it came into the hands of
Carmelo, or, even worse, The Answer. Everyone plays defense; everyone runs,
almost everyone gets into the game. Arron Affalo is the key, I think, because
he sets the example of constant effort. As soon as he gets into better shape,
and his three starts to fall, he'll be even better. Lawson is fearless and
swift as an arrow and he's become adept at pocket-picking. Andre Miller is a
player to identify with: he can't run, can't jump, has no range, has no weight-
room/steroid muscles and his mid-range is more of a leaner than a jumper, but
he's smart, resourceful, tricky, and throws a better alley-oop than anyone in
the league. He's the kind of steadyEddie you want to be in there for the last
five minutes. Al Harrington, who was injured and out of shape last year, has
come back strong and is now a classic sixth-man-scorer-off-the-bench-instant-
offense-go-to-guy. The Birdman is as erratic as all get out but he remembers
to swat a couple away every game. Unfortunately, he's mutilated his body to
the point that any person of aesthetic sensibility must fast-forward through
his foul shots. The furriners give the team great balance (and because they're
untattooed, provide a welcome relief for the eyes.) Gallinari, the Italian,
shows great promise, especially when he goes to the rim with two-handed
authority. When Nene, from Brazil, plays up to his ability, he's sensational,
and the more time he gets at PF the happier he'll be, which is why it's crucial
that Timofey Mozgov, the massive Russian center. learns to move his feet and
avoid the fouls. Mozgov will improve as the season progresses. Rudy Fernandez,
the lone Spaniard, plays good man D., but won't make a real contribution until
the outside shots start to fall. And then there's the half-Greek 7-footer, Kosta
Koufos, who plays with great enthusiasm.

Not to mention Kenneth Faried, college rebounding sensation, who's chomping at
the bit, waiting for one of the regulars to go down.

Other reasons to watch the Nugs: no J. R. Smith (a most talented nutcase),
no Kenyon Martin (effective on D but always borderline thuggish, and with
the ugliest no-spin set shot ever); no Carmelo playing matador. Addition by
subtraction.

It's a short long season, ths year. Stay healthy, guys.

Source: 2012/01/quiz

Title: Quiz
Date: January 03, 2012

What is a currawong? a gonolek, a boubou, a tchagra, a brubru?  a sitella,
a minivet? a drongo? a common koel?  Do you think that I've invented these
words?  Heck no. Each one is absolutely genuine and furthermore, far beyond
my powers of invention. And from the same large family come the zitting
cisticola, the bulbul, the cacique, the oropedola, the po'o-uli, and the 'o'u.
Not to mention the rhabdornis, the oxpecker. the rockjumper, the babbler, the
treecreeper, the tapaculo, the cotinga, the manakin, the pitta, the assity, the
yellow rifleman, and the logrunner.

You've probably figured it out by now. They're all passerines.

These great and new-to-me words come from The Bird (New York, 2008), a
whimsical, idiosyncratic survey, by the appropriately--named ornithologist Colin
Tudge. "What's that on that branch over there? Is it a grinning tudge?"

Source: 2012/01/bird-bigbird-and-little-dr-m

Title: Bird, Bigbird, and Little
Date: January 05, 2012

One high noon, many years ago, when I was myself barely fledged, and was an
undergraduate at a "large Eastern university,"  I spotted three well-known
members of the humanities faculty on the hunt for lunch. They were Ephim
Fogel, David Grossvogel, and Don Kleine. An unforgettable assemblage!  Fogel,
Grossvogel and Kleine, I thought -- sounds like the name of a law firm invented
by Tom Pynchon.

I had not reflected on this  -- to me  -- amusing incident until this week,
when I was reading the bird book that I mentioned in a previous post. There I
discovered that the largest known bird was the recently extinct elephant bird,
a distant Madagascan cousin of the ostrich, which stood 10 feet tall and tipped
the scale at 880 pounds. Its eggs were 3 feet in circumference and would have
provided three chicken-size egg omelets for about 55 people. I also learned that
the smallest bird is the bee hummingbird which the calipers says is two inches
long and which weighs .06 of an ounce. Its egg is the size of a pea, which means
than it would take a small flock of hummingbirds many days to make me a decent
breakfast.

Here's a bee hummingbird:

And here's an imaginative reconstruction of the elephant bird, a grossvogel if
there ever was one.

They are not drawn to scale.

Source: 2012/01/cym

Title: Cymbeline at the Barrow Street Theatre
Date: January 19, 2012

I have a sour relationship with "the stage" -- and especially with staged
Shakespeare plays. The theatre and I just don't get along. I think it's because
my expectations are too grand. When I go to the theatre, I want to be ravished,
but more often I'm bored, or worse than bored, embarrassed. I long to laugh, to
cry, to be transported --but instead, I find myself to be entirely too conscious
of the efforts and the contrivances of directors and designers and actors.
Moreover, how am I supposed to achieve ecstasy when the guy in the next seat is
snuffling and fidgeting and making inappropriate sounds at the wrong moments.
And besides, I probably know more about the Shakespeare play that I'm watching
than my comrades in the audience and I have opinions about what the play is
supposed to mean and how it should be performed, and so I become intolerant
and over-critical. And when one is busy criticizing, and one misses one's
inexplicably-deleted favorite lines, one has strayed from the path that leads to
rapture. When I sit still and concentrate on the book, I can achieve moments of
private transcendence. When I'm at the theatre, the theatre gets in my way.

Despite all, I went to see ("hear," Elizabethans would say) Cymbeline at the
Barrrow Street Theatre and, I joyfully confess, had a good time. Cymbeline isn't
performed much and I had never seen it done (except for the pedestrian BBC-TV
version, which doesn't count). I was in doubt whether such a long, complex,
plot-heavy play could be performed. But the young Barrow Street people were
earnest and enthusiastic and pretty and well-rehearsed. Their Cymbeline was
swiftly-paced and offered some delightful moments. I was genuinely impressed.

But I was not satisfied. I was not transported.

Was it a problem with the delivery, or was it the fault of the listeners, that
when Imogen learns that her husband/lover Posthumus Leonatus is at Milford
Haven, and cries out, "O for a horse with wings," the audience laughed. Oh,
please, audience, don't laugh, and please, actors, don't play it for laughs.
Imogen's imaginative expression is designed to capture her frustrated yearning
for the mate from whom she has been forcibly separated and to express all the
sexual longing of vibrant youth. She's head over heels in love and she's not
making a joke of it.  A "horse with wings" is not a piece of grotesquerie, as
the audience and the actors seemed to assume -- it's simply the fastest means of
transport that anyone could imagine until 200 years after Cymbeline was written,
when engineers started to play with the idea of a steam-driven engine. I so much
wanted  last night's Imogen to express, with that line, the kind of emotion
that brings me to tears in my study. But alas.

And similarly, when Imogen and Posthumus are reconciled at last, and they
embrace (an act that the  the audience has been anticipating for hours),
Posthumus is given the most poetically resonant line in the play. "Hang there,"
he says, "like fruit, my soul,/ Til the tree die." The line, compact of images,
is just outside our easy comprehension, but we know at a minimum that trees take
a very long time to die and that Posthumus and Imogen are now linked into one
soul and that Imogen is like "fruit" in the sense of sweetness and juiciness and
fertility -- indeed the ramifying plot has found its way to fruition. And so has
the chain of imagery that began in the first moments of the play, when Imogen
told us that her father, "like the tyrannous breathing of the north/ Shakes
all our buds from growing." It took five acts, but those blighted buds finally
ripened. I'm sorry to say that in the Barrow Street version, this touchstone
of poetry was not emphasized but swallowed; if you weren't waiting for the
line, you would have missed it entirely. Another moment of potential ecstasy
surrendered.

But in all honesty, I must admit that if the players had paused to underline
the sentence, I would probably be complaining that they treated the poetry too
"poetically" and too portentously. Shakespeare is hard to play, and I'm hard to
please.

But I'm not principally concerned that the Barrow boys and girls misread or
neglected a line here or there. I'm concerned about their big compromise.

While enjoying the first four acts, I could not help but wonder how six
performers on a rudimentary stage were going to deal with the theophany in the
fifth act, when Jupiter himself descends from above on the back of an eagle
and tells the audience not to worry, that everything is going to work out just
fine. The scene is the most important in the play and it's what distinguishes
Cymbeline from Shakespeare's earlier and easier and more-easily-performed
comedies. But the theophany is hard, and hard to explain, and also, I'm sure,
expensive. In my view, Barrow Street should have pulled the goalie and thrown a
hail Mary downfield; lay it all out there. But instead, they took an intentional
pass. O my gosh! they took a razor to the entire business. No Jupiter, no
eagle, no wondrous, mystical, symbolic appearance of Posthumus's lost family,
no soothsayer, no riddle, and therefore, I'm sorry to say, no enchantment and
no miracle. No miracle, no Cymbeline, at least no Cymbeline as it is known and
loved by such as I.

Here's what I think happens in Cymbeline. For four and a half acts, human
beings make a mess of things. The king is blinded by uxoriousness, the queen
is a machiavellia, Posthumus is vain, Cloten is simply stupid. The characters
tie themselves into plot knots and everyone is deceived in part or in whole
(although Shakespeare witholds nothing from the audience). Cymbeline thinks his
sons are lost, Posthumus thinks Imogen is dead, Lucius Brutus thinks Imogen is
a boy, Imogen thinks that Posthumus has been beheaded, and so on. Everyone is
wrong; no one knows the whole truth.

And then comes the miracle. Jupiter descends, and 20, or 21, or 22 (depending on
who's counting) mistakings are unravelled in five amazing, astounding minutes.
Cymbeline is a tragedy for four and half acts and a comedy at the end. And
should be played so. Take away Jupiter and take away the miracle. A play about
human folly and divine intervention becomes nothing more than Twelfth Night or
As You Like It. which is not a bad thing to be, but not what Shakespeare was
doing in 1610. It's like scissoring Marina's magical virginity out of Pericles,
or Hermione's rebirth out of The Winter's Tale, or Prospero's magic out of The
Tempest. It's not right. It undervalues a most thrilling, most remarkable piece
of writing. Even those of us who don't believe in miracles want to believe in
Shakespeare's miracles.

But -- the Barrow Street guys and gals inspired me to re-read Cymbeline, and,
all alone, just me and my Kindle, I once again indulged my ecstasy. So thank
you.

Source: 2012/01/more-absolutely-real-captured-in-the-wild-dialog

Title: More Absolutely Real Captured-in-the-Wild Dialog
Date: January 20, 2012

Dr. M. (at the spacious Metropolitan Museum of Art in NYC, to a guard);  "Can
you tell me how to get to the new American Wing."

Guard:  "You go straight ahead, through the main courtyard, through two more
doors, when you hit Egypt, you take a left."

Source: 2012/02/seed-news

Title: Winter Garden News
Date: February 04, 2012

Next summer's vegetable seeds have arrived in the mail. Hard choices; the
gardening will is infinite and the execution confined; which is to say that
there just isn't enough room to grow all the varieties we'd want. But in
addition to the old reliables, we try to make room for some exotics and
antiques. This year:   two kinds of heirloom tomatoes. Rose (an Amish
favorite), and Black Giant. Pasillo Bajio (an intense black hot pepper, for
the pepper- lovers in the family). Ma-Zu Purple Chinese Eggplant, supposedly
a favorite of Taiwanese gardeners. Black Beauty Zucchini. Suyo Long Cucumbers
("very mild and sweet"). Romanesco Italia Broccoli ("spiralling apple-green
heads"). Ching Chong Bok Choy, an early, cold-weather kind. Russian Red (some
call it Ragged Jack) kale. Two kinds of beets: Albino, a Dutch variety, and
Crapaudine, unfortunately named, but supposedly the oldest beet still in
cultivation. And also carrots, so easy to grow in our rich sandy soil, both a
new variety (Cosmic Purple) and an old one (Jaune Obtuse du Doubs, a French
carrot which dates to 1894).

It's going to be a good summer. We're in the midst of a January snowstorm right
now, but I can imagine myself tilling in a load of manure, raking up, and
setting out the stakes and twine. It's going to be a good summer.

Source: 2012/02/uncle-max

Title: My Mysterious Uncle Max
Date: February 11, 2012

Who knows what crimes or dark deeds my black-sheep Uncle Max had committed that
made made him such a pariah in our o-so-respectable family, but they must have
been something awful. Although he was my father's older brother, his name was
never mentioned except with embarrassment or distaste.

Inasmuch as I'm now the "patriarch," it's time to get the family stuff on the
record for the benefit of the kids, the grandkids, and the extended mishpucha.
So here's all I know about my mysterious uncle. Spoiler alert: it doesn't add up
to villainy.

Max was the oldest of the four (Sol, Mollie, and Mannie succeeded him). He would
have been born about 1895, just about the time the family escaped the Ukraine
for the Lower East Side. He studied at Albany State Teachers College for a
while, but I don't think he earned a degree. He lived in Paris during the 1920s
and perhaps 1930s. He was invited to but did not attend my parents' wedding. He
was divorced (a source of immeasurable shame in those years). My mother said,
"Uncle Max is very selfish." There was something shady about the way he made his
living, but I don't know the details, except that, for a while, he ghost-wrote
doctoral dissertations. He lived with a woman to whom he wasn't married. He died
of a heart attack during the 1950s.

I met him three times. Once, he came to a family gathering, My father wouldn't
speak to him. Another time he paid a weekday afternoon call to our East 9 Street
home. I found him in the kitchen talking with my mother: "This is your Uncle
Max." And then, when I was thirteen, he called and asked if he could take me to
the finals of the NCAA basketball tournament at Madison Square Garden. After
a lot of discussion and negotiation, I was allowed to meet him at the arena.
Max was a small man, hard of hearing, and very ordinary.  He tried hard to be
congenial. He told me that he had taken "Robert" as a middle name. Frankly, he
seemed no more menacing or odd than any other of my uncle-ry or than other men
of his generation. What else do I remember of that evening?  During the game,
an errant pass hit off a player's head and bounced into the basket.

I never saw Max again.

And yet my father once confessed to me that he told Max that "if he ever did
that again, I'd kill him." My father, mildest of men, threatened someone with
violent death?  Because he did what?  Dad wouldn't say.

Here's a spooky story, and I'm going to tell it exactly the way it happened, no
embroidery or exaggeration. On the night of my father's funeral, my brothers
and I and our wives gathered around the formica kitchen table in the old house.
Uncle Max's name came up. I said, "I know the name of the woman who he lived
with." "What is it?"  "It's Sarah Clyne, spelled with a C and a Y." There was
a Manhattan telephone book (five inches thick and at least two thousand pages).
I picked up the book and it fell open. I put my finger on a name. The name was
Sarah Clyne. "I said, did you see what happened?  I just opened the book at
random and my finger fell on the name Sarah Clyne, Max's lady. It seems like a
sign that I should call her."

But I didn't.

Here's the only picture of Max of which I have knowledge. He's with "little
grandma." The picture is taken in front of 334 Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.

Source: 2012/02/mannahatta

Title: Mannahatta
Date: February 13, 2012

Eric Sanderson's Mannahatta (New York: Abrams, 2009) reconstructs Manhattan as
it would have appeared to Henry Hudson when he sailed the Half-Moon into the
harbor in 1609. The glory of the book lies in its illustrations.  Here's a
conjectural reconstruction of old Manhattan island:

And here's a clever juxtaposition of ancient and modern:

In 1609, the island of Manhattan was home to between 400 and 1000 Lenape
Indians. They lived on fish, shellfish (leaving behind extensive middens), deer
and other wildlife, on fruits and berries. They practiced some small-scale
farming of corn, squash, and beans. Sanderson estimates that the Lenape had
lived on Manhattan for 10,000 years, or 400 generations.

Why so few people? The land was fertile, the seas abundant, the weather
not particularly harsh. While the Lenape sat still in Manhattan, advanced
civilizations were created by the Mayans, the Aztecs and the Incas. Along the
banks of the Mississippi, the city of Cahokia rose and fell. And yet the Lenape
never domesticated a single animal beside the dog and left behind no pottery,
weaving, or metals. They remained stuck in the paleolithic. Why, I wonder.
Perhaps things were too good.

On the other hand, the Lenape lived in harmony with the island for a very
long time. What are the odds that our present civilization, which has totally
transformed Manhattan in 400 short years, or just 16 generations, will last one
tenth as long?

February 24:  Still curious about the want of population growth or
technological development among the Lenape, I read C. A. Weslager's The Delaware
Indians, A History (1972) (Lenapes were called by their Anglo name, Delaware,
for many years). Wenslager does not suggest that the Lenape ever achieved
larger populations. Nor does he point to any archeological evidence of cultural
achievement. Still, I'm mildly suspicious that there may be more to the story. 
We know that Verrazzano contacted the Lenapes 90 years before Hudson sailed into
the harbor, and no one knows what diseases he might have introduced.

Source: 2012/02/lin

Title: Why We Love Sports
Date: February 14, 2012

I have to admit that I'm thoroughly taken with the Jeremy Lin story. It's so
wonderfully, ridiculously improbable. Asian-American guy, Harvard!! economics
grad, plays OK with the Erie Bayhawks and the Reno Bighorns but is released by
two not-so-strong NBA teams. A last-resort number 4 point guard on the Knicks,
sleeping on a couch in his brother's apartment, he comes off the bench to lead
the worst team in the league to five straight wins, drops 38 on Kobe and the
Lakers, etc. etc. Tyson Chandler, grumpy all season long, is now smiling. It's
not just Frank Merriwell; it's everyone's secret dream. And a morality play to
boot-- keep trying, persevere, trust your own abilities, take advantage of the
opportunities. An inspiration and a message in the same package.

It can't last. JLin can't keep on averaging 27/8. The Knicks will eventually
lose (though let's hope not tonight against shakey Toronto). One of those top
point-guard defenders, such as Avery Bradley, is going to eat him alive one of
these days. But he's the real deal and if he stays healthy, remains coachable,
works on his three and on his left hand, he could have a great, historic career.

Meanwhile, it's absolutely fascinating. Ama're returns tonight; that should be
easy. The test will come when Carmelo's groin heals. Can Lin and Anthony work
and play well together? I'll be watching.

And congratulations to Tommie Amaker, Lin's Harvard coach; he's got to be one
heck of a proud guy.

Another person who's mighty happy: David Stern, who's been struggling to get a
toehold for the NBA in the world's largest untapped market.

Source: 2012/02/repubs

Title: Idiot or Hypocrite? Your Choice.
Date: February 14, 2012

Today it's Santorum, who has staked out positions to the right of the Pope,
where there isn't all that much room. Yesterday it was Gingrich. Before that,
in their turn, Perry, Cain, Bachmann.  Each month brings a new anti-Romney and
just as inevitably, his/her decline.

The extremists who control the Republican party want a candidate who is
strictly, or extremely, or "severely" conservative and who can still appear sane
enough to be elected.

But it can't be done.  It's a hunt that's doomed to come up empty.

The "base," whether fundamentalist or libertarian or drown-the-government-in-
the-bathtub, has established a series of tests which make it impossible for
their candidate to be both sane and sincere. There can be no such animal.

The candidate must reject evolution and profess to believe in some variety of
creationism.

He must believe, or profess to believe, that global warming is a hoax --
a conspiracy theory devised by geologists and meteorologists and climate
historians. The candidate must be profoundly anti-science and anti-rational.

He must believe in some variety of "trickle-down economics," even though several
rounds of tax cuts have benefited the rich at the expense of everyone else. (It
hasn't been trickle down, it's been gush up.) He must believe that any attempt
to remedy the situation is "class warfare." And he must also believe that it's
no problem that the richer are getting out-of-control richer and the poor are
becoming poorer and more numerous.

He must believe that the mortgage crisis and the recession was caused by quasi-
government entities like Fannie and Freddie and not by the speculations and
peculations of de-regulated banks and brokers.

He must believe that the solution to the problem of illegal immigration is to
build a larger, taller wall, even though for every wall there's a ladder and
that there's not a leaf of lettuce that would be harvested or a roof patched in
all of America without undocumented labor.

He must believe that gay people are gay by choice and aren't entitled to equal
status under the law. How do they know? The bible tells them so.

They must profess to believe that the invasion of Iraq, the worst foreign policy
blunder in our history, was a good idea.

And they must believe that Barack Obama fronts a socialist-secular conspiracy,
other members of which are the press, the universities, and the "elite," who
want more than anything else to take away their guns.

Does this sorry bunch of Republican candidates believe all this nonsense, or do
they pander to the base? Are they idiots or are they liars?  Fools or knaves?
We report, you decide.

Source: 2012/02/good-old-days

Title: Good Old Days
Date: February 15, 2012

As a boy, I naturally assumed that Riis Park was named for Harold (Peewee).
Later, I learned that Jacob Riis was a well-known reformer whose 1890 book, How
the Other Half Lives, a chronicle of life in New York's slums, shocked  Gilded
Age complacency. Nowadays, Riis is known more for his pioneering photography
than for his writing.  Here are three of his images:

The young lady on the left is known to history simply as "Katie." When Riis
asked her what she did, she replied, "I scrubs." She was a laundress. She was
nine years old.

I've now read a adulatory life of Jacob Riis by Tom Buk-Swienty. I learned that
one of the worst New York slums, Mulberry Bend, had a population density of
2,047 per acre. Fifty per cent of Mulberry Bend's children died before their
fifth birthday. Every year, about 100 Manhattan infants were found dead in the
streets. In addition, another 500 children were abandoned by their parents. I
also learned that in 1883, when Cornelius Vanderbilt moved into his new chateau
on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 52nd Street, he threw a housewarming ball for
1200 guests. "$155,730 was spent on costumes alone."

Source: 2012/02/remembering

Title: Remembering
Date: February 23, 2012

Remembering, in a melancholy mood early this winter morning, some of the friends
and relations who left the room far too early: Arthur Oberg, Bernice Kliman, Bob
Nero, Bob Pois, Curtis Barnes, David Gaillard, David Novarr, Ed Nolan, Eleanor
Gottlieb, Eugene Pearlman, Gary Stahl, George Chodorow, Herb Eldridge, Honi
Haber, Howard Smokler, Ila Warner, Jane Comstock, Jonathon "Skip" Chase, Myrna
Mikelberg Brown, Nancy Hill, Phyllis Eva Goss Murray, Peter Dutch, Peter Tasch,
Renate Wood, Rob McIntosh, Rubin Rabinovitz, Sarah Obermeier, Shirley Johnston,
Stephen Evans, Virgil Grillo. And now Lee Coffee.

Source: 2012/02/on-sneezing-

Title: De Sternuente, or, Of Sneezing
Date: February 24, 2012

I enjoy fighting off a sneeze. It takes practice and concentration. When the
sneeze urge emerges, without warning, the battle is joined. On the side of
the sneeze -- dust or some other foreign particles passing through the nasal
hairs, reaching  the nasal mucosa, releasing a flood of histamines which
irritate the nerve cells and signal the brain to stimulate the trigeminal
network and activate the pharyngeal and tracheal muscles, producing a noisy,
100-mile-an- hour blast of microbes and snot. On the side of restraint --
nothing but enormous personal discipline and the desire not to surrender to
animal nature. There are some, who are less committed to mind-over-body, who
employ the fingertips to pinch the end of the nose, or, alternatively, who press
a knuckle against the philtrum, the infranasal depression which Shakespeare,
curiously, called "the valley" -- but frankly, when it comes to resisting
sternutation, digital success is only half a loaf. It's far more rewarding to
think one's way to a rare victory in the lifelong sneezomachia. Not to sneeze is
a triumph of the will.

Which is not to assert that a good sneeze gives no pleasure, if a person would
give oneself over to it. It's simply that the sneeze, especially one of the
window-rattling variety, is entirely anarchic and inartistic, which might be
why there is so slight a sneeze literature. Although hard to believe, it's a
fact that Puck is the only character in all of Shakespeare's plays who deigns
to mention the sneeze, but he weakens its disruptive force by employing the
archaism "neeze." The best-known literary sneeze (or, at least, the only one
that now comes to mind) occurs in Pope's Rape of the Lock, when Belinda,
ravished by Sir Plume's "glittering forfex," throws snuff in the baron's nose.
Immediately "with starting tears each eye o'erflows,/ And the high dome re-
echoes to his nose."

Snuff artificially stimulates sneezing, which may or may not be be why Michael,
Tsar of all the Russians, proposed amputating the noses of snuffers. Michael's
contemporary, Pope Urban VIII, merely threatened excommunication. Some say that
the practice of saying "God bless you" to sneezers originated with Pope Gregory
the Great, and has to do with the superstition that the soul leaves the sneezing
body, perhaps nasally.

Why is it that no one ever says "God bless you" to farters, who are as much in
need of divine intervention as sneezers. Society demands that farting, though
shameful (and belching, though comic), should be controlled; sneezing is, except
for the most determined among us, uncontrollable.

Source: 2012/02/amnesia-on-film-spellbound

Title: Amnesia on Film: Spellbound (1945)
Date: February 25, 2012

In Alfred Hitchcock's Spellbound (1945), man suffers traumatic shock, man loses
memory, man relives experience and regains memory. It's garden-variety Hollywood
amnesia, hortus hollywoodiensis. The amnesia is neither credible nor possible,
but it doesn't matter, because it's the world of film, where the most malleable
of mental afflictions takes whatever form is convenient for the writer or
director or the presiding mogul.

John Ballantine, played by handsome young Gregory Peck is the amnesiac and the
questions the movie poses are, when will he recover his memory, how much help
he will require from luscious psychoanalyst Ingrid Bergman, and how many times
he can he whine "I can't remember" and still get the girl. Bergman has a more
complex problem: how to be a smart and also a real woman (always a problem in
Hitchcock's wonderful world of misogyny). She makes use of that old dodge, a
pair of glasses; when they're off, she's feminine, but when she dons them,
she's intelligent. When did Hollywood decided that eyeglasses were a symbol for
brains?

But if she has brains, why is she attracted to a man who doesn't know who he is
but is convinced that he might be a murderer. It's as though the film itself
doesn't take amnesia seriously and treats it as a plot-device rather than the
distressing disorder that it would be to an actual sufferer.

It's a silly but engaging movie, perhaps too much of an advertisement for
psychoanalysis -- which it endorses without a shred of skepticism. I suspect
that the psychoanalytic themes, which haven't fared at all well these seventy
years, will eventually doom the movie to oblivion.

There are some tense echt-Hitchcock moments when it appears that the amnesiac
might be dangerous, but Peck and Bergman are just too pretty to be killer and
victim.

Source: 2012/02/aspirin-legs

Title: Fun with Aspirin
Date: February 28, 2012

I like to think that I have a sense of humor, but I just don't get this one-
liner by Rick Santorum's Daddy Warbucks, Foster Friess. "And this contraceptive
thing, my gosh, it's so--it's such--inexpensive, you know, back in my days, they
used Bayer Aspirin for contraception. The gals put it between their knees and it
wasn't that costly." So what's funny here? If the "gals" keep an aspirin between
their knees, they can't have sex and therefore can't get pregnant? Is that it?
Is that The Joke?

First of all, let's all chip in to send FF a copy of the Kama Sutra (or even
an elementary how to do it manual), where he can find some exotic and some
extremely obvious positions in which women can get pregnant and still keep their
knees together.

But why aspirin? Why Bayer aspirin? What do I not understand? Why an aspirin
between the knees rather than, say, a bible?  Or a book by Newt Gingrich? Or a
copy of the The Joy of Sex.

Foster Friess says all this aspirin fun took place "back in my day." I would
like to say that FF is a year younger than I, and that I a) never heard the joke
(if it's a joke) back then, and b) never heard tell of a single woman who used
knee-aspirin as a contraceptive.

I did some internet research on the aspirin-contraceptive connection and
discovered that there's a story going around in high schools that taking three
aspirin and drinking a Coke before intercourse will prevent conception. Advice
to young people: do not bank on it.

Will the Santorum administration, immediately upon taking office in 2013, ban
aspirin?

Source: 2012/03/ulysses

Title: Youth and Age -- Tennyson's Ulysses
Date: March 09, 2012

It wasn't until I reached college that discovered poetry. My comic-book
super- hero and baseball-infused brain was until then, poetry-wise, an almost
complete tabula rasa. I say "almost" because at eight or nine eight years
old I had memorized two great classics of American literature: "Casey at the
Bat" and also the poem by Grantland Rice about Tinkers, Evers, and Chance. In
additon, I knew the ubiquitous stercoraceous distich the first line of which
is "Here I sit, broken-hearted" and a related gnomic verse that begins, "No
matter how much you wiggle and dance." Then in 1956 I left Flatbush for
higher education and took a course in English Literature. The rest, as they
say, is history. It was sonnets and love poems of any kind, and rich luscious
liquid poems by Marlowe and Keats and Hopkins that entranced me. The more
intellectual poems were too taxing for my immature head. Lycidas, which
I now know to be the best poem in the language, was utterly impenetrable
for at least a decade, although I admit that I immediately responded to its
music: "With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves."

One of my teachers sagely observed that certain poets and certain poems were
for youth, some for maturity, and some for old age. "You may no longer like
then what you like now." Which has come to pass. And as an example of poetry
for the latter years, he adduced Tennyson's "Ulysses." "This poem may not mean
much to you now, but it will some day, if you live long enough." I remember
that I was much taken with the touchstone line "Far on the ringing plains of
windy Troy" but I thought that "Ulysses" was far too much about a really old
guy trying to cheer himself up and I did not see it holding a place in any
future I could envision.

Well, folks, I've now arrived at the so-called golden years, or, more properly,
the endgame, or extra innings (which in some sports is called sudden death) and
guess what? "Ulysses" has returned, front and center, exactly as was predicted
50+ years ago. It's right on target.

Tennyson's Ulysses is Homer's adventurer a generation older, kinging it in
Ithaca, but bored, unchallenged, and unstimulated. "It little profits that an
idle king,/ By this still hearth, among these barren crags,/ Matched with an
aged wife, I mete and dole/ Unequal laws unto a savage race,/ That hoard and
sleep, and feed,/ And know not me."

To put it vulgarly, Ulysses plans to bust out of the old folks home. He's
been a warrior, a hero, and a roving explorer. He "cannot rest from
travel." He needs to search "beyond the utmost bound of human
thought." He leaves Penelope, and he leaves the government of Ithaca to his
bureaucratically-minded  son Telemachus. The last lines of the poem, the
leave-taking, are most stirring:

Come, my friends

"Tis not too late to seek a newer world.

Push off, and sitting well in order smite

The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths

Of all the western stars, until I die.

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Though much is taken, much abides,

And though we are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are;

One equal temper of heroic hearts

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will

To strive to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Yes, I know -- the diction is a little antiquated and artificial, the urge to
get away a trifle too vehement. But nevertheless I'm moved by the resilience,
the perserverance. Though tear-inducing, the poem is anything but lachrymose.
And it's accepting: "that which we are, we are."

It's lately become the fashion to interpret "Ulysses" as a poem about
capitalism and imperialism. In this reading, Ulysses is just another white male,
off to conquer and colonialize The Alien Other. Or to see it as a poem about
male priviliege: he's a bad husband, abandoning the family. Or to conceive
the poem as a structure of ironies, in which Ulysses doesn't realize that he
undermines his own suppositions. There's a tad of truth in these arguments, as
there always is, because Tennyson was caught up in a Victorian striving that he
didn't fully or consciously assimilate. But frankly, I feel sorry for readers
who can't hear the verve and excitement in Ulysses's expansive view of things.

Moreover, it turns out that Tennyson was absolutely correct to proclaim
that there is a time in life when "not to yield" is an act of daily heroism.

Source: 2012/03/libraries-in-my-life

Title: Libraries in My Life
Date: March 16, 2012

I can't remember a time when I wasn't at home in a library. Although very much
a schoolyard urchin, passionate about baseball, trading cards and punchball (or
any kind of game played with a spaldeen), I rarely failed my weekly trip to the
storefront Avenue J branch of the BPL, where there were cases upon half-height
cases of juvenile and later "young adult" books. I read like a hungry larva,
without direction or discrimination. A few years later, when I reached Erasmus
Hall, my after-school employment was to shelve books at 75 cents an hour at
the BPL branch at McDonald Avenue (accumulating the $900 which paid my full
first- year tuition at Cornell). I not only mastered the Dewey Decimal System
but also absorbed everything that the library had to offer in the 612.6 area
of knowledge. At college, I was dazzled by McGraw, my first real library. In
my senior year, I was granted a stack pass, and therefore was able to waste
many hours not only in aimless browsing, but also lolling in long by-passed and
superseded libraries-within-the-library. I doubt that those most pleasant out-
of-the-way nineteenth-century nooks and corners survived modernization, more's
the pity. Later, in Cambridge, it was first Widener (where genuine incunabula
sat unprotected on the shelves), then Houghton, my first experience with rare
books, which, I discovered, are to be savored not only with the eyes, but with
the fingertips and the nose. Thence to Colorado, where, without the resources
of a major library, I dutifully read STC books on microfilm -- which made me
queasy, or on microfiche -- which produced genuine nausea. In 1976-77, I spent
one day a week at the British Library, studying sometimes in the old circular
reading room, where on downpour days buckets were distributed around the room
to deal with the leaks, and at other times in the North Library, where I read
big hunks of the perpetually exciting Thomason Tracts. In the early 80s, I
was able to enjoy the Huntington in San Marino, where the highlight of the
day was lunchtime among the exotic cacti and succulents. Later, at the Folger
Shakespeare Library in Washington, I found not only an unequalled trove of books
and mss., but also camaraderie with similarly-obsessed specialists. There was
always someone who could answer the obscurest of questions, and there were even
a few times when I was able to return the favor. At a cafeteria lunch, once, I
asked (faux-naively) "what do we do with the orts?" and everyone at the table
knew exactly what I meant -- orts the word that Shakespeare used in Troilus and
Cressida to refer to the uneaten portions of a meal.

Now I've come full circle and the Boulder Public is my three-times-a-week
destination. Not great holdings, but through the miracle of an efficient
interlibrary loan system, and supplemented by googlebooks and other electronic
resources, I can find enough to satisfy my unsteady, dilettante brain.

Source: 2012/03/downton-abbey

Title: Seventeen Hours of Downton Abbey
Date: March 18, 2012

I've now sometimes zoomed but sometimes plodded through seventeen hours of
Downton Abbey. The series is lovely to look at but also at various times
lugubrious, false, and shamelessly gimmicky -- but apparently I'm easily
seduced. Let me confess: I fell for it, mostly, but always against my better
judgment. Let's face it, the primitive parts of my brain simply overwhelmed
my higher critical faculties. I laughed and cried, even when I knew that I was
being cheated and manipulated.

My favorite parts: Mr. Pamuk and his Nelson Rockefeller departure ("he came,
and went)," which took me totally by surprise, as did Anna's and Lady Grantham's
resourceful disposal of the corpse. Lady Sybil as a nurse, in part because
she was doing useful work for the first time in her pampered life, and in
part because she looked so fetching in the uniform. My favorite performers --
Maggie Smith, reprising her role in Gosford Park (a much superior great house
fiction), and Mr Carson's eyebrows, perpetually raised in shock at modern
shenanigans.

The series is pure, undiluted soap. It is also, as they used to say
in Variety, a "costumer." Query -- would I have spent seventeen hours
watching a television program set in a mansion in Dubuque, Iowa, in 2012 in
which a soldier returns paralyzed from the wars and miraculously regains his
mobility, where terrible culinary disasters occur because the cook almost goes
blind, where granny shows her goodwill by losing a flower show, in which the
family is traumatized when a daughter runs off with the chauffeur, or where a
presumably innocent servant is sentenced to death for the murder of his wayward
wife. I don't think so. I would have said, "cornball soap opera" and clicked
back to the NBA. Or to the advertisements for zirconite jewelry. And yet I went
on. And on. And continued on even after Downton Abbey not only jumped the shark
but vaulted the great white whale, Moby Dick himself, when it introduced into
the plot a bout of supposed amnesia. Amnesia! Is there anything soapier?

Or perhaps my reluctant fascination proves that the traditional formulas
retain their power. Here's a formula of comedy: "artificial difficulties
overcome." In Downton Abbey, Lady Mary and Matthew are destined for one
another, and every viewer knows it, even as steaming piles of artificial
difficulties are strewn and heaped in their path. Shakespeare could slice
through the impediments in two hours traffic on the stage, but here it's
seventeen anguished hours until heir and heiress finally figure it out. And
here's another formula of comedy: always bring it to conclusion with a feast
and a dance. They did, and, sucker that I am, I was elated. Even though I saw
the scam coming a mile down the o-so- picturesque road

Source: 2012/03/foody

Title: Wrapped in Caul Fat?  Don't Tell Me!
Date: March 19, 2012

Our peaceful town, not long ago provincial and off-the-track, has now become
molto trendy. Only a generation ago, we were bland, undistinguished, white-
bread; and now we're America's happiest city, America's slimmest city, America's
healthiest city, and, just recently, America's foodiest city.

I'm not the slimmest, nor the happiest, nor the healthiest, so It's embarrassing
for me to live where I fall so far below the standard. When I'm melancholy, I
feel as though I'm a traitor to the common good. And I confess that never even
heard the word "foody" until I read that we were now "foodiest."

I don't usually frequent the expensive new restaurants -- they're too exotic
for my mac-and-cheese palate. But I was taken to one of our fanciest new places
recently and listened in at a conversation between patrons and waiter at the
next table. I transcribe it exactly as it occurred. Honest to Pete.

Patron A:  "I think I'll start with the julienned watermelon radish. Is that
served with tzitziki?"-

Waiter:  "Just a dollop."

Patron B:  "I'll have the hedgehog mushrooms with panko crumbs. Are your
bulgogi sliders marinated or grilled?"

Waiter:  "Marinated, then lightly grilled. Then dusted with sudachi zest."

Patron: A:  "I think I'll also have the clear gel of agar and turnip puree with
chestnut crumbs. Are your chestnut crumbs domestic or foreign?"

Waiter:  "I believe they're Italian."

Patron B:  "I see that you have coconut tofu cream. Do you serve that
separately, or with the grapefruit curd marscapone?"

Waiter:  "I believe that the chef likes to combine it with the date marmalade
and harissa."

Patron A:  "For a main dish, I'll have the lamb en crepinette. To Patron B
(aside whispering):  "Roasted in caul fat."

Patron B (aside, annoyed):  "I know that. (To the waiter):  I think I'll go
with the squid ink and hot sesame oil soup."

Waiter:  "Excellent choice, madam."

Patron B:  "And then the braised rabbit with lobster knuckles and pil-pil dill.
Is your pil-pil wild or domestic?'

Waiter:  "Wild, certainly."

Patron B:  "And along with that, I'd like a side of pickled ramps and fermented
garlic, with a poached duck egg."

Patron A: "Waiter, may I change my mind. I think I'd prefer the singed octopus
in almond puree. Or maybe the snails with liquified parsley, or just something
simple, like sea urchin served over discs of scallop with a hamachi and farro
salad."

Patron B: "I think I'll change my order as well. I think I'll go with the
espelettes in pistachio yogurt sauce. Or the veal sweetbreads with sheepmilk
dumplings. Or the okroshka with quail eggs."

The conversation went on like this for ever and ever, and I began to feel myself
out of place, so I left and went up to Marie's in North Boulder and ordered
a hamburger en bun with raw oignon and an old favorite of mine, pomme frites
francaises avec sauce de tomate. It was mighty satisfying.

Source: 2012/03/look-at-me

Title: "Look at Me."
Date: March 28, 2012

On our pleasant, prosperous downtown mall, we have entertainers and buskers
of many stripes --everyone  from fire-eaters, magicians, and left-behind 50s
folkie guitarists to Zip Code Man. Some are excellent (the occasional string
quartet or visiting bluegrass band) and some are horrible (the bam-bam-bam
drummers and the pathetic didgedoorists.

We also have a contortionist, whom I personally find difficult to watch.

To me, the contortionist is not so much an entertainer as he is an allegory of
the human condition. He's what they used to call in earlier centuries an emblem.

While other performers try to attract an audience by subtlety and guile, our
contortionist merely shouts, "Look at me. Everybody, look at me" -- which I
take as a metaphor or icon or emblem. When he calls out, "Look at me," he's
simply doing what the rest of us want to do but don't have the courage to do:
call attention to ourselves, ask for praise. We're all saying, "Look at me,"
but, becaused we're civilized and mannerly beings, we strive to do so by being
indirect or ironic or clever.  Not the contortionist. He's honest about himself
and about the true, elemental state of mankind. He shouts, "Look at me" -- and
then he ties himself into knots.

Source: 2012/03/why-are-dog-owners-such-scofflaws

Title: Why are Dog Owners Such Scofflaws?
Date: March 30, 2012

Why are dog owners such horrid scofflaws?  According to our local police-lady,
there are fifty-three signs distributed around the downtown mall that either
say, in clear language, No Pets, or else picture a dog bisected with a diagonal
line. But it's impossible to take a walk without encountering two or three or
half a dozen people obliviously or defiantly parading Rover or Spot.

I think it's reasonable to assume that the owners can read, or if "No Pets" is
too difficult to construe, that they could interpret the icons. It's possible
that they're just unobservant, and don't notice the signs, but I suspect not.
The signs are hard to miss.

I suspect that the dog people just assume that they're above the law. They love
their pooch, love its barking, love its scat, love the way it playfully lunges
at small children, and they can't imagine that anyone in the world would take
exception to their prerogative.

It's the same on the mountain trails. Just because the sign says, All Dogs Must
Be On Leash, doesn't mean that the law applies to Me.

I once said to a dog owner who was walking his big dogs off-leash, "You know
that you're breaking the law." He barked at me: "Get a life." Another time a
bulldog attacked me on the street, and I was warding him off with my briefcase
when the owner called him back. I said, "Dogs are supposed to be on leash." He
said, "What are you, the dog warden?" A friend was knocked off her bicycle by
a large, aggressive dog. The owner, who should have knelt on ground glass in
apology, said only, "He doesn't like bicycles."

And many other such stories, but you get my point.

Source: 2012/04/book-report-the-art-of-fielding

Title: Book Report:  Chad Harbach's The Art of Fielding
Date: April 05, 2012

I'm sure that I once before read a book called The Art of Fielding, perhaps
in the 1960s, but it wasn't a baseball novel; it was a old-fashioned critical
monograph about Henry Fielding, the author of Shamela, Joseph Andrews, Tom
Jones, Amelia, and Jonathan Wild. (For what it's worth, Chad Harbach, who
contributed this year's The Art of Fielding, though a skillful plotter, doesn't
have the range or the release or the depth to play in Henry F's league.)

I generally stay away from big-selling first novels. I prefer to let them
marinate for a decade or two, check out their staying power, before I make an
eight-hour commitment (not counting naps) to a 400-pager. It's an economy of my
own: there are too many great old things that I haven't gotten around to yet.
But I must say that Harbach's Fielding, highly recommended by friends, kept me
engaged right down to the last sentence. Plot, plot, plot, is the formula, and
there were enough surprises and twists in the story to keep even a skeptic like
myself turning pages enthusiastically. It's a hybrid novel, a genre-crosser,
with baseball books and academic novels (and a touch of Death in Venice) in its
bloodline.

What's best, beside the surprises in the plotting? The characters, most of
whom defy or challenge stereotypes, what a blessing. What's worst? The style:
not a memorable sentence or turn of phrase in the entire bland (ninth-grade
vocabulary, straight-ahead syntax) book. Most disappointing: the killing off
of an important character just when his situation becomes interesting and
troubling. Harbach, in my opinion, punts just  when he should have pulled the
goalie and swung for the fences.

Source: 2012/04/amnesia-on-film-somewhere-in-the-night-1946

Title: Amnesia on Film: Somewhere in the Night (1946)
Date: April 06, 2012

Somewhere in the Night is an early Joseph Mankiewicz film noir with amnesia at
its center. George Taylor, an injured ex-Marine played monochromatically by John
Hodiak, returns from the South Pacific not knowing who he is are what he was
--  except that he has a clue that he was on the shady side of the law. There's
an involuted, convoluted and confusing plot that pushes all the noirish buttons:
a chanteuse with a heart of gold and also a dame who's nothing but trouble, a
missing briefcase stuffed with 2 million bucks, a funny farm where a witness
to murder is imprisoned, a cynical police lieutenant, and even a polysyllabic
European gangster who derives from both Sidney Greenstreet and Peter Lorre.
Everything is recycled, and so is the amnesia. George Taylor might  just as
well have been a returning veteran with a perfect memory, or been a gumshoe,
or a shamus and the film would have been just as good (or just as bad). It's
surprising that when the money is recovered and the villains are punished,
George gets the girl but, contrary to precedent, doesn't recover his memory. The
film simply forgets his affliction and leaves him hanging. Perhaps it's romantic
-- after all, if you win the love of the lady, what does memory matter?  Or
perhaps the amnesia is so trivial, so perfunctory, so much a gimmick, that it
can be shunted aside.

Although not a good flim, it's partially redeemed by Richard Conte's turn as a
smarmy nightclub owner, Sheldon Leonard's two minutes as a dumb cuckold, and
Harry Morgan's thirty seconds as a bath attendant. Those guys are genuine pros.

More on movie amnesia: Spellbound, Random Harvest, Shattered, Blind Horizon
The Bourne Identity The Crooked Way

Source: 2012/04/what-lola-remembered-from-last-summer

Title: What Lola Remembered from Last Summer
Date: April 07, 2012

It was a long, luxurious summer, with gardens and apple cider and swimming and
berry-picking and walks in the woods and cousins and all sorts of games.

All much enjoyed by Lola, who is now approaching two and a half years old.

"So, Lola, what do your remember about last summer in Vermont?"

Lola, after a pensive moment: "Sheep and horses poop on the grass."

Source: 2012/04/where-sonia-slept

Title: Where Sonia Slept
Date: April 15, 2012

In 1904, at the age of 20, my grandmother Sonia Chafetz Uzilewski (later Green)
disembarked at Ellis Island. Because of her age, and because she lived within
an immigrant community, she never acquired much English, and as a result my
conversations with her were strictly utilitarian. I was curious about the old
country (White Russia, now Belarus) but she spoke little about it and what she
did say was difficult for me to construe. Two pieces of information about her
childhood have stayed with me: first, that in the old country, they brought the
cow into the house in the winter "to keep warm" and secondly, that, as a girl,
she "slept over the fireplace."

I was puzzled. All I could imagine was a house like my own pleasant childhood
home, but with a cow on the carpet and a young lady perched precariously on the
narrow mantle over the fireplace (if we had had a fireplace, which we didn't).
Frankly, I couldn't make much sense out of her story.

It wasn't until I happened to find myself in benighted Lithuania in 2003 that
I figured out the cow-in-the-living-room puzzle. I visited one of those large
open-air museums which are not uncommon in eastern Europe, in which traditional
peasant dwellings, along with churches, mills, foundries, etc. have been 
rescued and sprinkled around a landscape. At such sites, a very common form of
low-end dwelling consists of a barn or animal shelter on the dirt ground floor,
with a wooden second floor for human habitation erected just above. I believe
that when grandma said that they brought the cow into the house, she meant that
they stabled the cow down below, and that some of the heat from the animal
disseminated into the living quarters -- as would, incidentally, some of its
pungent effluvia.

So one problem was solved, but the mantle-sleeping remained a mystery. However,
just this past week the New Yorker featured an essay on traditional Russian
cooking in which there was a paragraph on a long-ago-and-far-away kind of stove.
Here's the pertinent section.

"A traditional Russian kitchen starts with a pech, a huge brick oven with many
winding vents designed to retain the heat from a wood fire. A pech was once
the centerpiece of traditional peasant homes; it took up about a quarter of
the available living space. It heated and ventilated the house, it dried food;
children and the elderly slept on ledges built into it."

"Children and the elderly slept on ledges built into it." Mystery solved!

Sonia told me that she slept over the fire, which I interpreted as a fireplace.
But I was wrong. She slept over the stove. For all I know, she might even have
used the world pech, which I couldn't possibly have translated or understood.

Now I know, that like other children at the very bottom of the nineteenth-
century Russian social ladder, she slept on a ledge built into a pech, with the
cow lowing just a few feet below her.

Need I mention once again how glad I am that she decided to pull up stakes and
head for new world.

More on Sonia Green: here.

Source: 2012/04/la-traviata-updated

Title: La Traviata "Updated"
Date: April 16, 2012

I prefer to hear rather than to see grand opera. The cd and the radio are my
preferred media. Stay at home, sit in a comfortable chair, listen carefully, be
ravished.

When you go to the opera, you re-discover that the plot is all silliness, the
characters incomprehensible, and the intermissions interminable.

Nevertheless, there I was, yesterday, at the Met's HD screening of Verdi's
La Traviata, the most melodic and romantic of operas. The orchestra and the
singing were, as expected, glorious. But the staging was all strained novelty
and misguided cleverness.

Can there be an opera less in need of cross-dressing and a gay subtext that La
Traviata?  Why would anyone want to clothe both the male and female choristers
in severe, gray, men's business suits?  If the story is all about boy-girl
romance and sexual intensity and sexual pleasure, why not encourage the men
and gaily-dressed women to dance and flirt and try to get together after the
downright way of generation?

Opera, when I take the trouble to see it, should be as pleasing to my eye as it
is rewarding to my ear.

But this time, officers of the Metropolitan Opera, I was forced to shut my eyes,
and just listen. It was just like staying at home, except that the chair was
less comfortable.

Addendum:  today I read an interview in the April 26 NYRB with the tenor Jonas
Kaufmann. Here's an excerpt:

"You see, the conductor believes that the audience is only coming to hear
the orchestra and is not interested in the story, the sets, the singers. The
director believes it's an all visual thing. So there is this constant fight over
what each person believes is the most  important part. I've seen semi-staged or
concert performances of operas that were more thrilling than staged ones. Why?
Because it's better to have nothing than to have something so disturbing that it
distracts you from enjoying the music and that doesn't allow the music to create
its magic."

Exactly my point.

Source: 2012/04/amnesia-on-film-clean-slate-1994

Title: Amnesia on Film: Clean Slate (1994)
Date: April 17, 2012

I imagine that the "pitch" went something like this:

"Ok, we have the star, Dana Carvey, who's hot right now. He's a funny man. He's
going to play a detective who watches The Maltese Falcon on the tv and thinks
he's Humphrey Bogart. And there's a coin that's worth seven million dollars and
a bunch of guys are after it. But here's the gimmick. Carvey has amnesia and he
doesn't know that he has the coin. And then the real kicker -- not only does he
have amnesia, but he has a kind of amnesia that starts over every time he goes
to sleep, so he doesn't even know what he did yesterday.. Ain't that terrific?"

Well, it must have been terrific, because someone decided to put some money into
the film, and someone managed to persuade James Earl Jones and Michael Gambon to
take supporting roles in this bird-brained turkey.

Did anyone say, "Does amnesia work that way? Is there a kind of amnesia that
begins again every morning."

If they did, I know what the answer would have been. "Who cares? This is not
real amnesia, it's movie amnesia"  --which is, once again, the most malleable
of maladies.

So here's a new genre, the amnesiac-gumshoe farce. A small, unpromising genre.

It's an unfunny movie that hovers between D (for dumb) minus and F (phony). I
doubt anyone's ever heard of it, except for hardcore amnesia fans. And even they
were disappointed.

Source: 2012/04/bringing-ourselves-up-to-date-on-the-subject-of-abkhazian-consonants

Title: Bringing Ourselves Up to Date on the Subject of Abkhazian Consonants
Date: April 20, 2012

Abkhazian has fifty-eight consonants. By contrast, English, a language which
is not consonant-poor, has twenty-three: the ones for which there are the
alphabetic letters such as b, d, f, etc. plus sh, ch, dz, ng, the occasional
trilled r, and the two sounds that are indicated by th (voiced in 'soothe' and
unvoiced in 'sooth'). Twenty-three consonants can make an infinite number of
words; fifty-eight consonants are more than a mouthful. How can the human speech
apparatus produce so many distinguishable sounds?  "By utilizing all points of
articulation from the lips back to the larynx," says an Abhakazian linguist, and
"by associating with plain consonants such secondary features as labialization,
palatalisation, and pharyngalisation." More simply, everywhere that tongue,
lips, teeth, palate, or throat can either stop the flow of air or allow air to
pass through must be put into play. Moreover, If I understand correctly, a sound
made by vibrating, for instance, the area of the uvular might occur in both
labialized (i.e. rounded lips) and unlabialized variants.

I'm guessing that Abkhazian would be formidably difficult to understand,
especially for those who are acquainted only with Indo-European languages.

Abkhazian is one of the indigenous North West Caucasian languages, distantly
related to Circassian and the now extinct Ubykh. It may be descended from
Hattic, which may have been spoken in the empire of the Hittites. There are
something like a million Abkhazian speakers, half in Abkhazia itself, a country
that borders the Black Sea to the northwest of Georgia, and half in Turkey and
other locations in the Abkhazian diaspora. Written language came only in the
mid-nineteenth century to the wild Caucasus. Abkhazians have been described as
20% Muslim, 80% Christian, and 100% pagan, their religion "a peculiar mosaic of
fragments of religious beliefs" in which "Christian ceremonies, Muslim rites,
and pagan observances are so closely interwoven that it seems impossible to
separate them."

Though the Abkhazian consonant system is daunting, it's a relief to learn that
the language uses only one vowel - ah - and also that both the extinct Ubykh and
a still existing dialect of Abkhazian named Bzyp (pronunciation??) employed "a
minimum of eighty consonants." Is eighty the record?

Source: 2012/04/book-report-some-hours-by-edward-st-aubyn

Title: Book Report:  "Some Hours" by Edward St. Aubyn
Date: April 25, 2012

I've now read the first three of the quintet of the much-praised Patrick Melrose
novels by Edward St. Aubyn, and that's all I'm going to read. It's been a long
time since I've encountered anything so nasty.  Is there a word for a place in
which every single individual is evil, snobbish, vindictive, petty, and cruel.
Kakatopia, perhaps. In St. Aubyn's world, Iago would have been an innocent. True
enough that he was jealous, obsessed, manipulative and murderous, but I doubt
that even Iago would have anally penetrated his five-year-old son.

And moreover: if I were a handsome, rich young woman (or a plain poor one) and
my date asked me to get down on all fours and eat some squashed figs off the
patio floor without benefit of fork or knife, I would run away screaming, slam
the door, and let a few years lapse before resuming social activity. So, I hope,
would everywoman. In the world of St. Aubyn's fiction, reader, she marries him,
and the couple live miserably ever after.

The dilemma that's posed by these novels is that in addition to being richly
kakatopic, they're also amusing, clever, and arch, with dialogue that might have
been written by a jaded Oscar Wilde. So I laughed -- but whenever I laughed I
felt dirty and complicit.

So no more St. Aubyn for me. These novels transcend satire and transmute into
ugly spewing. Not for me, thanks.

Source: 2012/05/an-omitted-event-

Title: A Suppressed Event
Date: May 03, 2012

I've been reading about the early colonization of New York city, a subject that
I've not approached since my days in elementary school in the 1950s, where, in
retrospect, it seemed that we went over the ground quite regularly -- Henry
Hudson, the purchase of Manhattan Island, New Amsterdam, Peter Stuyvesant, and
the English acquisition of the Dutch colonies. As we learned it, it was a sunny
story, untroubled and inevitable -- a path leading from pleasant but primitive
beginnings to its inevitable culmination in the Greatest City in the Greatest
Country on earth. There were large helpings of nationalism and triumphalism --
attitudes that I've come to loathe -- along with the insistence that America was
chosen among all the nations for peace and tolerance.

It appears, however, that there are events recounted in Russell Shorto's The
Island at the Center of the World (New York, 2004) that, if they had been
mentioned, might have diluted our tadpole triumphalism. Kieft's War, for
example, was never discussed.

Willem Kieft was one of the Dutch governors of the new colony, and he was a
pioneer in genocidal racism. A small group of indians had camped at Corlaer's
Hook (now the Lower East Side) and a larger group had settled near what is
now Jersey City in New Jersey. The Indians (Wickquassgeck and Tappan) sought
sanctuary from the Dutch against the Mohawks, to whom they had fallen behind in
their tribute payments. Kieft, for reasons of his own, launched an unprovoked
attack. According to a contemporary chronicler, "infants were torn from their
mother's breasts, and hacked to pieces in the presence of their parents, and the
pieces thrown into the fire and in the water, and other sucklings, being bound
to small boards, were cut, stuck,and pierced and miserably massacred in a manner
to move a heart of stone. Some were thrown into the river, and when the fathers
and mothers endeavored to save them, the soldiers would not let them come on
land but made both parents and children drown.... Some came to our people in the
country with their hands, some with their legs cut off, and some holding their
entrails in their arms....  After this exploit, the soldiers were were rewarded
for their service, and Director Kieft thanked them."

Such atrocities (there were many others) were omitted from the P. S. 217
curriculum.

When I read these stories, I feel as though I was tricked. I'm indignant and
angry.

It's all part of a grand deception in which every child is indoctrinated with
the idea that his own group is wiser, kinder, and better than the others.

If our great country were truly superior, we would have shown it by telling the
truth, the whole truth, not a purged and sanitized half-truth.

Source: 2012/05/reposted-the-sculpin-slimy-or-mottled

Title: Reposted:  The Sculpin, Slimy or Mottled?
Date: May 08, 2012

Knowing little of the finny tribe, I borrowed the Bradford Public Library's
copy of Langdon's introductory Fishes of Vermont (2006). It's an excellent,
informative, helpful guide. With Langdon's help, I can now declare that it's
undeniably the brown bullhead, a species of catfish, that has been multiplying
in our pond. The bullhead, a villainous omnivore, is one of the causes of the
steep decline of our population of frogs. The big, plug-ugly, bebarbelled brute
gobbles frog-egg globules.

Readers of this blague will not be astonished to learn that Dr. M .has fallen
deeply in love with fish names. Take the brown bullhead, for example. It's
also known by such evocative and lunatic denominations as the horned pout, the
mudcat, and the minister. Minister?  To whom, or under what circumstances,
would a brown bullhead minister?

My favorite Vermont fish, nomenclature-wise, is the slimy sculpin, also
performing under such titles as the blob, the chucklehead, the rock cusk, the
stargazer, and the cockatouch. The slimy sculpin should not be confused with its
near cousin, the mottled sculpin -- which can also be addressed as the slowfish
or gudgeon.

Many of the common Vermont fishes have lost their colorful historic names. The
bowfin was once called the John A. Gindle, the stonecat was the doogler, the
lake trout was the togue or longue, the burbot was variously ling or lawyer
(lawyer? minister? why not accountant? or dentist?), the quillback was the
buffalo, and the gar was the needlenose. On the other hand, the blandly-named
pond perch of olden days is trending in the reverse direction: it's now called
the pumpkinseed -- a name which seems curiously vegetarian for a predatory
denizen of the deep.

If I had known that there was a fish called the cisco (known on jolly days as
the tollibee and on prosaic days as the sand herring), I would long ago have
promoted Galen Cisco to my all-time-great Baseball-Fish Team, adding him to such
piscine luminaries as Catfish Hunter, Dizzy Trout, Chico Salmon, Sid Bream,
Bobby Sturgeon, Art "Red" Herring, and Shad Roe.

No Sculpins in MLB that I can recall, but In a more poetic universe, "Slimy"
Sculpin would have been a spitball pitcher, or perhaps even a team owner.

Source: 2012/05/senior-bowl

Title: Senior Bowl
Date: May 08, 2012

I was talking on the telephone with a fan of the Washington Nationals and for
some reason neither of us could recall the name of the lanky, scraggly-bearded
shaggy-haired high-salaried power-hitting right fielder who once played for the
Phillies and had a hard time last season but seemed to be starting out well this
year, and whose grandfather played shortstop for the Pirates fifty year or so
years ago.

Inasmuch as I once had near-perfect recall of such trivia, I was frustrated by
the failure of memory. But I decided that this time I wasn't going to google
the Nationals' roster but instead was going to force myself to cough up that
name, no matter how many polysaccharides had clogged my synaptic pathways. I
set my search memory program on full blast, and after about 45 minutes, while
I was scrubbing the sink, out popped the moniker. I called the Washington fan
and whispered into the telephone, triumphantly, these three syllables: Jay Son
Werth.

How does the human brain do that? You can't bring up a word or phrase, and then,
an hour or a day later, there it is! Tiny chemical processes or electrical
impulses chase from synapse to synapse until they just happen to happen upon
the neuron or neurons where "Jayson Werth" is stored? Really? Hard to fathom.
However it's accomplished, it's superbly miraculous.

But o-so-slow compared to the instant recall of my golden olden days.

So now I have this idea for a TV game show, modeled after College Quiz Bowl,
but called Senior Bowl. The format: when a question is asked, competitors start
the clock, which can run for, let's say, a couple of days. And also start the
videotape machine. Competitors go about their business and the first person with
the correct answer wins the round. When the tape is carefully and dramatically
edited, it's perfect reality TV for oldsters.

Announcer: "Congratulations to prizewinner Vivian de St. Vrain, who was able to
correctly identify the singer of "Duke of Earl" in only 17 hours, 12 minutes,
and 43 seconds!"

A major breakthrough in golden-years tv.

And by the way, I can now proclaim to all the waiting world that the name of
Jayson Werth's shortstop grandfather is -- "Ducky" Schofield.

Source: 2012/05/lord-of-the-flies-again

Title: Lord of the Flies;  a 1950s Allegory
Date: May 10, 2012

In my daughter's basement I found a dried-up, stained, pages-hanging-out
1959 paperback edition of William Golding's Lord of the Flies. On the cover:
"Copyright 1954." "Over 4,450,000 copies in print." "Sixty-second impression."
"Now Available For Students And Teachers: the Casebook Edition containing the
full text of the novel, critical essays, notes, and bibliography." Lord of
the Flies leaped into public prominence in the mid-1950s and quickly became a
classroom staple. A quick googling found half a dozen websites designed to help
high school students generate reports on the novel's "symbolism," etc.

I didn't like Lord of the Flies when I read it back then and it's become less
likable-- and less worthy of respect-- over the last half-century. It's a
variation on Robinson Crusoe, except that this time a score of boys land (how?
and not a one of them injured!!) on an uninhabited island in the Pacific. They
very quickly degenerate into savages, murder two of their own number, and are
hunting down the last boy who possesses a modicum of civility when a naval
officer (nauta ex machina?) arrives to take command. Lord of the Flies is a
dyspeptic, dystopian novel; it's also, according to the websites, a story of the
contest between civilization and barbarism and, -- guess what? -- it's barbarism
by a country mile.

Robinson Crusoe himself was no perfect model of psychological health, but
Defoe's story has been admired for centuries (it's the most reprinted novel in
history) at least in part because it asserts that a resourceful human being
can triumph over a bad situation. Crusoe reads his Bible, keeps a calendar and
a diary, domesticates sheep, develops a working agricultural system, learns
pottery, carpentry and other crafts, and builds himself both a summer and a
winter domicile. Lord of the Flies, on the contrary, is entirely pessimistic
about human capabilities: its flat, bookless, unskilled characters devolve
rapidly into war-painted, violent tribesmen. Robinson Crusoe embodied Age of
Reason optimism; Lord of the Flies is a post-Nazi novel in which there is no
culture, government is nothing more than incipient dictatorship, and religion
equals cruel scapegoating.

Why was it imagined that Lord of the Flies had something of value to say about
about human nature?  It's a sure thing that if Golding had written a novel
in which an isolated group of people behave like reborn Crusoes and work
cooperatively to tame the forest and create a communal utopia, he would have
been derided as a simpleton. No room in the Cold War inn or on the best-seller
lists or in high school curricula for optimism!

Golding arranges it so that the descent into barbarism appears to be not
circumstantial but inevitable. He banishes from his island women and therefore
any need for reciprocity in social institutions. (Violence without heterosexual
sex--just what's needed in the high school classroom!). Moreover, the boys
who land on the island are not a representative set of human beings: they're
English public school children who've already internalized poisonous notions of
hierarchy, hazing, power and class. When, at the outset, they choose a chief,
they're really selecting a head boy for whom lesser creatures will "fag." Of the
island's inhabitants, the only one with more brain than earwax is the physically
repulsive Piggy, while the only boy whose instincts are democratic is slow,
tongue-tied, and indecisive. Meanwhile, Jack, to whom Golding grants leadership
abilities, is a slick soulless demagogue. The author may appear to be impartial,
but in fact he's stacked the deck so that the emergence of proto-fascism appears
"natural." Golding, both a student and a teacher in English public schools,
seems to think that adolescents of his own circle somehow represent common
humanity. His analysis of culture is therefore as shallow as a parking-lot
puddle. And because it's so shallow, the novel is a treasure-trove for the
kind of teaching where the identification of "symbols" substitutes for genuine
thought, or emotion, or aesthetic revelation. It's a convenient opportunity
-- a casebook -- for the kind of bad reading that has damaged generations of
students.

Golding's island abounds not in intelligence but in absurdities. Is it credible
that three or four pre-adolescent boys armed only with sharpened sticks could
a) confront a wild boar and b) actually bring down a mature sow, and that the
sow would lie still, or allow herself to be held to the ground while one of
the boys repeatedly stabs and eventually kills the animal with a penknife, and
c) that the same boys, using no other tools than the single penknife, could
quickly skin, butcher and behead the sow, and then d) cut and drive into the
ground a post stout enough on which to mount that head?  Or e) that a few boys
could dislodge and push a rock that is "as big as a tank." Or that f) there
could exist an uninhabited Pacific atoll so small that a group of boys could
systematically search every inch of it like beaters on a hunt, but yet so large
that, without experiencing much in the way of rain, it could have streams and
pools of fresh water and, in addition, g) an inexhaustible supply of wild pigs
(indigenous? feral?). If Lord of the Flies is an allegory, then perhaps such
howlers don't matter. Yet even an allegory should not cause a reader to guffaw
at inappropriate moments.

Source: 2012/05/vegetable-love

Title: Vegetable Love
Date: May 12, 2012

As a rule, I'm as fickle as the legendary varying flag, but just now I have made
a firm unwavering commitment. My absolutely most favorite line of poetry -- are
you ready now, readers -- is (drumroll)l: "If you really want my peaches, gotta
shake my tree."

Is that poetry or what? It's teasingly inexplicit yet at the same time very,
very suggestive.

I first encountered the line in a mid-1950s doo-wopper by The Clovers (later
famous for "Love Potion Number Nine") called "Lovey Dovey."

Well, you're the cutest thing that I did ever seeI really love your peaches,
want to shake your tree. Lovey dovey, lovey dovey all the timeLovey dovey, I
can't get you out of my mind.

The line's subversive sexuality penetrated even our twin-bed, Eisenhower-era,
Ozzie-and-Harriet world.

Peaches/trees has a complicated history. Wikipedia tracks it to a song composed
by Irving Berlin in May 1914: “If you don't want my peaches/ You'd better stop
shaking my tree,” but I'd be willing to bet the orchard that Irving did not
invent but borrowed the line, probably from something bluesy. Berlin's peaches
warn us off, but Bessie Smith's 1923 peaches are both active and abundant: "If
you don't like my peaches then let my orchard be." Bessie was the kind of gal
whose peaches would be given away by the basketful. Blind Lemon Jefferson's 1929
peaches, on the other hand, are proprietary: ("you swore nobody’d pick your
fruit but me/ I found three kid men shaking down your peaches free"). Ah yes, we
must all be faithful to just a single source of fruit.

I'd wager that the peaches have appeared in fifty or a hundred songs in the last
century.

The line floats from song to song, but wherever it settles, it's always
suggestive of sexual desires and needs. Even when peaches are forbidden fruit,
they're also ripe and luscious oozers of juice. Shake that tree properly and
they fall into right into your mouth.

Andrew Marvell would have loved "If you really want my peaches, gotta shake my
tree."  Here's his witty mid-seventeenth century version of the trope. It's in
a stanza from his best poem, "The Garden."

What wondrous life is this I lead! Ripe apples drop about my head;The luscious
clusters of the vine Upon my mouth do crush their wine;The nectarine and curious
peach Into my hands themselves do reach;Stumbling on melons as I pass, Insnared
with flowers, I fall on grass.

Marvell's garden is not for strolling and smelling. It's a garden in which
the fruits attack the "speaker" in an active, science-fictiony way. No
nibbling here. Instead, "The luscious clusters of the vine,/Upon my mouth do
crush their wine." "Luscious clusters... crush" is one sensous mouth-filling
phrase. And those fine fruits, "the nectarine and curious (curious =s unusual,
not investigative) peach" require no shaking whatsoever. These fruits are
animatronic.

Marvell's "Garden" is as good a version of pomological love as Irving Berlin's
-- without even taking into account the brilliant and accomplished iambic
tetrameter couplets.

Source: 2012/05/amnesia-on-film-cowboys-and-aliens-2011

Title: Amnesia on Film: Cowboys & Aliens (2011)
Date: May 14, 2012

I imagine that the writers of Cowboys and Aliens had a grand old time inserting
into their screenplay as many as possible of both Westerns and sci-fi/horror
cliches. They did very well: there's a loner cowboy with cigarillo and fists of
steel, a domineering cattleman and his feckless son, a timid barkeep, a posse on
horseback tracking abducted relatives a la The Searchers, a band of Chiricuara
Apaches fighting for their own survival, innocent distressed maidens, etc.,
etc., and at the end, a hero riding off into the sunset. On the other side of
the ledger, computer graphic aliens resembling the velociraptors in Jurassic
Park (except for the slimy green blood) attacking us poor mortals, multiple
abductions, and o my gosh even a little boy hiding from a creepy creature in a
crevice in the rock, and then our intrepid James Bond-y macho hero sneaking into
the spaceship to free the captives and dynamite the mother ship, my o my what a
bounty.

And to these cliches, the unsatisfied writers added a bonus -- a dollop of movie
amnesia. Why not? Jake Lonergan awakes in the desert not knowing who he is,
why he is wounded, and without a clue as to why he has a futuristic bracelet
soldered to his wrist. Like most movie amnesiacs, he remains fully functional
and unimpaired. He's not the least bit agitated by his loss of memory. But then
comes a truly embarrassing, semi-racist moment. The Indians, who as everyone
knows are noble and in touch with the human soul in a way that we products of
western civilization can never be, treat his amnesia with a frothy brew (perhaps
mescaline, but who can tell?). Memory spontaneously returns; Jake remembers that
he escaped from the mother ship, knows where it has been parked, and also knows
about the secret entrance. And so to work.

Later on, the released abductees are all amnesiac, but they're cured instantly
(the movie is long enough) without Apache influence.

So now we can add alien abduction to the long list of precipitants of movie
amnesia.

This film could have been a gas except that its makers forgot about the comedy
that's inherent in the title and in the conception. Too bad. As it stands, it's
a solemn, noisy, elaborate, expensive, flimsy chimera.

At one point in the quest, the posse comes across an enormous structure that
looks like a paddle-wheeler right there in the middle of the desert. "There's no
river within five hundred miles that can handle that thing." But they continue
along, the boat is never mentioned again and plays no part in the story --
thereby proving that even screenwriters can suffer disabling bouts of amnesia.

Source: 2012/05/tumb

Title: A Tumbrilism Revival
Date: May 15, 2012

When rich people betray that they don't have the least clue how ordinary people
live, they might coin a "tumbrilism." The perfect tumbrilism is callous,
contemptuous, supercilious, insulting, and grotesquely ignorant.

The word "tumbrilism" seems to derive from tumbril, the cart that carried
victims to the guillotine during the French Revolution. The mother of all
tumbrilisms is Queen Marie Antoinette, who when told that the peasants had no
bread, is supposed to have replied, "qu'ils mangent de la brioche," usually
translated as  "let them eat cake." This classic trumbrilism derives from
Rousseau and was not assigned to Marie until a couple of generations after she
took her tumble.

Here are two good Congressional tumbrilisms: a) Fred Heinemann (R-North
Carolina): "When I see someone who is making anywhere from $300,000 to $750,000
a year, that's middle class." b) Congressman John Fleming (R, Louisiana): "The
amount that I have to reinvest in my business and feed my family is more like
$600,000 ... and so by the time I feed my family, I have maybe $400,000 left
over." And a gubernatorial tumbrilism: Paul LePage (R, Maine): "Maine's welfare
program is cannibalizing the rest of state government. To all you able-bodied
people out there: "Get off the couch and get yourself a job.'"

Here's a classic tumbrilism from the world of sports, courtesy of Jose Canseco,
who once had a ball bounce off his shoulder and into the stands for a home
run: "You know my life, this financial thing, is a very complicated issue.
Obviously, when you make all that money, people think, 'OK, let's assume it is
$35 million.' People have to understand that $35 million, you're paying the
government 41 percent. That leaves you with about $17 or $18 million, not even.
Then you're taking care of your whole family."

But the modern master of the tumbrilism is Mitt Romney, who, when asked about
his worth, replied, "It’s between $150 and about $200 some-odd million
dollars, I think that’s what the estimates are.”

Other priceless Romney tumbrilisms:

“I’m not concerned about the very poor. We have a safety net there."

"This feels good, being back in Michigan. You know, the trees are the right
height. The streets are just right. I like the fact that most of the cars I see
are Detroit-made automobiles. I drive a Mustang and a Chevy pick-up truck. Ann
drives a couple of Cadillacs, actually."

"I like being able to fire people who provide services to me."

"Even if you have a child 2 years of age, you need to go to work. And people
said, 'Well that's heartless.' And I said, 'No, no, I'm willing to spend more
giving day care to allow those parents to go back to work. It'll cost the state
more providing that daycare, but I want the individuals to have the dignity of
work.'"

Unlike the dubious provenance of "let them eat cake," these tumbrilisms, though
astonishingly naive and self-satisfied, are pure and genuine. Their Mittness is
well-witnessed.

Source: 2012/05/metamorphosis

Title: Starfish Metamorphosis
Date: May 22, 2012

I've been reading about the peculiar metamorphosis of the starfish, Luidia
sarsi, which eats shellfish and dwells in the muddy sediment of seashores from
Norway to the Mediterranean. Its diaphanous larvae are bilaterally symmetrical;
the adult form, with its five arms, is radially symmetrical, a most irregular
circumstance. Moreover, the adult emerges from the larva in a different way than
the butterfly from the caterpillar, where the structure dissolves and reforms.
The starfish develops from a cluster of cells lining the internal cavity of the
larva.""Here it grows and matures, an alien existence independent of the larval
body structures, axis, bilateral symmetry, and form, imbued with a complete
disregard for every embodiment of its larval stage."  Eventually, the starfish
emerges, and, most oddly, the larva continues on its way "swimming the pelagic
waters and grazing on its vegetarian diet of algae". Essentially, the starfish
develops from what might be called stem cells that are carried within the larva.
It's all very alien, or perhaps even Alien.

The theory presented in Frank Ryan's The Mysteries of Metamorphosis (White
River Junction, 2011) is that at one time the larva and the starfish were two
different creatures (from two different phyla). Somewhere in the dark backward
and abyss of time, sperm from the one creature encountered an egg of the other
(both creatures eject enormous amounts of reproductive material into the sea)
and cross-phyletic cross-fertilization occurred and the resultant chimera
prospered.

Biologists resist the hypothesis because of the challenge it poses to the
standard view of the evolutionary branching of life. I'm in no position to judge
the theory's truth or falsity, but I'm attracted to the idea because it makes
life forms so much more complex and unpredictable, and because it overturns
conventional thinking.

Source: 2012/05/life-boon-or-thorn

Title: Life:  Boon or Thorn?
Date: May 26, 2012

The most widely-known as well as the most notorious poem of the second half of
the twentieth century is Philip Larkin's "This Be the Verse."  For those of
you who don't know the poem by heart, here it is in its brief and startling
entirety.

They fuck you up, your mum and dad.

They may not mean to, but they do.

They fill you with the faults they had

And add some extra, just for you.

But they were fucked up in the turn

By fools in old style hats and coats,

Who half the time were soppy-stern,

And half at one another's throats.

Man adds on misery to man.

It deepens like a coastal shelf.

Get out as early as you can,

And don't have any kids yourself.

Pessimistic?  Jaded?  Angry?  Yes, I think it's fair to call it so. And let's
also add, unsubtle with a vengeance.

Larkin is hyperbolically illogical. It can't be true that every generation is
more deranged than the one that preceded it. When were the good times? A few
generations ago? In the Dark Ages? In antiquity?  No, in Larkin's view, it's
been all downhill, all the time. No doubt those early primates were already
fucking up their kids when they came down from the trees and started to walk
upright on the savannah. "There's only one piece of roasted rhinoceros left. You
take it. I don't mind being hungry."

Despite its dyspepsia and illogicality, "This Be the Verse" is a curiously
lovable poem. Whenever I've heard it read or recited, audiences react not
with horror but with amusement. The poem's misanthropy is so absolute and its
language so blunt that it can't help but provoke tittering.

The laughter arises because the poem doesn't earn its pessimism. It's too fluent
and too easy -- unlike, say, King Lear, where the sublunary world is rank with
incest, betrayal, and murder. After three thousand lines and five full horrific
acts, Shakespeare earns the standing to conclude that life is miserable and that
"humanity must perforce/ Prey on itself, like monsters of the deep." So it is
in Oedipus, where the events lend credibility to the difficult apercu that it's
best not to be born at all, next best to die very young.

While Shakespeare and Sophocles are philosophically serious, Larkin is merely
flip. There's a monumental disproportion between his gloom and the light-verse
vessel in which his gloom is contained. And so arises the off-kilter comedy.

It's a whiny poem. "Poor poor pitiful me. I had a difficult mommy."

If "This Be the Verse" is in fact the most popular poem of the last fifty years,
it supersedes Robert Frost's "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." What a
remarkable devolution! While Frost endures, Larkin abhors.

I doubt whether Larkin had "Stopping by Woods" in mind, but he certainly glosses
Robert Louis Stevenson's "Requiem" -- the poem from which he drew his title.
Stevenson's performance is charming, gentle, self-effacing, and modest.

Under the wide and starry sky,

Dig the grave and let me lie.

Glad did I live and gladly die.

And laid me down with a will.

This be the verse you grave for me:

Here he lies where he longed to be.

Home is the sailor, home from the sea,

And the hunter home from the hill.

Stevenson praises the adventurous life lived well and brought to completion.
Death may end it all but it also closes the circle. There is no completion, no
circles in Larkin, where natural processes are crudely truncated: "don't have
any kids yourself."

"This Be the Verse" is a hilarious and wonderful piece of joking, but its
victimology is unsettling. It's tempting to claim that it satirizes its own
pessimism, but, I'm sorry to say, it does not. Larkin loves to wallow in his own
gloom.

Here's another Victorian variation on the thema Larkiniana.

Is life a thorn?

Then count it not a whit.

Man is well done with it.

As soon as he's born,

He should all means assay

To put the plague away.

Pessimistic, yes. But Colonel Fairfax, even-handed, also entertains the
possibility that life might be a boon (which, as we all know, is true at least
some of the time).

Source: 2012/05/three-advantages-to-old-age

Title: Three Advantages to Old Age
Date: May 31, 2012

1.  No longer possible to die tragically young, with promise unfulfilled. Well, actually, promise can still be unfulfilled, but not because of early death.

2.  No longer any need to fuss with contraceptives.

3.  Read an entire magazine article while urinating.

Source: 2012/06/predators-and-prey

Title: Predators and Prey
Date: June 25, 2012

I was almost asleep but semi-conscious and I heard a noise outside. It could
have been the wind knocking over a chair, but it might also have been a raccoon,
a skunk, or a groundhog. Or even a coyote, a beast that we hear but almost
never encounter. Whatever it was, I was immediately electrified, the "flight or
fight" response fully engaged. Ready to go hand to hand with a groundhog or any
other rodent. But then I thought, hey, I'm an apex predator. Why I am being so
skittish, so fearful? I'm not a prey animal. I can hold my own with anything out
there.

The first hand axes date from about 2.5 million years ago. (A hand axe is
nothing more than a piece of flint or other stone, knapped into a point on one
side, adapted for cutting or throwing). The first spearpoint appears 250,000
years ago. Spears for throwing, or lances for poking are a major breakthrough
for hunting or self defense.

I wonder why it took 2.25 million years for one of my hominid ancestors to think
to mount an axe on a shaft of wood. How hard could it have been? Eventually
the bow and arrow appears in the archeological record, but not until 25,000
years ago. The pace was picking up. My point, however, is that for a couple
of millions of years, my forebears were not predators. They  were prey,
hiding from the European lion (50% larger than the modern African lion), from
the giant hyenas, from the cave bear, from big old snakes, and other extinct
mega- predators. Cowering on the savannah, clutching a hand axe, for millions
of years. It hardwires the brain.

No wonder that a noise in the night makes me fearful. Two million years as
prey doesn't disappear from the DNA just because we've recently eliminated or
neutralized all the major predators.

I think that human beings haven't realized that they are predators and are
almost entirely shaped by the prey experience. As a result, we're afraid of
animals; we're afraid of our shadows; we're afraid of noises in the night. We're
afraid of each other.I doubt that we'll ever grow up and learn to comport
ourselves confidently but not aggressively. As a species, we're just plain
scared. We should be lions, not chickens.

Source: 2012/06/more-about-lolas-use-of-language

Title: More About Lola's Use of Language
Date: June 30, 2012

At two-and-a-half, Lola has become very precise. Grandpa: "That's a nice white
sweater you're wearing." Lola: "It's a jacket." Grandpa: "You're tired. Why
don't you put your head down on the bed." Lola: "It's not a bed; it's a pad."
Grandpa: "It's a nice blue pad." Lola: "It's green."

All this precision is coupled to idiosyncratic pronunciations. Ketchup, for
example, is "kep-tuck."

Source: 2012/09/precision-in-language

Title: Precision in Language
Date: September 09, 2012

Grandma (affectionately):  "You're a silly duckling."

Lola (age 2+):  "I'm not a duckling.  I'm a people."

Source: 2012/09/unorthodox

Title: Does Religion Rot the Brain?
Date: September 11, 2012

Unaware that I was choosing a splashy and controversial best-seller, I selected
from the library's new book shelf something called Unorthodox (New York, 2012),
by one Deborah Feldman, and a sadder, more dispiriting book I have rarely read.

Ms. Feldman had the misfortune to be raised in the Satmar branch of the Hasidic
movement -- a sect that, at least as she describes it, is unhappy, puritanical,
finicky, repressive, ferociously anti-rational, patriarchal, and bossy. Boys
study Talmud but girls are not educated past a high school -- what would be
the point, when, as Deborah's grandfather once told her, "girls belong in the
kitchen?" Feldman's memoir is not just dreary, it's ostentatiously lurid. Its
subtitle is "the scandalous rejection of my Hasidic roots" -- and the attention-
mongering scandals that she recounts are mostly sexual in nature.

There is a old story that John Ruskin collapsed in a heap when he discovered,
on his wedding night, that his bride had pubic hair. Feldman out-Victorians
the great Victorian, claiming that she did not know that she had a vagina, an
entrance, an opening, "down there." Is such ignorance possible in this age? 
And then she explores her sexual failings, mostly her vaginismus-induced post-
honeymoon extended virginity -- which she blames on her Satmar upbringing
(although want of curiosity might also be a factor).

Feldman's memoir has upset the Hasidic community and there is at least one
website devoted entirely to attacking its veracity. And in fact the memoir does
contain the commonplace omissions and elisions of autobiography --  none of
which seem to invalidate the whole. However, the defenders of the sect miss the
point (as does Ms. Feldman).

The Satmar movement isn't reprehensible because it dishonors brains and women
and especially women's brains. It's reprehensible because it is erected
on a lie. "We learn in school that God sent Hitler to punish the Jews for
enlightening themselves. He came to clean us up, eliminate all the assimilated
Jews...."  What an absurd and odious doctrine! Are we expected to entertain
the hypothesis that six million Jews died for eating lobster?  "The first and
greatest Satmar rebbe said that if we became model Jews, just like in the olden
days, then something like the Holocaust wouldn't happen again, because God would
be pleased with us." So Hitler and the Nazis and the SS and the camps are a) the
fault of the Jews themselves, and b) God can be placated if all Jewish women
wear thick stockings and wigs and cover themselves from collarbone to wrist and
knee.  It's a brainless argument, and one that, if you think about it for a few
seconds, gives the victory to Hitler. Plus, it's an argument that creates a god
who is even crueler and more idiotic than usual.

Indoctrinated with this criminal bullshit, the survivors of the Shoah and their
descendants voluntarily re-ghettoize themselves and, of their own foolish
accord, imprison themselves into a new dark age of their own invention.

Here's what I learned from this book. Satmar is a check-your-brains-at-the-door
cult that controls 130,000 adherents who manifest all the symptoms of obsessive
compulsive disorder. It's "bad things will happen to me if I step on a crack on
the sidewalk" raised several painful orders of magnitude.

Ms. Feldman may have escaped the cult but she's still in the dark. She's left
Satmar behind because she couldn't read the books she wanted to read or wear the
clothes she wanted to wear and she couldn't locate her own vagina. But it's not
her vagina that readers should worry about;  it's her brain.

Source: 2012/09/amnesia-on-film-unknown-2011

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Unknown (2011)
Date: September 21, 2012

Here's a case of double amnesia, in which a second case of the disease is
overlain over the first (as usual, once the amnesia genie is activated,
screenwriters cry havoc and let slip the dogs of anything goes).

Our hero, played by a tired Liam Neeson, awakes from a coma not remembering much
but thinking he's Dr. Martin Harris, a geneticist. He has no identification,
and no one knows him, even his young wife. Turns out, he's not Dr. Harris at
all, but a professional assassin who has somehow forgotten that his alias is
an alias. It takes an innocent new girlfriend and several car chases and
some highly-choreographed fist fights before he comes to his senses. Once he
realizes that he's a professional killer, however, he turns over a new leaf and
becomes a Good Guy. He thwarts the intended assassination and with solemn steps
and slow, begins a new moral life.

Here's the question that occurred to me:  a guy is a long-time, career
assassin. He has an accident and forgets that he was a murderer. Then little
by little he remembers. Is it probable that his personality would change and he
would be reborn to innocence and good citizenship, I only ask because that's
the red herring that Unknown's audience is asked to masticate? I myself don't
buy it.

Neeson asks, over and over, "Who am I?"  In serious works of literature (cf.
Lear's "Who is it that can tell me who I am'), such a question is tragic.  In
amnesia movies, "Who am I" is not tragic but merely mcguffinic.

Source: 2012/09/beautiful-women

Title: Goddesses Excellently Bright
Date: September 26, 2012

At the Perfect Pear, our local eatery, dinner was less than ambrosial,
but halfway through the mashed potatoes, the room was suddenly illuminated
by an astonishingly beautiful young woman who arrived (drums, and trumpets,
and more trumpets) with bland boyfriend in tow. She was lambent and glowing
-- so lovely that I felt the urge to get up and whisper in her ear that her
brilliance had refreshed and cheered my entire day.

Of course I did no such thing.  I'm not that kind of guy.

Later, I fell into a reverie and brought to mind the very few magnificently
beautiful women whom I had encountered in my life. Now I don't mean women who
are merely or very attractive, of whom there are, thankfully, many; nor women
upon whom one's youthful self has lavished an intense passing crush. I mean
women who are goddess-beautiful. Women around whose brows flames flicker, and
who, when they walk, do not touch their feet to the ground. Here they are:

In Ithaca, Margaret C., a sylph or naiad. In Cambridge, the young Aphrodite
who sprawled so fetchingly in Widener's periodical room, unconscious of the
attention she garnered. At the pottery, Mariel ----- ("Ariel with an M,"she
said), a psychologist, who, though already greying, was a perfect Juno.
Students: in New York, Ms. ----- Pavony, who glowed for almost an entire silent
semester, right up to the precise moment that she contributed to the discussion
in the squeaky voice and accent of a 1930s M-G-M telephone operator. In Denver,
Ms. {exotic first name] Samuels, who, I'm happy to say, remained silent on the
rare days she deigned to come to class. A Hindu fertility goddess, yes -- but
perhaps also a daughter of Zion. On the airplane: the radiant Denver actress,
who confided to me that her best part "so far" was a Midol commercial. On the
bus: the young lady with the electric green eyes. At the Folger: the luscious
student from France, as lovely as a young woman can possibly be, who said to me,
"Can I ask you a question about Shakespeare? Why do some of the lines stop in
the middle of the page and some go right to the margin?" Oh, would that she had
not asked!

And while I mused over my small handful of goddesses excellently bright, I
remembered that on two separate occasions, forty or fifty years ago, an older
gentleman had approached Mrs. Dr. Metablog to say, in these or equivalent words,
"thank you for being so beautiful."

At the time, I was taken aback, but now, in my pre-dotage, I fully comprehend.

(It stands to reason that I must also have encountered young men of great
beauty, but, try as I will, I can't bring any to mind.)

Source: 2012/09/welwitschia

Title: Tweeblaarkanniedood, or Khurob, or Nyanka, or Anyango, or Whatever You Want to Call It.
Date: September 29, 2012

I read with enthusiasm Richard Fortey's Horseshoe Crabs and Velvet Worms (New
York, 2012), a pop biology book which describes various plants and animals that
originated millenia ago and that survive outwardly unchanged to the present
day. It's a great subject and might have been a great book if Fortey had been
less anecdotal and more informative, and if he not just blathered into the
tape recorder but had paid attention to organization and prose style.

Ever since my summers at Makamah in the 1940s, I've had an affection for
horseshoe crabs. They were abundant then, although scary and definitely not-to-
be-stepped-on, and although I can't say for sure, I wouldn't be surprised to
find that they are very rare now, especially in populated areas like the Sound.
I would not have known that horseshoe crabs date from the pre-hemoglobin
era and that their blood (or blood-equivalent) is based not on iron but on
copper. I did not know anything about velvet worms or the various ancient
slimes with which Fortey is so taken, but I am well-acquainted with horsetails,
which, however primitive they may be, continue to thrive rather wonderfully
around our West Bradford pond.

Of all Fortey's species, my favorite is unquestionably the welwitschia, or,
as it is sometimes called, the tweeblaarkanniedood, or khurob, or nyanka, or
onyango -- a plant which is no less exotic than its various names.

It's the only plant in its order (although it can claim fossil relatives) and
it hangs on in Namibia and Angola. It's a very distant relative of pines and
spruces, having diverged in the late Permian. Welwitschia has an extremely odd
growth habit. It makes only two true leaves in its lifetime, but the leaves,
which might be imagined as very wide ribbons, grow constantly throughout the
long life of the plant. The leaves can be fifteen feet long;  the plant
can live for a thousand and some think even two thousand years.  Here's a
welwitschia: it's not a classically handsome plant, not a garden beauty.

Source: 2012/09/ryan

Title: Lyin' Ryan?  We Report, You Decide
Date: September 30, 2012

There's been so much noise about Governor Romney stonewalling calls to release
his tax returns and so much commentary about the one he did release, that the
anomalies in running-mate Paul Ryan's tax returns have been overlooked.

When Ryan made his 2011 taxes public, he had to "amend" what he and his lobbyist
wife had initially reported. It seems that he had "inadvertently" failed
to report $61,122 in income. Now sixty grand might be chicken feed for the
Governor, but it's a big hunk for the Representative. It raises his total income
to $323,416 and bumps up his taxes by $19,917. The sixty-thousand bucks comes
from an income-producing trust that he inherited from his wife's mother, a
successful Oklahoma attorney. Moreover, on June 6 of this year, Ryan amended two
years of financial disclosure reports that he filed with the clerk of the House
of Representatives which show that the trust produced income of between $100,001
and $1 million.

So Ryan "forgot" that he had inherited a small fortune from his
mother-in-law, and he "forgot" to report to the IRS just about 20% of his
income.  Fortunately, he remembered both of these facts when he began to come
under consideration for national office and knew that his finances would be
closely scrutinized.

Ryan is a supposedly a policy wonk, touted for his attention to detail. He's
an expert in taxation and expenditure -- or so we're told.  But he's not,
apparently, attentive to his own affairs.

He's also the person who claimed to have run a sub-five minute marathon and to
have climbed o-so-many of Colorado's mountains.

So, constant reader, here are your choices. Either Paul Ryan (a)
"inadvertently forgot" to include $60,000 worth of income on his 2011 taxes,
or (b) he's a untrustworthy, lying scumbag who suits the facts to the situation,
and who was hoping to get away without paying his fair share and only came
clean when it looked as though someone would notice.

We report;  you decide.

(I'm trying to think, if I were the recipient of a $60,000 a year inheritance,
which I'm not, whether I could possibly "forget" to report it as income. Nope,
can't imagine such a circumstance.)

Source: 2012/10/why-we-love-opera

Title: A Splendid Sentence
Date: October 16, 2012

All that is good and all that is bad about opera is summarized by the following
splendid sentence. It comes from a plot summary of Donizetti's L'Elisir
d'Amore. Prepare to savor.

"At the pre-wedding feast, Adina and Dulcamara entertain the guests with a
barcarole."

Is that genius, or what?

Here's the situation: the plot's a little thin and needs to be padded.
Barcaroles were big in the 1840s. By good fortune, Donizetti just happens to
have one in his drawer, or perhaps he has been thinking about gondoliers since
his last trip to Venice. So let's slip a barcarole in there.

Moreover, the barcarole is beautiful. Perfectly wonderful and enjoyable. It's
as lovely as the excuse for its performance is ridiculous.

That's why we love grand opera -- its inevitable and constant juxtaposition of
glorious and absurd.

Thanks, Metropolitan Opera in HD, for bringing it to our attention. Let's hope
for many more afternoons of such transcendent, splendid silliness.

Ah that in real life we could while away our empty hours with barcaroles.

Source: 2012/10/amnesia-on-film-mirage

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Mirage (1965)
Date: October 17, 2012

I was half-way through this neglected Cold War paranoia-mystery-Hitchcocky
black-and-white (and noir all over) amnesia movie when I realized that I was
watching a lineal ancestor of the Jason Bourne films. It's all there: the
trauma, the amnesia, the shadowy organization determined to eliminate the
amnesiac, the assassins, the hair-breadth 'scapes, the chases, the murky
plotting.

David Stillwell (note the encouraging onomastic pun in his surname) played by
the ever-upright Gregory Peck, has accidentally defenestrated his mentor and has
gone into what this film calls "unconscious amnesia." He's got to figure it all
out, which he does via Bourneian flashbacks, even while being pursued by a bunch
of very bad guys, who fortunately, are most amateurish with their pistols.

There's also a dollop of Bond in the mix: a nuclear secret, a threat to world
peace and in addition a possibly helpful, possibly dangerous former mistress.

And there's Walter Matthau as a shambling amateurish detective. Early Walter
Matthau -- taking a few first steps on the road to becoming the real Walter
Matthau.

It was a superior movie during the first mysterious hour, but as the mystery
unravelled, it turned into cliche and incoherence. Too bad, because the noir
atmosphere was splendidly realized and the shots of 1960s Manhattan a genuine
treat.

Mirage is a political movie, but it's hard to track its politics. Howard Fast,
who wrote the novel from which the screenplay is adapted, leaned far left while
the director, Edward Dmytryk, leaned right. The film teeter-totters.

Mirage was remade three years later as Jigsaw, in which an LSD overdose was
substituted for amnesia. Jigsaw doesn't seem to be available on Netflix, but
I'll look for it. "Unconscious amnesia" apparently mutated, during the hippie
years, into "drug amnesia." A new genre

Source: 2012/10/polygamy

Title: A Man and a Woman
Date: October 23, 2012

I find it utterly fascinating that Romney and Obama, who are so unlike in so
many ways and yet both to the best of our knowledge good "family men," are both
descended from polygamists.

Barack's great-grandfather Obama Opiyo had five wives and his grandfather,
Hussein Onyango, had at least four. Such was the Luo tradition. Barack's
father's bigamy was unlawful rather than traditional -- he left what used to be
called a "grass widow" behind when he escaped Kenya.

Both of Mitt's great-grandfathers, Miles Romney and Helaman Pratt were
polygamists. Miles had four wives and thirty children, Helaman had five
wive and who knows how many offspring. Both families fled the U. S. en masse
when a divine revelation and the enforcement of the Morrill Act ended polygamy
in 1890.

And yet preachers and politicians continue to proclaim that "marriage is between
one man and one woman, and always has been, since the time of Adam and Eve."

It ain't so. Nothing could be more ahistorical or more false. The biblical
patriarchs were all polygamists and King Solomon himself, a model of wisdom,
we are told, collected an astonishing, exhausting household of 300 wives and
700 concubines. Plural marriage was part of Jewish tradition way into the first
millennium. Another Abrahamic religion, Islam, is notably polygynous even as
it is furiously anti-polyandrous. Marriages over the world have taken every
shape imaginable, sometimes formally, sometimes informally. The idea that
marriage is  permanent and unchanging is a canard belied by the immediate and
symmetrical family histories of our two candidates.

Source: 2012/10/othello-otello

Title: Othello/ Otello
Date: October 30, 2012

I prefer my opera to be aural rather than visual. Opera is a form that
is made for listening, not watching -- at least in my view. The music,
Mozart or Verdi, is frequently transcendent and most satisfying. But on those
occasions when I venture to the opera house and I have to deal with the
cultic, cachectic audience and the grand-opera worshippers as well as the
ridiculous plots, the unhandsome singers, the interminable intermissions, the
staginess and artifice and the general all-around silliness -- as well as pay
through the nose for the privilege of doing so, well then, I'm not always a
happy fellow.

I know the sound of Verdi's Otello moderately well, having played the Placido
Domingo version often enough for the laser to have bored holes into the cd.
Moreover, as it happens, I'm moderately familiar with Shakespeare's play). But I
had never seen a performance of Otello until this past Saturday when we betook
ourselves and our bagels and our Granny Smiths to the Century Theatre to watch
the Metropolitan Opera's Live in HD performance. It was, frankly, glorious --
Renee Fleming in the electronic flesh, moving us to tears with the willow song
(along with Verdi's bonus, dubious Ave Maria).

She was superb; so were the orchestra, the costumes, the sets, even the
overacting, villainous Iago, who would have twirled his mustachios, if he had
had them, and the non-acting, expressionless Othello.

Our "guide," a robust, comfortable mezzo whose name I should know but didn't
catch, made the claim that Verdi's Otello improved upon Shakespeare's Othello.
A highly dubious claim, I think, but then, I don't know how to measure the
value of the grand "Othello music," that Shakespeareans so much admire, against
the cellos and the bassoons. Whether for better or worse, however, there's a
heck of a lot in Shakespeare's play that didn't make it across the centuries
and genres and into Verdi's opera. More than can be said in a paragraph or
a blaguepost.

For starters, Shakespeare created a multi-layered society, not just elaborate
sets. His city of Venice has a sense of itself as a successful, orderly,
civilized, and advanced community. Into this world strides Othello, not
only an outlander but an African and a erotic exotic. Although Venice needs
his soldiership, he's still a black man in a racist world who marries a
willful patrician lady who prefers him to  the "wealthy curled darlings of
the nation." It's an unlikely, perilous match: he's "declined into the vale
of years" while she's very very young. He's a soldier who's been around the
world; she's the secluded mistress of the house affairs. He's commanding;
she's naive.

Verdi must have loved Othello, although not necessarily for the right reasons.
How could a play that ends on a bed, with a climactic murder-suicide, not have
excited the instincts of the composer of Aida. Nothing more appropriate for
grand opera than Othello and Desdemona -- and yet o so simple a representation
compared with Shakespeare's rich figures and complex society.

Imagine a Merchant of Venice in which Shylock is not Jewish, or a King Lear in
which Lear is a troubled forty-something and you're well on your way to grasping
an Othello in which melanin is replaced with melodrama.

As a result, even when Verdi brought tears to my eyes, it was because I was
seeing through the opera to the play that lies beneath it.

And sometimes I was crying because I so desperately missed the beauties and the
profundity that Verdi had not seen fit to include.

Source: 2012/11/slavestates

Title: Where We Are, 2012
Date: November 08, 2012

The Republicans now draw most of their strength from the former "slave states."
Here's the evidence and the map:

In 2012, Republicans won only 55 electoral votes from the free states. Obama
carried 332.

I don't think it's coincidence or merely an association.  I think it's a cause.

In order to support slavery, a person has to deform and distort his brain; he
has to learn to make or accept arguments that are innocent of fact and logic and
fellow-feeling.  He has to damage his intelligence and ruin his morals, and,
apparently, he must pass the consequences on to his children and grand-children.

And so the sins of slavery continue to be visited upon us, yea even unto the
seventh generation.

Source: 2012/11/barkis

Title: Who's Laughing Now?
Date: November 09, 2012

Many years ago, when I was young and invulnerable, it was most amusing that Mr.
Barkis, the "willin'" carrier in David Copperfield, offered up his shillings
with such agony.

Barkis is bedridden with a cripplingly painful illness. He has a locked box of
coins, and although he has become "near," he has the generous impulse to give
David a guinea. However, to fetch the money costs him a martyrdom. "He endured
unheard-of agonies in crawling out of bed alone, and taking it from that unlucky
box....  We heard him uttering suppressed groans of the most dismal nature.
This procedure racked him in every joint."

Barkis's pain was, once upon a time, comic. Nowadays, alas, I can only imagine
that Barkis has ruptured a disc, and must endure a chronic, unameliorable,
incurable torture that will only end with his death.

And then there's the Fat Boy, in Pickwick Papers, who cannot prevent himself
from falling asleep. What's so funny about chronic fatigue or narcolepsy? At my
present advanced age, I tend to fall asleep every time I lie down with a book,
even if the book is a  wild extravagant wonderful novel by Charles Dickens.
Inopportune sleep by day is almost as unpleasant as insomnia or nightmares (or
insomnia plus nightmares) at night.

I think also of Mr F.'s demented Aunt, in Little Dorrit , who can no longer
follow the conversation, but "after regarding the company for ten minutes with
a malevolent gaze, delivered the following fearful remark:'When we lived at
Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers.'"'

Is her senility, or as we would now say, her Alzheimer's, so very amusing.

It were, but now it ain't no longer.

Dickens died young, at 58, so there is no way to know whether his sense of humor
would been softened by the ravages of disease and age.

Source: 2012/11/more-coffee-shop-conversation

Title: More Coffee-Shop Conversation
Date: November 10, 2012

Source: 2012/11/mommiesdaddies

Title: In Which 3-year-old Lola Describes the Structure and Functioning of the Contemporary American Family
Date: November 20, 2012

Source: 2012/11/butts

Title: A New Look at the Republican Anus
Date: November 24, 2012

What in the living heck did Republican elder Haley Barbour mean when, discussing
his party's recent electoral disasters, he announced that "we’ve got to give
our political organization a very serious proctology exam. We need to look
everywhere”?

I've got to guess that he "misspoke." Surely he didn't mean to claim that GOP
office-holders have their heads so far up their own asses that it's going to
take a  proctoscope to locate them?

Source: 2012/12/national-sword-association

Title: Guns in the Classroom?  Why Not Swords?
Date: December 05, 2012

The ancient Romans did not allow swords to be carried within the pomerium, the
sacred central precincts of their city.

They were able to maintain the prohibition because they did not have a National
Sword Associaion to argue that if swords are banned, only criminals with have
swords; or that swords don't kill, people kill; or that it's a violation of
personal liberty for free men to be forced to check their swords at the city
wall. Nor was there a fanatic Roman electorate ruthless enough to donate to the
campaigns of every soft-brained aedile, quaestor, praetor, or consul willing to
proclaim the sanctity of swordsmen's rights.

Is it the case that swords were also prohibited in the Roman classroom?  I
don't know -- but I suspect as much.

Here at the University of Colorado, in the infant millenium, guns may not be
carried into the sacred precincts of the football stadium. However, they're
sure-as-hell legal in classrooms, and have been ever since a State Supreme Court
ruling forced the U to allow students with Colorado concealed weapon permits to
carry their guns on campus -- even on days when exams and papers are returned to
students by an historically-unarmed faculty.

So what about swords? Why should guns be allowed in class and swords prohibited?
I don't mean the modern rapier, which is so long that their presence would
create, in every classroom, a noisy clatter and might even cause unwary students
to trip and fall. I'm thinking rather of the Roman short sword, the famous
gladius, which can easily be worn, in an unthreatening manner, under the toga or
ski jacket.

Rapier (noisy and prone to cause accidents):

Gladius (inoffensive):

In point of fact, why the pusillanimous resistance to gladii at football
games?  Fifty-thousand spectators, highly-partisan fans, gargantuan quantities
of illegal booze and dope, and short swords -- what could possibly go wrong?

Source: 2012/12/amnesia-on-film-i-love-you-again-1940

Title: Amnesia on Film:  I Love You Again (1940)
Date: December 09, 2012

The ol' amnesia gimmick plus "screwball" comedy plus W. S. Van Dyke plus Willam
Powell and Myrna Loy equals "I Love You Again" (1940).

Workaholic, unfun Larry Wilson gets conked on the head and wakes up as an
amusing grifter named George Cary. (Hollywood amnesia will do that to you,
apparently -- completely revise your personality.) But in his new and at the
same time prior state, Larry/Geoge has to come to terms with Larry's wife Kay,
who wants a divorce from the melancholy cheapskate half of the compound hero.
And yet It comes to pass that Kay  prefers the grifter.

Much forced hilarity ensues.

Once again, amnesia proves to be the most malleable of maladies. Bop on the
head, he's Larry; another boy, he's George. Amnesia is a gas, even to the pont
that Myrna Loy, unhappy with what she's got, picks up a vase to re-transform
William Powell into the way she wants him. Mechanical (not medical) amnesia
anticipates Danny Kaye in The Court Jester: a snap of the finger he's a
duellist; another snap and he's a clown.

Source: 2012/12/baseball1955-2012

Title: Baseball, 1955 and 2012
Date: December 13, 2012

In 1955, Duke Snider lived at 178 Marine Avenue (in Brooklyn's Bay Ridge). His
was the middle house in this picture.

Gil Hodges lived here, at 1120 32 Street. Two floors, 1400 square feet.

Harold "Pee Wee" Reese and family made their home in 970 square feet of 9714
Barwell Terrace. Carl Erskine's home, at 9318 Lafayette Walk, was even smaller,

just 910 square feet.

Sandy Amoros lived in Bed-Stuy, in this brownstone at 147 Bainbridge Street,
most likely on just one of the three floors. His was the leftmost building.

And here is Alex Rodriguez's 2012 house in Miami, Florida.  It's up for sale
for $38,000,000,

which is what 19,681 square foot waterfront properties go for nowadays. A
bargain, for all I know.

Source: 2012/12/footballconcussions

Title: Life after Football
Date: December 15, 2012

Every year, football becomes harder and harder to watch. When the quarterback
is blitzed and has his clock cleaned, or a receiver on a crossing pattern gets
his bell rung, I no longer think, brilliant play. Instead, I think, pain and
concussion.

Not a game goes by but that a lineman leaves the field of sport on a gurney, to
admiring huzzahs and applause from the comfortable spectators.

Have I become more timorous -- or more compassionate?  I still admire the skill
level of the players but I'm distressed because these gladiators have become
permanently injured for my amusement.

There's a Washington Post article about a lineman named Tre Johnson, who left
the game in 2003 after nine seasons in the NFL. Johnson, who earned two degrees
before he was drafted, is now a highly-regarded middle-school social studies
teacher at the private Landon School outside Washington. His is a post-career
success story.

The Post article offers some information about Johnson's present state of
health. He's forty-something years old and for three years has been walking
three miles, twice daily, in order to shed some weight.  More power to him,
he's now under 400 pounds and hoping to get back to his playing weight of 275.
He suffers from diabetes, high cholesterol and elevated blood pressure. He's
already endured nineteen surgeries (seven on his shoulders, seven on his knees,
an elbow, hands and Achilles’ tendon). "He can't sleep more than three hours
at a stretch. There’s not a morning he doesn’t wake up in pain, and it takes
a full hour to get moving in tolerable discomfort." Although when he played, no
one kept track of concussions, Johnson has some sort of brain injury, because he
can't tolerate bright or fluorescent lights. To what degree his banged-around
brain has been seriously disabled will not become clear for a few more years.

Tre Johnson is doing well, but what about other ex-players who are not quite so
healthy?

Source: 2012/12/more-on-sex-ed-in-victorian-england

Title: More on Sex Ed in Victorian England
Date: December 17, 2012

George Drysdale (1823-1904) wrote, anonymously, Physical, Sexual, and Natural
Religion (1854), a pioneering guide to contraception and sexual disease that was
condemned by the pious as "the Bible of the Brothel."

Drysdale arrived at his progressive ideas after an adolescence and young
manhood crippled by sexual ignorance and sexual panic. At the age of fifteen,
he "accidentally'' discovered masturbation and found that the practice offered
an 'easy mode of satisfying his passions, which had long been the source of
unrest and torment to his vivid imagination.' He masturbated, poor Victorian
fellow, two or three times a day and involuntarily endured occasional nighttime
'discharges'. He was overcome with guilt and even more so tortured by the fear
that, as he was instructed by prevailing doctrine, the 'loss' of semen would sap
his strength and inevitably lead him to madness. Hard to believe -- but such
notions were commonplace among our recent, ignorant ancestors.

It gets worse. He was so distressed by his uncontrollable onanism that on trip
to Hungary, he faked a suicide, leaving his clothes and identification beside a
river.

And worse still. While in Hungary, he underwent a series of procedures to deaden
and destroy the nerve endings of the penis "by inserting into the urethra a thin
metal rod coated in a caustic substance. He submitted to this procedure seven or
eight times." It didn't work -- at least in the sense that it didn't diminish
his passion for masturbation. I also suspect that it might have hurt.

It gets better, though. He resurrected himself and came back to his family after
he consulted a doctor who offered the breathtakingly brilliant prescription that
he "try coition." Intercourse with prostitutes, he discovered, quite cured his
urge to masturbate. Holy moley, what a revelation! What a fucking breakthrough!

Drysdale never married but in later life he lived for many years with a woman
named Susannah Spring.

Now, if you were writing a novel about a person who "dies" and returns to life
and you called his mistress or partner or whatever she was by the name Spring,
with its obvious overtones of rebirth, you would be justifiably accused of
moralism or allegorizing or heavy-handedness. Nevertheless, truth is truth to
the end of the chapter and Susannah Spring she was.

I hope George and Susannah were happy together. I hope they frequently and
joyously "tried coition." The poor boy deserved a few good years.

(I've pilfered the story of George Drysdale from Kate Summerscale's revelatory 
Mrs.Robinson's Disgrace [New York, 2012]).

Source: 2012/12/strigils

Title: Strigils
Date: December 19, 2012

I doubt that I know any more about strigils than your average man in the street.
I had read about them for years, of course, but I had never seen one with my own
eyes until yesterday, when I took myself down to the Pompeii exhibit in Denver.
There they were, kind of stuck away in the corner -- two bronze beauties.

Strigils were used for cleaning the body, ancient Roman style. Early loofahs.
The one posted below looks a lot like the one I saw yesterday -- a garden-
variety Denver/Pompeii specimen that was retrieved from under 20 feet of
Vesuvian ash:

Here's another strigil, this one a little more elaborate.

They're kind of formidable, aren't they?

If, two thousand years ago, you had been patrician enough to go to the thermae
for your ablutions, you would have left the calida piscina, the warm bath, and
hastened to the destrictarium, which was a room dedicated to strigiling. There
you would have applied a mixture of olive oil and pumice to your skin, and then
one of your slaves, who might be an aliptes, a masseur, or a simple balneator, a
bath attendant, would have strigiled you clean.

But why olive oil and pumice? Greasy and gritty. Why not soap?  Did the
ancients have soap?  Who invented soap?

Fortunately, there's a website devoted to these important questions. Its
forthright, unapologetic url is soaphistory.net.

The first traces of soap appeared among the Babylonians, some 5000 years ago.
The recipe: mix animal fat with wood ash and boil. So soaps were around, but --
mirabile dictu -- they weren't used for personal hygiene. They were used for
cleaning wool and cleaning pots; Pliny, who was there for the explosion of Mt.
Vesuvius, and knew all there was to know, records only that soap was used as a
hair pomade.

The world we have lost was a far dirtier place than we like to imagine. In point
of fact, our familiar cake soaps and their widespread use are an industrial
revolution-nineteenth century invention.

Considering the effectiveness and convenience of modern soaps, I'm not looking
for a strigil revival -- no Mr. Strigil at every streetcorner. Nevertheless,
there's not a brush or a washcloth in the modern world that can match the beauty
of the best of the ancient strigils. Here, for example, is an old Etruscan
strigil with a naked-girl handle (she herself brandishes a mini-strigil). It's
less useful than a cake of Ivory, but -- let's face it--  a heck of a lot more
glamorous.

Source: 2012/12/dowdgod-1

Title: Maureen Dowd's Theology for the New Millenium
Date: December 31, 2012

Fifty years ago I enjoyed arguing with people of religion about the existence
of god, but nowadays I find it to be a singularly unprofitable exercise. The
believers and the atheists are so entrenched in their positions hat no one ever
convinces anyone of anything. Moreover, the faithful are so damned touchy that
it's no fun to talk to them! They are easily offended, I think, because the
weaker their evidence and logic, the more intense their compensatory passion.

I give thanks that at this my moment in history and geography, the true
believers may be angry with me but they don't have the power to bludgeon me into
obedience. (In general, the less intelligible the religion, the greater its
reliance and economic and corporeal sanctions to compel allegiance.)

These philosophical musings are inspired by a New York Times article that has
received an ungodly amount of attention. Maureen Dowd, who has made a career out
of cracking wise at figures of authority, especially Clintons, has given over
her space this Christmas week to a column on theology (or, as it is sometimes
called, the Subject without an Object). She endorses the argument of a priest-
friend. He (the priest) makes an end run around the classic Problem of Evil --
which is, that inasmuch as the world is very obviously a thoroughfare of woe,
then an omniscient god must be either powerless or malicious. Here's Dowd's
priests's formulation: "If we believe, as we do, that God is all-powerful and
all-knowing, why doesn’t He use this knowledge and power for good in the face
of the evils that touch our lives?"

A very good question indeed and one that believers in a beneficent deity have
failed to resolve yea all these many centuries. Dowd's priest's answer (which is
loaded with a bunch of transparently obvious smuggled assumptions) is that "for
whatever reason, God has chosen to enter the world today through others, through
us....  We are human and mortal. We will suffer and die. But how we are with
one another in that suffering and dying makes all the difference as to whether
God’s presence is felt or not and whether we are comforted or not."

Let me try to understand this argument. This new twenty-first century god, the
"dowdgod" let us call him, has entirely disappeared. He doesn't actually do
anything at all. He's so hidden -- absconditus, in the traditional language of
theology  --  that he permits all kinds of suffering and instead chooses to
manifest himself merely as a comforting presence.

Is that the argument that Dowd thinks is worth a column of valuable newsprint?
Yes, so it seems to be. Astonishing.

Faith," the priest continues, "is lived in family and community, and God is
experienced in family and community. We need one another to be in God’s
presence...." (No god for the solitary, then.) "When my younger brother, Brian,
died suddenly at 44 years old, I was asking “Why?” and I experienced family
and friends as unconditional love in the flesh....  The many ways that people
reached out to me let me know that I was not alone. They really were the
presence of God to me. Suffering isolates us. Loving presence brings us back,
makes us belong." His animating idea: the love of friends is a manifestation of
the deity. Wow. How shallow, how trivial, how wrong!

No one would disagree with the notion that suffering isolates us and that
friends and family console us.  I can't argue with such a proposition. It's
plainly obvious. But what in the world does such an observation have to do
with the existence or the nature of a supernatural being? It's not evidence
for god, it's not proof of god; if anything, it's the contrary of a proof.
Human beings console us, not "god"; the god part, the theology part, is utterly
supererogatory and unnecessary. What Dowd's priest has done is to change the
word "compassion" into the word "god." But we know that compassion is not
supernatural; it's entirely and essentially natural.

So the dowdgod turns out to be no more than a feature of human nature that
"soothes broken hearts." But what does it mean to believe in, or worship, the
dowdgod. Not much.  All a person has to do is to notice that it helps to have
some folks around when you're in pain -- and then to re-label the good feelings
that emanate from friends as god. It's so very easy, so undeniable. And utterly
meaningless.

And what a nice old friendly god it engenders. Whatever happened to Augustine,
Calvin, Luther. Those tough old guys are turning over in their graves. The
dowdgod is a far cry from from Jehovah, from Allah, and certainly from the
demanding Jesus who came to bring not peace but a sword. Those were gods to
reckon with. But now, out with Jupiter Tonans, the thunderer, and in with
Jupiter Manus-tenens, the hand-holder. Or Jupiter Sussurans, the whisperer.

It hardly matters whether one believes or doesn't believe in a god so weak-kneed
and thin-blooded, so positively humane.

Maureen Dowd might say, if she were surrounded by compassionate friends "You
make me feel god." In the same situation, I might might say, "You make me feel
good." The difference is only one minuscule "o" vowel, which, honestly, is very
like a zero. And zero is all that this new theology offers.

Source: 2013/01/amnesia-on-film-and-now-ladies-and-gentlemen-2002

Title: Amnesia on Film:  And Now, Ladies and Gentlemen (2002)
Date: January 04, 2013

There can't be a disease in fiction that demands more vigorous suspension of
disbelief than movie amnesia. And Now, Ladies and Gentleman, a latter production
of the great Claud Lelouch, pushes the  disbelievery to the breaking point.
It asks us to accept not one but two identical and fanciful cases of the
affliction. Both Valentin Valentin, played by Jeremy Irons, and Jane Lester,
played by Patricia Kaas suffer from symmetrical "blackout" periods in which
memory evaporates.

What, prithee, are the odds?

Duelling amnesias are mighty unlikely, but such is the premise of the film.
Although I doubt that there's much in the scientific literature about the
romantic potential of mutual amnesia, in this film the disease becomes a mild
erotic stimulant. Why the heck not, I say.

Inasmuch as no one but confirmed amnesiaphiles are ever going to see this film,
let me spoil it at once by saying that both Valentin, a jewel thief, and Jane, a
chantoosie, find themselves in Fez in Morocco. There they are healed, and after
much ado, set out to circumnavigate the earth in a racing boat called Ladies
and Gentlemen (hence the film's odd title). Valentin, a traditionalist, takes
the orthodox medical route and goes to a local surgeon, who shows him and us an
MRI generated picture of his brain disfigured by a great white splotch ("It's
a wonder he can remember anything," says the Doc.) Valentin undergoes radical
surgery but Jane, taking an easier route, is cured by making a pilgrimage to a
local Moroccan saint. How  unjudgmental and egalitarian to equate medicine and
mystery;  and also, by the way, how very nonsensical.

The film is well made --  replete with all kinds of fancy effects and
flashbacks and dream sequences. I love the idea of draining color from the
characters' faces to signify that they have begun another of their symmetrical
"blackouts." But aside from the amnesias, there's not much to wonder at, at
least not if you've seen your share of caper/jewel thief films.

I loved the exotic North African locales. I'm chagrined to report that I didn't
recognize the wondrous Claudia Cardinale, who was 63 when the film was made.
Claudia had been a great friend to my youthful imagination.

The amnesia that afflicts Valentin and Jane is, as far as I know, unique in that
it comes and goes, appears and disappears. Less like an amnesia than an allergy
-- here one moment, then gone. But as a plot device, constant.

Source: 2013/01/tobacco

Title: Tobacco in My Life
Date: January 06, 2013

My lifetime tobacco consumption consists of one cigarette. Actually, half of
one cigarette. I believe it was a Lucky Strike. Or perhaps an Old Gold. It was
certainly one of these:   It was 1952. My older brother came home from a
summer job in the Poconos with a cigarette tucked into the sleeve, like this. So
cool, so macho:

That's not my brother, but it might have been (although he drove a Dodge). A
pack of Luckies in the shoulder was just about the most glamorous thing I had
ever seen.

So I tried one. I stole one of my brother's coffin nails, hid in the cellar, and
lit up.

It was hideous and I was bilious.

I confessed as much to friends who were already secret smokers. The word of
advice -- "After you do it for a while, you get over feeling sick."  Not a
persuasive argument, at least to me. It seemed stupid.

There were some years there when I faulted myself for not being as adventurous
as my peers. Just another example of my conservatism and caution. But now I
think that not finishing that cigarette may have been the single wisest act of
my otherwise brainless adolescence. If I had smoked that cigarette to the nub,
I'd still be fighting the addiction.

I was, in those days, surrounded by smokers. My father smoked an occasional
cigar but mostly a pipe, filled with Prince Albert tobacco.  It came in a can
something like this one:

He was forever fussing with his pipe -- knocking it, grinding out the remnants
of the previous pipeful, refilling, lighting up. It was quite a ritual. But
stinky nevertheless.

My mother smoked cigarettes, lots of them, until she came down with the ulcers.
I was often sent around the corner to the candy store to buy her a pack of
Chesterfields (no problem selling cancer sticks to children in those benighted
days). Our house always stunk, especially when friends of my folks would visit.
Everyone in their crowd  smoked. Mostly chain-smoked.

No air in our home, just smog.

It's hard to know how tall I would have been, or how intelligent, if I hadn't
been raised in a blue haze.

In college, my roommates all smoked. It didn't like it, but I didn't have
the courage to complain. In those days, the deck was stacked in favor of the
smokers, who had the rightaway. To object was to be fussy, or finicky, or
unmasculine. Some of the professors smoked while teaching -- an act which gave
the students permission to light up as well. It was nasty. Abstainers had no
purchase.

Then things began to change.  We went from this

and this

to this (in 1964):

And then throughout the '70s and '80s, there were the constant revelations
about the fakery and lying of the big tobacco companies, who chose profits and
destroying lives over honesty and public health.

Nowadays, no smoking in anyone's home, no smoking in buses or planes, no smoking
in restaurants, no smoking in government buildings, and no smoking (as of next
month) on the mall.

But I'll tell you what still makes me sick. It's a bunch of teen-agers, hanging
out in front of the coffee shop, puffing theatrically and addicting themselves
-- and subtracting an average of ten years from lives. In the old days, when
doctors smoked Camels, or were reputed to do so, there may have been some excuse
for smoking;  but now, when the evidence is all in, a kid who starts to smoke
is a complete raging fool.

I'm sorry but I have no nostalgia for the great age of cigarettes, though they
were, as a Lorillard executive once said, "the perfect product;  make it for a
penny, sell it for a dollar, and it's addictive as hell."

Source: 2013/01/how-rupert-brooke-died

Title: How Rupert Brooke Died
Date: January 08, 2013

From a mosquito bite to his lip.

Rupert Brooke was an immensely talented young poet, best known today for the
hyper-nationalistic World War I sonnet, "The Soldier." He lived for just twenty-
eight years and his death was a tragedy for letters.

It's easy to be skeptical about the mosquito. I've been in the company of these
insects many times, and I've never been bitten on the lip. Mosquitoes seem to
avoid the mouth area -- at least, they avoid my mouth. But then, I don't know
anything about the habits of eastern Mediterranean mosquitoes.

Brooke was a sub-lieutenant with Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve; the mosquito
attack took place while his ship was anchored in the Aegean. He developed an
abscess and sepsis and as a result was transferred to a French hospital ship,
the Duguay-Trouin. He died at 4:46 pm on 24 April, 1915 and was buried in an
olive grove on the island of Skyros.

An unlikely death-- as odd and irregular as that of Aeschylus (struck on the
head by a tortoise dropped by an eagle), or Isadora Duncan (strangled by a scarf
entangled in the wheels of a motor-car). Or the unfortunate composer Jean-
Baptiste Lully, who, while conducting in the traditional manner by beating time
with staff, accidentally knocked his own foot, causing an abscess which became
gangrenous and fatal. Alas, no antibiotics in 1687.

My guess is that if Brooke had not been bitten and had survived Gallipoli (where
his ship was headed), the "pure and elevated patriotism" displayed in "The
Soldier" might have become less enthusiastic. Brooke  might have evolved in a
direction similar to that of his jaded-about-warfare contemporaries Siegfried
Sassoon, Wilfrid Owen, Isaac Rosenberg, Ivor Gurney, and Edward Thomas. But
we'll never know.

Source: 2013/01/edward-thomas

Title: A New Biography of Edward Thomas
Date: January 11, 2013

I've just finished a genuinely wonderful new biography by Matthew Hollis
called Now All Roads Lead to France, a Life of Edward Thomas. I'm dazzled, and
glad to be so. The book is carefully and comprehensively researched, literate,
sensible, and compassionate. Its author is confident enough not to overwhelm the
poor reader with pounds of extraneous detail. I'm not easily rivetted, but this
biography was truly rivetting. Thank you, Matthew Hollis.

I'm a longtime Edward Thomas enthusiast. Thomas learned how to employ the
language really used by men more successfully than some of his highly-regarded
predecessors. I didn't know much about Thomas's life, and therefore hadn't
realized (though I might have guessed had I been more astute) how much Thomas
had learned from Robert Frost. The two became inseparable friends during Frost's
English years and spent hours and hours together, neglecting their wives and
families but talking poetry and poetic language. Clearly, they cross-fertilized.

In fact, if you listen closely, you can hear overtones of Frost in Thomas's
best-known poem.

Yes, I remember Adlestrop -- The name, because one afternoon Of heat the
express-train drew up there Unwontedly. It was late June. The steam hissed.
Someone cleared his throat. No one left and no one came On the bare platform.
What I saw Was Adlestrop -- only the name And willows, willow-herb, and grass,
And meadowsweet, and haycocks dry, No whit less still and lonely fair Than
the high cloudlets in the sky. And for that minute a blackbird sang Close by,
and round him, mistier, Farther and farther, all the birds Of Oxfordshire and
Gloucestershire.

The first line of the poem is so casual and demotic that it sounds like what
later came to be called "found poetry." I'm glad to know that there is an actual
Adlestrop up there in the Cotswolds, though surely Thomas was well aware that
"Adlestrop" sounds as though it were invented by the Ministry of Silly Names.

The poem is a latter-day pastoral which contrasts the hiss of industrial steam
with the with perennial birdsong and cloudlets. A brief ecstatic revelation.

My all-time favorite poem by Thomas is this blank-verse masterpiece:

As the team's head-brass flashed out on the turnThe lovers disappeared into
the wood.I sat among the boughs of the fallen elmThat strewed the angle of the
fallow, andWatched the plough narrowing a yellow squareOf charlock. Every time
the horses turnedInstead of treading me down, the ploughman leanedUpon the
handles to say or ask a word, About the weather, next about the war.Scraping
the share he faced towards the wood, And screwed along the furrow till the
brass flashedOnce more.The blizzard felled the elm whose crestI sat in, by a
woodpecker's round hole, The ploughman said. 'When will they take it away?
''When the war's over.' So the talk began –One minute and an interval of ten,
A minute more and the same interval.'Have you been out? ' 'No.' 'And don't want
to, perhaps? ''If I could only come back again, I should.I could spare an arm,
I shouldn't want to loseA leg. If I should lose my head, why, so, I should want
nothing more...Have many goneFrom here? ' 'Yes.' 'Many lost? ' 'Yes, a good
few.Only two teams work on the farm this year.One of my mates is dead. The
second dayIn France they killed him. It was back in March, The very night of the
blizzard, too. Now ifHe had stayed here we should have moved the tree.''And I
should not have sat here. EverythingWould have been different. For it would have
beenAnother world.' 'Ay, and a better, thoughIf we could see all all might seem
good.' ThenThe lovers came out of the wood again: The horses started and for the
last timeI watched the clods crumble and topple overAfter the ploughshare and
the stumbling team.

Source: 2013/01/sonnet-for-my-father

Title: Sonnet for My Father
Date: January 12, 2013

I did not know that Edward Thomas sometimes made use of the entries in his
journal as the raw material for his poetry.

His practice is not unique. Ben Jonson boasted that he wrote all his poems in
prose first, then re-wrote them into verse.

So I decided to try an experiment. I took a blog post, written some years ago,
called What My Father Ate. For ease of reference, I reproduce it here.

"Sardines, by the tinful. Herrings, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed
never to eat tongue again, and I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken liver.
Steak, when we could afford it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen
meats -- salami, baloney, corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of
Heinz. Apples, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially
white chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, covered with gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. No alcohol, nary a drop. On hot days,
no beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee. Cheese, either Velveeta or
swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb cake direct  from Ebinger's
Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat.
Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning, bagels and rolls, warm from the oven,
eaten while reading the Times (25 cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream,
the more exotic the flavor the better."

And then I turned it into a sonnet, with these results.

Fragrant, oily iridescent sardines,

Herring by the tinful, gefilte fish;

Lima beans, soaked, boiled, mashed and then buttered

Crowding the flesh to the edge of the dish.

Salami, baloney, baked beans, and tongue.

Chopped chicken liver, calf liver with bacon,

Corned beef, frankfurters slathered with mustard

Pastrami -- and anything delicatessen.

Roast pork with applesauce, roasted potatoes.

Black radish, gribbinis, onions, and rye bread,

Cheese -- cream,  Velveeta or Swiss --  on a bagel.

On Sundays, Ebinger’s crumb cake instead.

Apples, core and all, gnawed  down to the stem.

The flesh, the seeds, the skin – all gone just like him.

Doesn't seem to work for me. I guess you have to be a poet, which I obviously am
not. Or perhaps there's a problem with the raw material.

Source: 2013/01/edwardandedna

Title: Edward and Edna
Date: January 15, 2013

Edward Thomas died at the battle of Arras, in France, in April of 1917. He was
thirty-nine years old.

In this picture, he looks intense, suspicious, soulful, possibly even poetic,
-- but not the suffering-soul-kind of poet. When he joined the military, he
transformed himself into the stereotype of an officer. The new "look" was not a
success, in my opinion.

Before he went off to the war, Edward Thomas conducted a flirtation and possibly
an affair but more probably what they called in those inhibited days a "romantic
friendship" with Edna Clarke Hall. She was a beautiful, intelligent woman, an
artist. Here she is looking positively post-Pre-Raphaelite.

And here again -- youthful, delicate and glowing.

After Edward died, his wife Helen, herself a gifted, attractive and certainly
long-suffering woman,  wrote to Edna. "Why wasn't I beautiful to Edward? Oh,
I did so long for your beauty not to take it from him, not take but give, to
have hair & eyes & mouth & that something else....  I remember you so clearly
standing for all I longed to have to give him."

I am moved by Helen's grief and also by her generosity.

Edna Clarke Hall died at age 100 in 1979.

Source: 2013/01/markwayne-mullins-1

Title: Representative Markwayne Mullin
Date: January 15, 2013

I listened to an interview with Markwayne Mullin, a new member of the House of
Representatives, and had a hard time believing my ears. It wasn't that he was
inarticulate or stupid. It was that he was so utterly smug, so absolutely and
entirely certain of himself. He has no doubts. He knows exactly what ails the
country -- too much government -- and he knows how to fix it -- lower taxes,
less regulation, more free untrammeled capitalism. He does not seem to be aware
that the United States of America is a big, complicated, multi-faceted country.
Markwayne Mullin possesses all the arrogance of ignorance, in spades.

Here's some proverbial wisdom: "For every complex problem, there's a simple
solution, and it's wrong."

My father, who was not a military man, always liked to vote for people who had
served in the Army or Navy. "At least," he would say, "they have met people from
other parts of the country. Maybe they've served abroad and seen something of
the world."

Markwayne Mullin hasn't served in the military and there's no evidence on his
website that he's traveled far from his home of Westville (population 1596) in
Adair County in eastern Oklahoma. Here is Main Street, Westville:

He went off to college (Missouri Valley College, which, curiously, doesn't teach
foreign languages) but didn't stay long. His website says he's a successful
businessman, a plumber. More precisely (and I'll let his prose speak for
itself), "Mullin is proud to have turned a family trade into a thriving
business. Mullin Plumbing is most recognized due to its advertising and the
more than 100 employees known for their hallmark red vans visible servicing
Oklahomans across the state. For his part, Markwayne personally promotes the
company through television and radio advertising. One of his favorite jobs is to
produce and host the radio call-in talk show “House Talk.”

His positions are straightforward and clear (and red, red, red) -- an entirely
unoriginal litany of right-wing simplicities and pieties.

We are taxed enough. Cutting spending, not raising taxes, is the answer to
paying down debt.

The 2nd Amendment is crucial to ensuring our freedom.

Excessive government regulations, like those promulgated by the EPA, harm job
growth.

We must restrain an out-of-control bureaucracy.

Life — from the moment of conception to natural death — is sacred. I am a
100 percent pro-life conservative.

Our United States troops must NEVER be under control of the United Nations.

We spend too much on foreign aid. Our challenges here at home must come first.

Private industry creates jobs. The government creates dependency.

Traditional marriage, between one man and one woman, is a sacred institution
that must be preserved. Strong, healthy families are the heartbeat of our
nation.

Parents should have final decision-making authority in the education of their
children, because they know better than Washington, D.C., bureaucrats how to
best educate their children.

ObamaCare must be repealed.

Ensuring access to quality, affordable health care is one of America’s
greatest challenges today. The free market will meet the challenge if the
government will get out of the way. We must cautiously seek comprehensive reform
that protects the solvency of Medicare and Medicaid.

We must protect America’s borders to stop illegal immigration. Amnesty
proposals should be rejected.

Penalties should be strengthened against illegal immigration and law enforcement
given the resources for enforcement.

If it had been one of those call-in radio shows, I would have liked to ask Mr
Mullin a couple of questions, such as, how are we going to get the lettuce
picked and the roof fixed without all those immigrant laborers? How come life
expectancy is lower in the US than in socialist Europe, even though we spend
more on health care? How much do we actually spend on "foreign aid"? Who exactly
wants to put US troops under the control of the United Nations? Are people
like me, retired teachers who worked only for the government, really all that
dependent? and compared to whom? Who's attacking your traditional marriage
that you need to get all in a twist about other people's marriages? How come
when a not-for-profit hospital is taken over by a for-profit hospital, the
mortality rate immediately rises? To whom should we turn when the cantaloupe is
contaminated? Should we worry about global warming? Should we be concerned by
the concentration of wealth among the top 1% of families.What happens when a big
hunking tornado rips through Adair County?

My hope is that Markwayne Mullin, who as he begins his congressional career is
superficial to the very core of his being, will come to Washington, meet some
folks from different parts of the country and from different ethnic backgrounds,
learn a little about the world, come to an appreciation of the complexity of
things, and grow up to be a useful broad-minded compassionate public servant.
It's not impossible, but it's not going to happen until Mullin realizes that
he doesn't know everything about everything, and that the practices that made
Mullin Plumbing such a success may not be the same practices that will promote
the general welfare over all of the US of A.

I'm hopeful, but frankly, I'm not at all optimistic.

Source: 2013/01/large-mammal-news-

Title: Large Mammal News from Boulder, Colorado
Date: January 20, 2013

Mountain lions frequently wander from the foothills right into the heart of
town. It's routine for them to "take" a pet cat or dog. A full-grown mountain
lion can jump over the 8-foot chain link fence behind which you've sequestered
your golden retriever, kill it, and then grab it with its mouth and bound back
over the fence. The young lion pictured above has found itself on someone's back
deck. Good thing that there are no children enjoying themselves on the swings to
its left.

The lion doesn't seem to be fazed by her near-cousinhood to behind-glass-door
domesicated kitty. Stay inside, Muffy! You'll have a better day. .

A few months ago, wildlife officers killed a lion that had followed the deer
downtown and "showed no fear of humans." More commonly, officers shoot the lions
with tranquilizer darts and then banish them deep in the mountains west of town.

Mule deer are totally at home in our city. They're so common that no one pays
them much mind, except when they eat the shrubbery and the early spring flowers.
They're so acclimated to humans that they don't even shy when you come right up
to them. They just stare right back at you and go on eating your tulips.

Black bears are also frequent visitors. They patrol unsecured garbage cans,
especially in the fall when they're fattening up for hibernation. Recently, one
of them became quite a celebrity:

It was shot with a tranquilizer dart and dropped from its perch in a tree on to
a mattress, and was then transported back into bear country.

We have another celebrity animal this week, but the story behind it is not so
felicitous. A bull elk has been hanging out, for the last few years, right at
the western edge of town. He's become a friend, or perhaps a totem, to his human
neighbors. But for some stupid reason, two police officers (one of whom owns
a taxidermy studio) decided to kill it. Which they did, with a shotgun. The
"Mapleton Elk" has been mourned with a candlelight vigil; the police officers
have been charged with "suspicion of forgery, tampering with physical evidence,
attempting to influence a public official as well as unlawful taking of a trophy
elk, conspiracy, killing an elk out of season, unlawful use of an electronic
device to unlawfully take wildlife and first degree official misconduct." I'm
not proud of them.

Our local coyotes have also been in the news. Although we've always known they
were around, they've been discreet. But lately, they've taken to harassing
joggers on the Creek Path.

The plan is to "re-educate" them, but "lethal control" has not been ruled out.

Be sensible, coyotes! Stay out of sight. No nipping at the heels of strollers or
bikers.

Source: 2013/01/terpen

Title: Terpen
Date: January 23, 2013

Before there were dikes there were terpen.

I was disgracefully ignorant of terpen until I read Robert Van de Noort's
North Sea Archaeologies: A Maritime Biography, 10,000 BC to AD 1500 (Oxford,
2011). Van de Noort devotes many pages to terpen, which are artificial islands
constructed between 500 BC and 1000 AD in parts of the Netherlands, Denmark,
and Germany. The earliest terpen were simple mounds on which a house was built;
later several or more would be joined together to form small elevated villages
protected against high tides and flooding. They might be as much as forty
feet high. With the coming of dikes (c. 1000-1200 AD), terpen ceased to be
constructed.

Here's a terp, viewed from above.

And here's another, photographed from ground level.

I've been to the lowlands and might have seen these peculiar topographical
features with my own eyes, but I certainly didn't register them. Even if I had,
I might have confused them with the grave barrows or tumuli that are common
in Scythian Bulgaria, or even with drumlins, which have a similar look to the
uneducated eye -- although drumlins are natural rather than man-made.

I love it that "terpen" retains its ancient plural, along with words such as
oxen and brethren. There aren't many such words in the language (children is a
reduplicated plural, the original "-er" plural supplemented by an -en plural --
and some day to be superseded, I predict, by "childrens").

Van de Noort's book is fascinating reading for those who like terpen and bronze-
age sewn plank boats and such. It's rich in detail but might have been even
richer if the author hadn't felt the need to waste space by calling the seashore
a "place of liminality" and shipboard "a heterotopia sailing upon the Deleuzian
ocean" -- and also indulge himself with many unconvincing  speculations
dependent on such peculiar,  modish, transitory vocabulary.

When it comes to odd words, give me the old ones every time. Here are some
satisfying lovely words that were as new to me as terpen: saltern (an area in
fenlands set aside for salt manufacture); cofferdam (a temporary dam), thwart
(a seat in a rowboat), leister (a two-pronged spear for fishing), dromond (a
medieval galley) and broch (a dry-stone tower).

Source: 2013/01/persona

Title: Revisiting Persona: 1967-2013
Date: January 30, 2013

When I saw Ingmar Bergman's Persona in 1967, I was pretty much baffled. Oh, I
understood the translated dialogue, and I understood the general idea that the
two women were similar and possiby melding into one, whatever that might mean,
but I didn't understand what it all signified, or how the "plot" was related to
the repeated abstract collages and to the heavy-handed religious symbolism. It's
hard to recall whether I was intimidated by the film or resented it -- I think
both, alternately and sometimes simultaneously.  Did I mumble under my breath,
"pretentious fraud?"  I can't say for sure.

I saw Persona again last night. I would like to tell you all, faithful readers,
that I have grown and matured into a discerning viewer, and that the once-opaque
film is now transparent. But I can't. It's still just as mysterious as it was
almost fifty years ago.  And I'm just as slow, or insensitive, or unaesthetic.

Even the "self-reflexive" moments -- i.e. when the audience is allowed to see
the camera -- seem obvious and not especially clever. Everyone has always known
that films are films. So what?

Inasmuch as I've seen many more films by Bergman (and many that I admire
tremendously), I am prepared to indulge the auteur. I think Persona is just so
personal to Bergman that it doesn't communicate. Whatever else it might be, it's
astonishingly self-indulgent. I confess that, at heart, I'm still suspicious of
the people who claim to understand and who are eager to explicate.

To the MGM DVD of Persona, an interview with Bibi Andersson, who spoke almost
all the film's dialogue, was appended. Ms. Andersson said that she knows that
some people considered Persona to be Bergman's masterpiece, but that she herself
didn't understand it.

I admire her candor.

Source: 2013/02/amnesia-on-film-private-life-of-sherlock-holmes

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes (1970)
Date: February 03, 2013

As far as I can remember, and I've read the stories many times, Conan Doyle's
Sherlock Holmes never had to deal with amnesia, which in those days of reading
and writing had not yet become the most routine of plot devices. The Holmes of
Billy Wilder's movie runs into amnesia straight off the bat, when Gabrielle
Valladon, a handsome though mighty bedraggled woman, appears at 221-B Baker
Street apparently suffering a loss of memory precipitated by both a bump on
the head and a near drowning in the Thames. But there's a gimmick within the
gimmick: Mme. Valladon's amnesia is totally fraudulent. The lady is in "fact" a
German spy pretending loss of memory in order to insinuate herself into Holmes'
sympathies.

The audience falls for it, which is not a surprise, because we watchers have
been indoctrinated to willingly and enthusiastically suspend our disbelief at
the slightest hint of film's most common malady. But that Holmes should succumb
-- well, that's a bit of a disappointment. Fictional Holmes would have been a
lot more discerning, amnesia-wise, than filmic Holmes.

Source: 2013/02/helen-thomas-storms-wing

Title: Nineteenth-Century Romance
Date: February 08, 2013

I've several times poked fun at sad instances of Victorian sexual prudery. If,
gentle reader, you doubt that I'm capable of prude-pokery, check here, here and
here.

My mild animosity toward the sexual silliness of our ancestors originated in
my childhood. My father, though in most things a font of good common sense,
was, sexually speaking, very much a old-fashioned dyed-in-the-wool Victorian.
Whenever a discussion of sex or anatomy or reproduction would arise in our
house, he would immediately turn red and stumble out of the room. Early on, I
learned not to ask. On the few occasions when my poor papa mumbled something
before he bolted, his information was always uninformed, frequently wrong, and
occasionally dangerous.

My father inhabited an earlier psychological universe and he couldn't possibly
have imagined how the  invisible worm has turned. If he were alive today, he
couldn't watch movies or TV or read novels. Too much gross language, too much
frankness, too much nudity, too much casual coupling. He would have been aghast
and embarrassed.

Nevertheless, repression has its compensations. It is absolutely clear to me
that people of his generation and earlier experienced pleasures that cannot be
realized now. The brave new libertine world of hooking up and sloppy drunken sex
and XXX sites gratifies the instincts, but at significant cost.

Return we now to the last years of the nineteenth century, when Helen and the
great poet Edward Thomas went a-courting. In their young twenties, a couple of
years into their anguished relationship, they (in Helen's words)

were sitting in the undergrowth of a little copse in a remote part of the
common. Edward had said that he had never seen a woman's body, and I do not
remember quite how it came about, but I quite naturally and simply without any
feeling of shyness, knelt up in our secret bower and undid my clothes, and let
them fall about my knees so that to the knees I was naked.  I knew my body was
pretty, my breasts wre firm and round and neither too small nor too large, and
my neck and shoulders made a pleasant line, and my arms were rounded and white,
and though my hips were small, the line of the waist was lovely.  I was proud
of my body, and took the most innocent pleasure in its lines and health and
strength. So we knelt in the grass and dead leaves of the copse opposite to each
other, he silent and I laughing with joy to feel the air on my skin, and to see
his enraptured gaze. For as he knelt he gazed wonderstruck and almost adoring,
quite still, quite silent, looking now and then in my eyes with a serious
ecstatic look, his eyes full of tenderness and love, searching mine for any sign
of regret or shyness. He did not touch me, but just knelt there letting hie eyes
take their fill of the beauty that was filling his soul with delight. When,
without a word, I lifted my clothes about me, he helping me, he only then said,
'Helen, I did not know there was such beauty.'

Scoff as you will, ungentle readers.

I know -- it's prettified and romanticized. But it's an innocence that cannot
be invented. And I'm not scoffing. I don't think that there's a person on our
continent or in our century as naive as Edward Thomas was in England in 1898.
Nor do I think that there's anyone who could say what he said, and say it with
such bedazzled and wonderful sincerity: "Helen, I did not know there was such
beauty."

It's a world that we have lost.

(Helen Thomas unveils in her memoir, Under Storm's Wing).

Source: 2013/02/bergmans-the-seventh-seal

Title: Ingmar Bergman's The Seventh Seal
Date: February 10, 2013

I remember that my first and until yesterday sole viewing of Bergman's The
Seventh Seal took place in August of 1958 at one of those big old downtown
Brooklyn movie palaces. I was in the company of Leigh Anderson and Alice Bruno,
who might not remember the day -- or remember me, for that matter.

It was a memorable occasion because Bergman mattered, or so it seemed at the
time. Like everyone in my age-cohort, I had grown up on westerns and crime and
horror and musicals. I knew what to expect in a movie theatre. A beginning, a
middle and an end, for one thing. A resolution. But then along came Fellini and
Kurosawa and Bergman and the rules changed. It was exciting and puzzling and
like other observant college kids, I was trying to figure it all out. Movies had
been Saturday entertainment;  I did not know that thee could be "intellectual."

The Seventh Seal took me by surprise in all kinds of ways. It was episodic and
the episodes didn't tie together into a linear narrative. Its emotional range --
from sexy to sordid to brutal to picturesque to ruminative -- was more than I
could fathom or follow. It didn't have a Hollywood plot -- no one ended up with
the money or the girl.  And then there were these long brooding silent shots in
which the point lay in the cinematography (I word I didn't wouldn't learn for
twenty years). I had no vocabulary to help me understand what I saw -- I didn't
even know the word "allegory", or if I did, I didn't connect it with movies.

Last night, The Seventh Seal came around again, this time not in a palace but
right there on the big hdtv.  I was hoping it would still be as magical as
it was in the 1950s, but alas, not so. It seemed, I'm sorry to say, stagey
and contrived and pretentious. The allegory -- the despairing knight's search
for meaning in a godless universe -- came across, last night, as shallow. The
discovery that there ain't a god out there does not shock this born and raised
atheist, although I do feel for Bergman and all those others whom it cost so
dearly to surrender the illusion.

Source: 2013/02/why-we-love-kenneth-faried

Title: Why We Love Kenneth Faried
Date: February 12, 2013

Because he plays with infectious enthusiasm. Because he's undersized for his
position but unfazed. Because he plays a better game today than he did last
week. Because he's so often the first man down the floor, outrunning and
outhustling his opponent. Because he's not the most gifted athlete in the
league, but he makes the most of his abilities. Because he plays within himself
and doesn't force up bad shots. Because he can score fifteen or twenty points a
game without a play being called for him.

Sure, he's occasionally out of place on defense.True, he hasn't yet learned how
to play the pick and roll. His offensive games is limited to putbacks and short
jumpers. And sometimes he has a bad game because the opponent is bigger and
better.

But he's learning. He's coachable.

And because he's the first NBA player to pledge support for gay rights. (Kenneth
has two mothers and he "loves them both.") Congratulations, Kenneth Faried, for
speaking out.

Source: 2013/03/redskins-injuns-native-americans

Title: Redskins /Injuns/ Native Americans/ Human Beings
Date: March 11, 2013

In the beginning there was Tonto, the "faithful Indian companion" and there were
"renegades" who didn't want to live on the reservation. I was a perfectly naive
urban lad, and of course I bought the whole package.

In my defense, I early developed serious qualms at the Saturday westerns
where buckskinned redskins were regularly drilled by six-shooters to fall
picturesquely from pinnacles or palaminos. My first serious movie, Red River,
featured a memorable and even-then-revolting scene in which redskins were
remorselessly and shockingly slaughtered.

I'm proud to say that early on I started to identify with the underdogs.
Renegades indeed? But some of my sympathy was bought with eroticized stereotypes
of women (such as Debra Paget in Broken Arrow). And then there were Rudy York
and Allie Reynolds, who were real people. How to reconcile the stereotypes to
the facts? Beyond my childhood abilities.

It's astonishing how much of my view of our native cousins was generated by the
movies. And by Fenimore Cooper as well, although at this present moment the
only clear remembrance of the Leatherstocking saga that remains in my mind is a
gruesome scene in which fiendish Mohawk "squaws" torture a white captive.

In school there were maps of territory inhabited by the Navajos and the Iriquois
and the Comanche and the Pawnee. All very exotic but I for one had no concept
that these names signfied people with lives and identities and histories. P. S.
217 textbooks certainly did not use the word "genocide."

In the 1960s, I read perhaps a hundred "captivity narratives."  And also
Theodora Kroeber's very moving biography of Ishi. Exposure to these books opened
my mind.

And since then I've visited the cliff dwellings in Mesa Verde and read about
the vast city of Cahokia. But my knowledge remains literary, rather than
experiential. Although I live in the great west (and just two blocks from
Arapahoe Avenue), I've rarely encountered genuine native Americans -- they're
mighty scarse in these parts. And the few folks whom I've met who claim Indian
"blood" are far blonder than I.

Source: 2013/03/neanderthal-news

Title: Neanderthal News
Date: March 15, 2013

We were not always the earth's sole hominid. Neanderthals (and Denisovans, and
Homo floresiensis (if they were truly distinct species) overlapped our time. 
Here are two skeletons, one of ours and one of theirs.

The first Neanderthals appeared perhaps a quarter of a million years ago
and certainly by 170,000 years BP. They seem to have supplanted Homo
heidlebergensis, a more distant cousin of ours, and they flourished from Spain
to Israel, as far north as Finland, and possibly as far east as the Altai
mountains in Siberia. In order to live in cold climates, they would have
clothed themselves, though of course not a trace of a garment has survived.
Neanderthals, it's been newly determined, carried a gene associated with pale
skin and red hair. Their brain cases were slightly larger than ours, but shaped
differently --  bulging at the sides and protruding in the back. Their rib
cases flared at the bottom and their pelvises were broad, which meant that their
strides necessarily involved a lot more hip rotation than our straightforward
gait. They were more robust than we, with heavier bones and muscles, and they
were much stronger. They ate more than we did and matured more rapidly -- their
wisdom teeth developed at six years of age. Earlier Neanderthal populations
appear to have been scavengers, but later ones were predators, capable of taking
mammoths and wooly rhinoceroses. The plaque of Neanderthal teeth reveal traces
of phytoliths which occur in the roots and leaves of plants. It's known that
they ate dates, barley and legumes. Both meat and plants were cooked. There is
some fragmentary evidence that they practiced cannibalism, but, I'd prefer to
think, only "survival cannibalism."  Neanderthals lived in bands or perhaps 8
or 10 members. They occasionally buried their dead, but left behind no evidence
of ritual or ceremony. They knapped chert and flint into scrapers and hand axes
and the knew how to bind stone to wooden handles with adhesives and sinew, but
they did not make use of bone tools.

They were gone from the earth about 20,000 years ago, displaced by homines
sapientes and perhaps reduced by changes in the climate or by other destructive
natural events.

Humans of European origin (but not of African or Asian) interbred with
Neanderthals, so that as much of 4% of human DNA is Neanderthal. On ther other
hand, no Homo sapiens DNA has been discovered in Neanderthal populations. No one
knows why the one and not the other.

This report is filched from Ian Tattersall's Masters of the Planet (2012), an
excellent book that brought me up to date on human origins. I recommend it
with genuine enthusiasm. It's learned, clearly written, and sensible. And it
displaces the cartoon history I grew up with in which monkeys lead to apes and
then to Piltdown (!!!) man and then to insurance salesmen in tie and jacket. 
The modern picture is more complicated and far more fascinating and also replete
with unsolved puzzles.

Source: 2013/04/stephen-maxfield-parrish-1922-2012

Title: Stephen Maxfield Parrish, 1922-2012
Date: April 02, 2013

Now only one of my teachers survives -- and then only because he's a
centenarian. Steve Parrish, next-to-last, who was very kind to me back there
in the 1950s, died a year ago at the age of 90. News travels slowly.  I now
realize that Steve was only a couple of years out of grad school when I met him
(his career started late because of two Navy stints, one in WWII and one in
Korea). He was disarmingly casual, but nevertheless learned and intelligent. In
retrospect, I am stunned that he was able to listen to my adolescent blather
with a straight face. I also remember a dinner at his home where his genial
demeanor was taxed by the ferocity of his then-wife. Of his famous grandfather,I
tried but never got him to say a word. Letters and postcards from him were
appropriately signed, "Affably, SMP.  I remember that he helped me with my
undergraduate thesis, helped me to win a Wilson, and wouldn't let me quit the
"large Eastern university" to which he had sent me when I wanted to come back
home to the alma mater far above Cayuga's waters.

I should have thanked him. Too late.

Source: 2013/04/hyena-news

Title: Hyena News
Date: April 26, 2013

It had been a long time since I'd read a decent hyena book, so I opened Mikita
Brottman's Hyena (London, 2012) with great anticipation.

I'm sorry to report that it was a bit of a disappointment: not nearly enough
biology and too much undigested "reception history."  Yes, it's true that
hyenas are regarded with almost universal fear and revulsion. perhaps because
they dig up corpses and run off with young children. But I knew that. And
although Brottman mentions the unusual sexual apparatus of female hyenas, which
causes so much difficulty with copulation and childbirth, she neglected to
remind us that hyena males lack a baculum.

Good pictures, however.  Here's one.

Not particularly lovable, I think.

I've seen a lot of stuffed animals in baby's cribs, but I've never seen a cute
stuffed hyena. Merely a sampling error, it turns out. Stuffed hyenas suitable
for your newborn are available on the internet,

Nevertheless, I a bit skeptical that hyenas will ever outsell the bunnies and
puppies.

Source: 2013/05/shakuntala-devi

Title: Shakuntala Devi's Brain
Date: May 09, 2013

Shakuntala Devi, who died in India a week or so ago, was an incredible
arithmetician. She once "accurately multiplied two random 13-digit numbers in
a few seconds." "On a visit to this country, an American psychologist set her
two problems: the cube root of 61,629,875, and the seventh root of 170,859,375.
Shakuntala Devi gave the correct answers - 395 and 15 - even before he started
his stopwatch."

No one knows how she did this. No one has even advanced a persuasive theory.

It's difficult for me to remember a thirteen-digit number. I don't think I could
remember two thirteen-digit numbers. It's beyond my imagination to think about
multiplying them (to produce the correct twenty-six digit answer).

I'm wondering whether Devi's abilities seem so astonishing because she's out
there all by herself. If there were a cohort of people who could easily multiply
8, 9, or 12 digit numbers it wouldn't seem so wonderful that she could do 13.
But she's unique.

And intimidating.

But then I'm intimidated by Mozart, whose feats are also beyond imagining.

I wonder whether Ms. Devi carried some sort of genetic mutation. Is remarkable
proficiency at mental arithmetic an inheritable trait?  Which makes me wonder,
when did homines sapientes acquire the ability to learn the times table?  When
did the mutation for that trait first appear?

I telephoned my consultant on such matters, the blogger Political Mammal. He
says that the ordinary brain, yours and mine, does so many calculations just
when we walk down the street and compare this storefront to the one that went
out of business and to the similar one on the next block that, well,  we should
be just as astonished at quotidian events as at mental arithmetic.  I see his
point. Who knows how many synapses are firing now, even as I'm writing this
simplicity-itself post.

But writing a few words is a commonplace miracle;  extracting seventh roots --
now, that's something else.

Source: 2013/05/amnesia

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Vow (2012)
Date: May 20, 2013

Amnesia movies continue to thrive. This latest, The Vow, made a bunch of money
but was widely panned.  And should have been. It's a sad sad day when the
amnesia is more credible than the male lead.

The Vow purports to be based on the story of Krickitt (sic) Pappas, who lost
the memory of eighteen months of her life in a automobile accident. Her husband
re-courted her. and re-won her; they lived happily ever after. They're sticking
to the story that she never regained her memory of those lost months.

i have no particular reason to doubt the tale, improbably though it might seen.
The brain is another country; they do things differently there. And Rachel
McAdams, who plays Krickitt, is the most persuasive amnesia-victim I've yet
encountered. Because she doesn't take the amnesia for granted, Hollywood-wise,
but struggles to figure it all out, she seems to be genuinely afflicted.

Nevertheless, it's incredible that she should be in love with that lump of all
lumps, the lumpish Channing Tatum, who turns his character, Kim Carpenter, into
a affectless lump.  I've encounted talentless actors in my life, but Tatum is
something special.

Nor do I believe that the lovers either met or were reunited at the "Cafe
Mnemonic."

The Vow is pure, unashamed soap opera, although it is more credible about the
disease than most amnesia offerings, perhaps because it offers no cooked-up,
nonce oversimpliication of what's going on in the brain.

Source: 2013/06/fowles

Title: Fowles, Snakes, etc.
Date: June 13, 2013

On the whole, Fowles, as befit his name, was a birder rather than a "snaker,"
so I don't know how he stumbled upon Clifford Pope's The Great Snakes. I am
not surprised that the one fact that Fowles gleaned from Pope's herpetological
knowledge that "snakes copulate for hours, sometimes a day at a time."  A very
Fowlesian piece of information.

I am surprised that he also reported in his journal the same snake anecdote that
Dr. Metablog noted right here on this very blog. Back in 2006, Dr. M.  made
mention of the instructions provided to early African missionaries on the proper
response to meeting one of those 25-foot-long,  300-pound reticulated Burmese
pythons. I found it in a book called Man the Hunted. Here's the story:

Remember not to run away; the python can run faster. The thing to do is to lie
flat on the ground on your back with your feet together, arms to the sides
and head well down. The python will then try to push its head under you,
experimenting at every possible point. Keep calm, one wiggle and he will get
under you, wrap his coils round you and crush you to death. After a time the
python will get tired of this and will probably decide to swallow you without
the usual preliminaries. He will very likely begin with one of your feet. Keep
calm. You must let him swallow your foot. It is quite painless and will take a
long time. If you lose your head and struggle he will quickly whip his coils
around you. If you keep calm, he will go on swallowing. Wait patiently until
he has swallowed about up to your knee. Then carefully take out your knife and
insert it into the distended side of his mouth and with a quick rip slit him up.

In 2006, Dr M. wrote:  "Well-meant advice, I'm sure, but perhaps difficult to
follow. Suppose you're just not in the mood to allow the python such liberties
with your person. Suppose you've forgotten to bring your knife; suppose
the python decides to start with your head rather than a foot. Suppose you
involuntarily wiggle just a teensy bit. Suppose you just don't feel that it's a
good day to be engulfed."  Fowles' comment is shorter but equally pertinent. 
He writes:  "And spend the rest of your life in an asylum."

When I realized that Fowles and I had a common interest in giant man-eating
snakes, I decided that the least I could to honor his memory was re-read The
Magus. Which I did, at first with enthusiasm and then with increasing dismay
as the the novel's flaws began to overwhelm its beauties. The Magus is too
contrived, too obvious. Nicholas Urfe, the naif, is so unsuspicious that he is
fooled by Conchis, the magician, over and over again -- many more times than is
remotely credible. The reader (the 2013 reader, that is, not the 1965 reader)
catches to the repeated gimmickry. But then after Urfe realize that he's been
sadistically manipulated, he stockholm-syndromes his tormentors far too rapidly
and cursorily.  It should take as much time to heal as to be harmed. As a
result the book is out of balance -- too long in the middle, too short in the
resolution. And then on top of that there's the heavy-handed Jungstuff and the
grade-school pop Freudianism!! O my gosh. I was embarrassed. And in addtion,
there is the deeply, unliberated Victorian attitudes toward sexuality in a book
that claims to be "advanced."  Anyway, it just did not work this time through.
What a disappoingment.

And I'm disappointed in Fowles as well. I began to read his journals in the hope
that he would be  complex and philosophical and aware, but, no, he was just
like me -- simple, defensive, insecure.

And what a snob: so much and so often worried about his bourgeois background and
so ashamed of his  well-meaning parents.

Most unforgiveable is not that he ran off with his best friend's wife, but that
he wouldn't let Elizabeth keep her daughter. He made her choose between him and
her own child.  In my view, a man should never come between a parent, a mother,
and her offspring. It's a violation of the natural order, if there is such a
thing as the natural order.

Nevertheless, I'm clinging to my most positive memoriesof Fowles The French
Lieutenant's Woman, which I still believe to be a novel that will last.  But
frankly, I'm just a tad frightened to re-read it.

Source: 2013/06/colloquial-conversation-in-othello

Title: "Colloquial Conversation" in Othello
Date: June 29, 2013

There is an ocean of difference between colloquial conversation in real life and
the dialogue that appears in Shakespeare's works, even when his plays are at
their least artificial and most mimetic.

In its most ordinary use, the word "conversation" means nothing more that the
talk in which real men and women engage in the greater part of their social
lives. These conversations might include formal or semi-formal events such
as oration, debate, interview, negotiation, interrogation, official inquiry,
ceremony , arbitration, sermon, lecture etc. -- all of them linguistic
interactions that are governed by specific although for the most part
unarticulated rules. "Colloquial" conversation, on the other hand, refers
specifically to the wave of informal, unplanned, unregulated and unrehearsed
exchanges that occur over dinner, on the street, by the water-cooler, at the
tavern. Such conversations, although not incapable of eloquence, are on the
whole disorderly, sprawling and haphazard. They are brimful of uncompleted
or suspended thoughts (or thoughts introduced by one interlocutor and then
either completed or re-directed by another), with syntactic collapse and
improvisation, with references to shared experience that may seem to be grand
leaps of logic to an eavesdropper but that are perfectly intelligible to the
participants, with mumbles and grunts, extended pauses (some meaningless, some
momentous), with apparently inexplicable ellipses, with overlaps in which a
number of participants speak simultaneously, with unmediated zigzags from the
profound to the trivial, with repetitions and backtracks, with mis-speakings,
mis-hearings, clarifications, false starts, fragments, non-verbal but sometimes
significant ecphoneses or "response cries" (ooh-ooh), and with a flotilla of
other very ordinary and very natural curiosities. Real colloquial conversation
is spontaneous; it is the activity of two or more intelligences working together
to shape meaning. Real talk is essentially untranscribable, and students of
conversation who have made an effort to set such interactions down on paper have
had perforce to resort to elaborate and imperfect diagrams and codes.

In strong contrast, dialogue in Shakespeare's plays very seldom attempts to
approximate colloquial conversation. And with good reason: Elizabethan dramas
seldom stoop to represent the casual situations in which conversation is likely
to occur. Instead, the circumstances upon which the plays dwell are typically
formal or ceremonial, and the dialogue in which they are enacted consists for
the most part of speeches that delineate an emotion or moral response to a
conflict, of debates over the proper course of action, of reports on past or
distant events, as well as judicial or ritualistic confrontation, soliloquy,
meditation, prayer, boast, threat and counter-threat and various other kinds of
regulated discourse in which the artless and random quality of ordinary talk
would be entirely inappropriate. The dialogue in comedies, though in a different
register, is equally artificial, consisting as it does, of wit-combats, jests,
and the conceits that clownage keeps in pay. Shakespeare's most colloquial
exchanges, unlike real-life conversation, are on the whole orderly, sequential,
composed in intelligible syntax and in complete thoughts. It goes without saying
that dramatic dialogue is, with the exception of the rare improvisational
moment, not spontaneous at all but the studied product of a single controlling
intelligence.

During the first years of his career as a playwright, Shakespeare experimented
with a variety of revolutionary ways to compose dialogue (not generally, but
on propitious occasions) that, although not in any real sense congruent to
actual spoken conversation, nevertheless managed to create the illusion of a
natural and colloquial sound. The employment of dialogue that might pass for
real utterance was not an inheritance from earlier dramatists but was a craft
that Shakespeare had to develop on his own. The fabrication of such dialogue is
an unobtrusive art that does not call attention to itself -- in point of fact,
colloquial conversation is most successful when it is least noticeable. While
the great leviathan examples of Shakespeare's rhetorical mastery have been
subjected to exhaustive analysis, colloquial conversation is so small and so
inconspicuous a fish that it has managed for hundreds of years to slip the nets
of critical analysis.

There is a finely-crafted instance of seemingly-natural colloquial conversation
in Othello.

As Emilia helps Desdemona prepare herself for bed, the two women gingerly feel
their way toward an issue of great sensitivity -- the domination of women by
men. It is a relaxed and intimate conference, all the more obviously so because
it follows in the wake of an anguished and highly-wrought -- and rhetorically
elevated -- scene in which Desdemona has been slandered as an adulterer and as a
daughter of the game.

What techniques does Shakespeare employ to make the exchange between Desdemona
and Emilia appear quite so marvelously natural?

Attempting to console her sorrowful mistress, Emilia offers the opinion that
it would have been better if Desdemona had never known Othello. Desdemona
contradicts her serving-woman:

Des.  So would not I:  my love dost so approve him,

That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns

(Prithee unpin me) have grace and favor.

"Prithee unpin me" comes as a genuine surprise because it is syntactically
discontinuous from the sentence in which it is embedded. It's a separate topic.
Dialogue in Elizabethan drama ordinarily deals with issues sequentially rather
than simultaneously, but dialogue begins to sound a bit like conversation when
the interlocutors engage more than one subject at a time. That the two themes
of the discourse are located on different rhetorical levels (the rather formal
series of nouns in parallel -- stubbornness, checks, frowns-- in contraste to
the offhand parenthetical instruction), suggests that something interesting and
different is about to occur.

The progress toward real or realistic-sounding conversation, initiated with
"unpin me here," continues when Emilia's response engages neither Othello's
mysterious anger or Desdemona's unpinning, but introduces a third subject: "I
have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed."  With this sentence Emilia does
more than simply resume a discussion of so ordinary a matter as bedclothes, she
also replicates a common feature of colloquial conversation -- its practice of
referring without overt signal to a past mutual experience -- i.e. "you bade
me."

Now Desdemona drifts off in a direction of her own.

All's one:  good faith, how foolish are our minds?

If I do die before, prithee shroud me

In one of these same sheets.

"All[s one" -- with its variant "all's one for that" is a common Elizabethan
demotic catch phrase: here it serves a meaningless filler. Desdemona's meander
from death to shrouds to sheets is designed to reflect her own private, internal
non-volitional synaptic leaps. Her apology - "how foolish are our minds" -
reflects both Desdemona's and Shakespeare's knowledge that the sentences violate
the habit of dramatic dialogue in that they are ordered not by logic but by
association.

Emilia's mild but polite rebuke ("Come, come, you talk") is followed by a
sentence in which Desdemona introduces the fourth separate and distinct subject
of this unfolding conversation.

My mother had a maid called Barbary.

She was in love, and he she loved proved mad,

And did forsake her.

Desdemona has fallen into a reverie in which she re-lives an experience of
the childhood that Shakespeare has newly and spontaneously invented for her.
In these two-and-a-half lines, Shakespeare audaciously allows Desdemona to
introduce three new but extremely pertinent characters: Desdemona's mother,
hitherto unknown to the audience, her mother's forsaken maid Barbary, and
the maid's lunatic and inconstant lover. The effect of Desdemona's brief but
poignant recollection is to reinforce the illusion that she is an autonomous
speaker, giving shape to her sentences as they precipitate out of her battered
and not-entirely-disciplined consciousness. An astute audience (or readership)
will certainly notice that Desdemona projects her own plight onto these
imaginary meta-beings, and although the psychological ramifications of their
creation are rich indeed, Shakespeare's use of these improvised beings to mimic
the habits of real talk is as fully wonderful.

Desdemona continues:

She (.e. Barbary) had song of willow.

An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune.

And she died singing it. That song tonight,

Will not go from my mind. I have much to do

But to go hang my head all at one side

And sing it like poor Barbary..  Prithee dispatch.

To enforce the quotidian quality of the dialogue, Shakespeare invokes a
phenomenon familiar to every reader or hearer: the tune that seems to repeat
of its own accord in one's mind. The result: Desdemona has been provided with
a memory, and her memory holds a song, and that song is now apparently going
to sing itself independent of the character's own will. But what occurs is not
only the illusion that Desdemona reveals an inner experience; it is also that
these reflections are cast in such courageously monosyllabic language. And just
to assure us that the characters not not float from their dock in the material
universe, Desdemona's instruction to Emilia --"Prithee dispatch" - sustains the
exact colloquial mode initiated by "Prithee unpin me" and anchors both women in
the real present.

Both song and reverie are now shunted aside as the conversation comes to a small
climax. The two ladies continue to imitate the randomness of real talk:

Emelia.  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?

Desdemona.  No, unpin me here.

This Ludovico is a proper man.

Emilia.  A very handsome man.

Desdemona:  He speaks well.

Emilia:  I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a
touch of his nether lip.

Desdemona and Emilia drift from topic to topic: nightgowns leads by some
unarticulated but easy-to-imagine route to Ludovico and his masculine allure,
thence to Ludovico's habits of speech and at last to the very vivid and
memorable 'lady in Venice" -- a colorful personage who springs from Emilia's
fabricated pre-history, and who flashes across the stage in a hyperbole of
brilliant but unstressed beauty (and whose inexplicable passion asserts that
women can prosecute love-longing fully as irrationally as men). And then, just
when it seems as if the maid Barbary has been left in the lurch and forgotten,
the conversation turns back upon itself and Desdemona breaks into the song of
the poor soul who sat sighing by a sycamore tree. To reinforce the apparent
spontaneity of the moment, Shakespeare makes Desdemona repeatedly interrupt (and
even amend) her own singing :  "Lay by these"... "Prithee high thee;  he'll
come anon"... "Nay that's not next.  Hark who is't that knockes."  This broken
series of syntactically independent units, periodically intruded into the song,
are invented for the sole purpose of giving emphasis to the naturalness and
immediacy of the moment.

Shakespeare has therefore created the appearance of spontaneous conversation
by forsaking the straight path of normative dramatic dialogue. Desdemona and
Emilia intertwine present and past, real and fanciful, public and private, high
language and low, song and speech, understatement and exaggeration, syntactic
coherence and syntactic collapse, all within a context of shared knowledge and
almost sisterly intimacy.

The colloquial moment is fleeting, for even before the scene comes to a close,
Shakespeare returns to a more traditional dramatic idiom. Nevertheless, the
episode has done important work: Emilia's great feminist manifesto ("Let
husbands know,/ Their wives have sense like them") which will follow immediately
after this exchange, has been so effectively grounded in a real, earthy, and
contemporary context that it must stir every sensitive intelligence with its
grand appeal to equity.

It has long been acknowledged that the exotic Moor speaks in a highly
particularized, elaborate, and picturesque idiolect of his own - the music that
sweeps in with the icy currents of the Pontic sea and allows the Moor's great
dignity to find its grand expression. Desdemona and Emilia sing a far calmer
but more original song, and their impromptu domestic duet is surely no less and
perhaps even a greater artistic achievement than Othello's stupendous arias.

More on Othello:  here, here, and here.

Source: 2013/07/translation-conundrum

Title: Translation Conundrum
Date: July 01, 2013

Some years ago, I was doing time at a world-famous research library.  One of
the other inmates posed a problem to the assembled denizens. A Frenchman, he was
translating an American novel into his native tongue and there was a passage
in the book that he could not understand. He thought it might be a joke but he
couldn't make heads nor tails of it. He read us the passage. "Two men are in a
bar. The first man asks, 'What do you do with a giraffe who has three balls on
him.' The second man answers, 'Walk him and pitch to the elephant.'"

As I remember, everyone in the room "got it," but no one could suggest a good
solution to the translation problem. Word-for-word wouldn't do and an equivalent
was impossible to identify. I don't know what the poor fellow decided. Something
elegant, I hope.

Source: 2013/07/a-new-much-ado-2012

Title: A New Much Ado (2012)
Date: July 04, 2013

The new Much Ado is a charming, understated success. The actors are not trained
Shakespeareans; they're tv series folk, and they say the lines conversationally
and casually, paying scant attention to the verse or to the mannered prose
rhythms. It works, on the whole, although some of the great lines are delivered
so unemphatically that they're swallowed and lost. Whoever would imagine that
Benedick's "the world must be peopled' could slip by an audience without e'en a
giggle. The text is judiciously pruned -- the only major omission the nighttime
ceremony for presumably dead Hero -- but that's a scene that has always made
me uncomfortable so I wasn't sorry to see it go. The Dogberry-Verges sequence
is a brilliant deadpan triumph. There's very little added business, thank you,
but what there is, is choice. The actress who plays Beatrice (Amy Acker) has
borrowed so much from Emma Thompson's delivery (in the last filmed Much Ado)
that if you were to close your eyes, you'd think that you'd time-traveled back
to 1993.The director, whom I had never heard of but is apparently famous, is
Joss Whedon. Thanks, Joss.

I've seen many many modern films in which hero and heroine don't get on at first
but little-by-little find themselves in love and in marriage. But Shakespeare
was there first. Beatrice and Benedick are the mom and pop of a half-a-zillion
subsequent comedies. It's good to see them as alive and thriving as they are in
this realization.

Source: 2013/07/a-perfect-sentence

Title: A Perfect Sentence
Date: July 10, 2013

We have goats, two Nigerian pygmies, ex-boys, 9 weeks old.

Ella ((10), returning home from a session with the kids. "The black goat
totally tried to eat my pants."  A perfect sentence, utterly original, utterly
wonderful.

Source: 2013/08/barefoot-to-palestine

Title: "Barefoot to Palestine"
Date: August 30, 2013

I'm enchanted by a sentence in Othello that is spoken by Desdemona's lady-in-
waiting, Emilia. She's helping Desdemona to undress and the two women are
engaged in informal chat. Desdemona, perhaps wondering why she had the
misfortune to fall in love with exotic Othello, allows her mind to wander. It
comes to rest on a countryman of hers, a good-looking man named Ludovico. And
then her interlocutor Emilia praises handsome Ludovico in words that should
compel every sentient being to gasp in astonishment and admiration.

About Ludovico, Emilia makes a remarkable claim: "I know a lady in Venice
would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip."

All that needs to be said is, wow! But let me try to explain why the sentence so
transfixes me.

It's hyperbole, but not the ordinary hyperbole of largest or smallest or coolest
or most awesome. It's a hyperbole beyond hyperbole. A lesser writer might have
said, "I know a lady who would have walked a long way to make love to him." Not
Shakespeare. For "a long way," Shakespeare give us "barefoot to Palestine";
for "make love" he offers "a touch of his nether lip." It's extravagant and
wheeling.

A hike, shod, to the holy land, would have been a long and exacting journey.
Barefoot, beyond belief. The evocative word "Palestine" infuses religion and
sanctity into a sentence about sex and desire -- and therefore generates a love-
longing that is as powerful, as silly, and as ill-planned as a crusade. And for
what aim? Not even, for this mythical lady hiker, a big, zonking, mouth-filling
kiss; simply for the merest contact of lips. No, not even lips, just one lip --
the lower one. It's an hyperbole of minimalism.

In the poetry that Shakespeare knew from his childhood, it was men who would
make the vows and undergo the trials to court their beautiful ladies. But this
lovely sentence reverses the convention. It is, so to speak, Sadie Hawkins day
in Venice.

Emilia elsewhere asserts that women have desires as strong as lovers of the
other sex; here she demonstrates that women's love-longing can be as ridiculous
(and as powerful) as men's.

And everyone who knows Othello will hear in the word "Palestine" an intimation
of the violent act that once, many years ago, shook Aleppo.

Source: 2013/09/yet-another-note-on-nineteenth-century-horsedrawn-vehicles

Title: Yet Another Note on Nineteenth-Century Horsedrawn Vehicles
Date: September 16, 2013

How are we new-millenium readers supposed to grasp the social significance of
nineteenth-century horsedrawn vehicles when even characters in nineteenth-
century novels can be easily baffled?  True enough that Miss Alice Vavasor and
Lady Glencora are both very young ladies, and true also that they've lived
marvelously protected lives, but still -- such appalling ignorance:

" [Alice Vavasor] saw a light stylish-looking cart which she would have called a
Whitechapel had she been properly instructed in such matters, and a little low
open carriage with two beautiful small horses....

"Dear Alice, I'm so glad you've come....  Your maid can go in the dog-cart with
your things!" -- it wasn't a dog-cart, but Lady Glencora knew no better."

A dog-cart was not pulled by dogs. It was an informal vehicle with a recessed
box or cage in which dogs were transported. Trollope lords it over his Lady
Glencora for her ignorance of such plebian matters. And a Whitechapel? There's
no footnote in my edition of Can You Forgive Her and neither google nor
wikipedia hazards a guess (though Wik is well aware of a "deathcore" band of the
same name), so I'll just go with "light stylish cart."

And now add "Whitechapel" to the list: barouche, basket carriage, berlin,
britchka, brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche, cariole, carryall,
chaise, chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon, curricle, cutter,
daumont, dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly, fourgon,
four- wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty car,
jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau, patache, phaeton, pill-box, post-chaise,
rockaway, shandrydan, shay, sociable, spider-phaeton, spring-van, stanhope,
sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika, victoria,
vis-a-vis, wagonette, and wurt.

Source: 2013/09/can-we-forgive-anthony-trollope

Title: Can We Forgive Anthony Trollope?
Date: September 29, 2013

Friends of long standing know that Vivian de St. Vrain, alter ego and nom de
blague, makes two boasts that go a long way toward the establishment of a
substantial worldly identity: a) I've never eaten a McDonald's hamburger,
and b) I've read all forty-seven of Anthony Trollope's novels. Old info for
old friends, but for those internet pilgrims who've just stumbled upon this
website, I know what you're thinking -- what a fascinating personality is Vivian
de St. Vrain!!  What a heady and disorienting combination of discipline and
indulgence and whimsy!!!!  What a guy!!

And not only all of Trollope's novels, but many of them multiple times!!

In fact, I've just now re-read Can You Forgive Her?, the first 800-pager of
the six Palliser novels. This would be either my third or fourth reading -- and
almost certainly, considering my "maturity," my ultimate passage. And what is my
mature judgment, you ask?

I love Lady Glencora more and more. The poor dear was sandbagged into an
arranged marriage but she has spunk and grit. She's attracted to the handsome
sexy guy from the other side of the tracks and she's not going to let him go
easily. Trollope doesn't say so in so many words, and perhaps can't admit it
even to himself,  but she's locked in the classic D. H. Lawrence situation.
She's married to a precious dry article in Planty Pall, a refrigerator of a man
who can't be much fun in bed, no fun at all we think, and she has yearnings. If
it were a Lawrence novel, Lady G. would leave the future Duke and gambol  in
the woods with Burgo Fitzgerald, thread her mound with flowers, live on berries
as long as they lasted, and celebrate her release from prudery in overblown
purple prose. But because it's the middle of the nineteenth century, she is
saved from disgrace -- narrowly -- and learns to renounce her proto-Lawrencian
stirrings. Not without pain.

If there's a miracle in the novel, it's that she gets herself pregnant, and by
her husband. A deus ex machina last-minute rescue! But we readers wonder,
how did it happen?  Plodding Planty Pall doing his duty, meeting his sense of
obligation to his forebears and descendants?  We're surprised that the old
stick had it in him, even though, we're repeatedly told, he's not yet thirty
years old.

Trollope loves his rebellious women, as long as they don't rebel too much, and
as long as they mind that they're subordinate. And also, that they not do much
reading or acquire learning.

And yet I can't help but think how George Eliot would have taken the same
situation and turned it into more than a novel of manners. She would have
transformed it into a critique of the entirety of Victorian culture. Trollope
does not know enough or doesn't care enough to engage the larger issues. But
then, no one, except George Eliot, could do so. Well, there's also Tolstoi.

The novel has its dry spots, but the brilliant parts are absolutely brilliant.
The conversation between Plantagenet and Glencora after the ball, after Lady G.
doesn't run off with Burgo, is utterly scintillating. Trollope is a novelist's
novelist.

He's also good with Alice Vavasor, who like Glencora, goes up to the line but
never crosses it. I think Trollope overdoes it when he turns George into an out-
and-out villain. It's unnecessary and melodramatic. He should have trusted
Alice, and trusted his readership also. We knew that George was a rotter long
before his resort to violence.

And what shall we say about John Grey, Alice's long suffering on-again, off-
again fiance and patient Griseldo. He's just too good for words -- so good
that he becomes otherworldly, almost allegorical. Can a man be so passive and
still be admirable and marriageable, even in an era in which renunciation was
the virtue of all virtues? All in all, John Grey is not credible. Not as a
character, not even as an ideal.

Question of the day for Dr. M?  Should he go on with Phineas Finn and his Irish
friends, or should he stop now?

I think I'll wait and see if I can find someone to tread this path with me. I
don't know that I want to go it alone. Some pleasures should be shared.

Source: 2013/10/an-early-introduction-to-political-foreboding

Title: An Early Introduction to Political Foreboding
Date: October 07, 2013

I was thirteen years old when Eisenhower-Nixon defeated Adlai Stevenson. I
was of course horrified. In what sort of nation, I thought, could a doddering
simpleton with a dark mccarthyite machiavel at his ear defeat an intelligent,
educated, humorous progressive. Ghastly, ghastly.

Mullling this over this morning, I remembered that while Truman was still in
office, postage stamps would be cancelled (hand-cancelled in those days) with
the inscription, "Twenty-five years of Social Security." But right after the
Eisenhower inauguration, the slogan was altered to "Pray for Peace."

A message about a concrete program that actually helped people suddenly turned
into a meaningless, faux-religious instruction. "Pray for Peace" did not seem
then, nor now, like a viable political position. "Pray for Peace" did not speak
to me.

Sixty years later and the Republicans are still beating the same meaningless
drum, still going backwards.

Not only have the damn Republicans not caught up with the age of reason, but
they're still embracing the dark ages. The hole into which they've inserted
their collective heads is not only deeper but considerably more vacuous.

Source: 2013/10/an-incontrovertible-proof-of-evolution

Title: An Incontrovertible Proof of Evolution
Date: October 11, 2013

'The placement of the human male genitalia is ridiculous and ill-conceived.
What in the living heck are such sensitive and vulnerable organs doing right
out there -- in front, dramatically positioned to be bumped by furniture or
careless hands, struck by flying objects, or pummeled by grandchildren. In any
intelligently-designed universe, the penis would be entirely retractable, making
its appearance only when summoned. (Nor would it be a dual-purpose organ. Every
engineer knows that dedicated instruments always perform better than devices
that combine functions.

Moreover, the testicles would be buried deep inside the body cavity, as, for
example, the spleen or the ovaries -- not hanging loose, ungirded and swattable.

Freud once remarked that the male organs of generation have not evolved in the
direction of beauty. And therefore not even the crassest male flaunts his stuff
to attract a mate. Or never did, not until the coming of the internet. If the
parts weren't intended to beautiful, then they might as well have been concealed
and protected. But not so.

Why are they where they are?  The culprit, obviously, is evolution --
specifically, the shift to upright posture. Four feet on the ground and the
apparatus is tucked away behind the hind legs, way back there in the anterior.
Protected, inconspicuous, and discreet. Stand up, and there they are just where
they shouldn't be. A three-year-old child with a box of crayons could produce a
better design than frontward-facing genitalia.

Instead, we're left with either another example of divine under-achievement,
or further and supererogatory confirmation that the universe is disorderly,
aleatory, and improvisational.

It was when women joined in standing upright that breasts came into prominence.
There is no other  mammalian species in which the organs of lactation are so
clearly displayed. But female breasts had the good sense to evolve into an
essential part of sexual display.  "Hey, mister, look at these. Look how well I
can nurse your babies."

Now there, at last, is an evolutionary outcome that makes sense.One that a guy
can bring himself to endorse and admire.

Source: 2013/10/advice-for-parents-part-one

Title: Advice for Parents, Part I
Date: October 26, 2013

On the telephone, The Daughter (as she sometimes calls herself) was fussing
about her teen and tween children. "I'm on the warpath (her metaphor) about the
mess. I'm tired of cleaning up after them. Right now T. has left a pile of her
homework on the kitchen floor. She's at ballet for two hours. What do I do? 
Walk around it or clean it up. Why does she do this?  And O. has left half a
sandwich and piece of apple on the table. I failed to train them when they were
young and now it's hopeless."

Every parent in North America, and perhaps every parent in the known universe,
might make the same complaints.

I tried to console The Daughter. "If you'd like to take ten minutes to vent, I'm
here to listen."

She vented for thirty seconds, then fell silent. Frustrated.

I said, "Here's the way I think of it now. You lose every battle, but you win
the war."

"Explain," she muttered.

"It's obvious. When you and your brothers were growing up, there was some
sort of conflict every day. One of you didn't show up for dinner. Whoever was
supposed to take the garbage out, 'forgot' to do it. Someone would get into a
screaming fit at someone else over nothing significant. Quarters would be stolen
out of pants pockets. Some inches of liquor would mysteriously disappear. Sassy
words would be spoken to parents and parents would be devastated. Someone wasn't
sleeping at the house where he or she said he or she was going to spend the
night. Mileage on the car speedometer would increase without explanation. There
were horrible scenes when someone was asked to do the most minimal of chores.

And yet, despite it all, despite the fact that every day I lost the battle,
I won the war. Each of you turned out to be what my own father used to call
'solid, taxpaying citizens.' You've all doing good works. All living upright,
moral lives. All creating healthy, functioning families. All of you are
excellent parents. The grandchildren are thriving.

So in the long run, I won. Lost every battle, won the war."

The Daughter said, "Blog it."

Source: 2013/11/post-friendly-skies-reposted

Title: Post-Friendly Skies (reposted)
Date: November 27, 2013

It had been a while since I last flew Frontier --the airline with the cute
furry anthropomorphic talking mammals on their tails. There have been changes
-- all of them for the worse. There's now an extra charge for each piece of
luggage. Those free meals are a thing of the remote past.  So are the days
when you would get the entire can of ginger ale or tomato juice. It's now a
splash of juice in a cup of ice. No free TV -- you swipe your card, they swipe
your cash. The seats are smaller, too. More rows, less leg room.  Wasn't there
a time when air travel was glamorous?  Now it's just a big Greyhound in the
sky, a warehouse on wings.

Not only was my seat compressed, but the back didn't recline. Somehow I had
been assigned a seat that backed onto the emergency exit row. In earlier
planes, such seats used to recline, but I'm guessing that Frontier has gained
a few inches by rendering the backs immobile -- at the cost of my comfort (but
not at reduced cost).

Adding to the insult is an unapologetic sign on the back of the seat in front
of me inscribed with the words  NO RECLINE THIS ROW. I wonder what language
the author of this sign thinks he is using. Not English, that's for sure.  "No
recline this row" does not even come close to parsing. What would it have cost
Frontier to affix a sign that read "the seats in this row do not recline." 
Where do they outsource their signs -- to the writers of 1940s cowboy and faux-
Indian movies?  No recline this row! Come on, frontiersmen; you can do better
than that. If you have no respect for me, at least have a little respect for the
language. The talking animals speak better English.

To the chief of sign-makers at Frontier I say, "No hire this job."

There was another sign for me to stare out while I sat there, miserably
cramped, watching the clock.  "LIFE VEST UNDER YOUR SEAT." Isn't Frontier
banging the frugality drum a little too hard?  The sentence might have read,
"Life vest IS under your seat." How much could a trifling copulative verb
cost?  If Frontier wanted to be truly prodigal, it could even have raised
the cash to provide an indefinite article:  "A life vest is under your
seat."  Wow. A complete sentence!. What a concept!

(Orignally posted 2011:  2013 update: no free beverage at all nowadays;  the
cart is only for paying customers. I didn't bother to ask how much for the
plastic cup of water. My prediction:  next time, there will be a charge to use
the bathroom.)

Source: 2013/12/lucinda-roanoke

Title: Lucinda Roanoke
Date: December 23, 2013

I've been reading Trollope's Palliser novels again -- my third or fourth time
through this series of six great big whoppers.  It's a familiar tour -- but
with enough forgettings and misrememberings on my part to keep me focussed and
surprised.

I finished The Eustace Diamonds late last night. I know that I read this novel
for the first time in 1961 because it was in the curriculum of a course taught
by showman Professor Edgar Rosenberg. I haven't the siightest recollection of
that early reading or of Rosenberg's lectures either, but then, sixty years have
gone by and larger and larger cavities riddle my porous Swiss cheese brain.

The Eustace Diamonds is rich in both plot and character.  In addition to
the usual "who is going to marry whom" scenario (three separate instances
here) and still another version of the handsome but weak  hero who is going
to the dogs but redeems himself in the last installment, there's a genuine
cops-and-robbers mystery along with three separate detectives (none of them
as competent as Mr. Bucket). And then there's also a riotous profusion of
characters. Some, like Mr. Benjamin and Mr. Mealyus, products of Trollope's
uncontrollable disgust with those nasty Semites, merely disfigure the page.
Others are stock characters who appear in novel after novel, the name alone
changed:  in this case the the patient Griselda figure Lucy Morris. But then
there's a glorious almost Dickensian abundance of highly-marked, genuinely
individualized and extremely imaginative, credible inventions.

There's Lizzie Eustace, with her fibs, taradiddles and utterly conscienceless
lies; George de Bruce Carruthers, who has an eye for the main chance but knows
how to protect himself against pretty women; elderly Lady Linlithgow, who's all
tart tongue and selfishness; Lord Fawn, a pitiful small-minded aristocrat; and
the bustling opportunistic hypocrite Mrs. Carbuncle.

And then there's Lucinda Roanoke, who inhabits a corner of the novel but
who is fascinatingly perverse. She's an American, very young and handsome,
impecunious, who's being shopped around to snare a husband. Under pressure,
and against all good sense, she accepts an offer from the brute Sir
Griffin Tewett. Lucinda has no intention of becoming an obedient wife. The
engagement becomes a war of attrition between the "lovers."  Sir Griffin holds
on only because, it appears,  he doesn't like to lose and because he assumes
that he'll be able to control Lucinda once he's married and has legal authority
over her. He looks forward to the only sort of sex that might occur, which
woud be nothing less than rape. Lucinda is sex-averse and finds even a kiss
to be abhorrent. As the wedding day approaches, she announces that she will
never be Sir Griffin's bride. She threatens both murder and suicide. On
the morning of the long anticipated day, she simply refuses to leave her
room. Trollope tells us that she has gone mad. And that's the end of the
affair.

Lucinda doesn't quite fit into the space. On the surface, the episode makes the
point that women were offered no place in society except obedient wife. But
this is not comedy of manners;  it's pathology. Sir Griffin is a sadistic
monster. Lucinda does not want to submit, and therefore "chooses" insanity.
Trollope does not follow Lucinda into her madness; instead, he dismisses her
from his novel in exactly the same way that the English society dismisses such
women. Trollope can't make a drop of sense out of the situation that he himself
created. Lucinda deserves, and will earn, a novel of her own. But it won't be
written by Anthony Trollope.

Source: 2013/12/more-dialogue-transcribed-exactly-from-real-life

Title: More Dialogue Transcribed Exactly from Real Life
Date: December 25, 2013

Foureen-year-old granddaughter (astounded):  "Grandpa, you still get Netflix
through the mail???"

Grandpa:  "Yes, it's a tradition. We'e been doing it this way for hundreds of
years."

Granddaughter:  "Hummh."

Source: 2013/12/another-pearlman-gosse-xmas

Title: Another Gosse-Pearlman Xmas
Date: December 30, 2013

And so we've come to the end of the "holiday season" once again.

Another Christmas, another winter solstice, another St. Lucy's day with
its deepest of midnights. Even here in ever-sunny Colorado, things are a
bit gloomy. However, I have every confidence that another spring is just
around the corner. I don't need to bring greenery into the house in order to
prevent the dragon from swallowing the sun. The days, now so abbreviated, will
lengthen and in five weeks we'll see the first crocuses and a week later the
daffodils and pussy-willows. It's going to happen. But as always, the last
days of the year challenge me.

I'm relieved and happy that Christmas and the whole Christmas business is done
and gone. No one wants to be a scrooge and I don't want to frown on carols and
gift-giving and plum-puddings and good fellowship, but in my heart, let me
confess, I don't like the holiday. I can't make sense of the virgin birth or
the sacrifice of the only-begotten son. I don't even respect the story-- to
me it's just dressed-up scapegoating. Moreover, Jesus' revolutionary message
about caring for the poor seems to be ignored or repudiated by Christianity's
most vociferous advocates. And then there's all that incongruous stuff that
has accreted around Christmas -- the hype and the commercialism and the
religious chauvinism and the reindeer and the tactless triumphalism. It's both
incomprehensible and offensive to me.

And I'm in good company. I have allies. Let us go back to the beginning of
Athe merican experience with Christmas.

If the profoundly religious seventeenth-century founders of our country had
a single favorite Biblical moment, it's when the Lord (speaking through His
prophet Amos) severely condemned the vanity of holidays. "I hate," said
the Lord, "I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies." The Lord of Hosts specifically enjoined against the attempt to
placate him by sacrificing animals (a matter of topical concern in Amos's time).
"Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept
them; neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts." Nor did
He rest with these easy-to-follow injunctions, but He went on to condemn all
musical tributes as well. Nor more chants, glees or carols: "Take thou away
from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols."
Our Puritan forefathers recognized that the Lord opposed not only rituals
and music but all formal observances and rote piety. The Ancient of Days was
moved not by empty ceremony but by right action and good behavior. Instead of
squeaking timbrels and sounding brass, why, "let justice run down as waters,
and righteousness as a mighty stream." Taking these uncompromising sentences
as their guide, our founders dug in their heels against the ostentatious
celebration of all holidays, especially Christmas.

I applaud the old guy, the Father, and I revere Amos. His mantra bears
repeating: "Let justice come down as the waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream."

The neglect of "righteousness" in favor of buying things makes me melancholy. I
would be happy to see fewer purchases and more good deeds. It would help us
through the dark months.

The winter solstice is a sensitive time for me because it's the anniversary
of my father's birthday. He arrived to no poorer family on the planet on the
darkest day of the year, the twenty-second of December, 1904. ‘And they
called his name Emanuel, God with us,’ -- but whether by accident or design, I
have no idea. My father lived a long and just life. He had many virtues -- one
of them that he was the least materialistic person ever. He had no possessions
and craved none. But he was righteous.

I don't know how anyone could write a biography of Emanuel, my father. There
was so little plot, so little conflict in his life. He went about his business,
raised his family, kept to the straight and narrow. His memory is a blessing to
us.

At this time of the year I turn once again to one of the most
challenging fathers in literature. The voluminous works of Sir Edmund Gosse
are not much read nowadays except by specialists in Edwardian literature, but
Father and Son (1907) still stands as one of the world's great autobiographies.

The father in Father and Son is the biologist Philip Henry Gosse, whom Charles
Darwin once called "an honest hod carrier of science." The older Gosse was a
minister and a leader of the Plymouth Brethren, a very strict, very puritanical
splinter of English Protestantism -- one that could easily have taken Amos as
its prophet and leader. According to his son Edmund, P. H. Gosse held that
the celebration of Christmas was "nothing less than an act of idolatry. The
very word is Popish, [my father] used to exclaim, 'Christ's Mass!' Then he
would adduce the antiquity of the so-called feast, adapted from horrible
heathen rites, and itself a soiled relic of the abominable Yule-Tide. He would
denounce the horrors of Christmas until it almost made me [that is, Philip
Henry's son Edmund Gosse the autobiographer] blush to look at a holly berry."

A passionate man, Philip Henry Gosse. A difficult father. Can we Imagine how
Philip Henry Gosse would have suffered to behold a twentieth-century American
Christmas: muzaked "Silent Night" in a shopping mall. Or even --horror of
horrors --the odious, saccharine "Little Drummer Boy." There's not a sappier
song in all of creation.

In Father and Son, Sir Edmund recollects a Christmas of his youth. One
boyish year he defied his father and, putting his immortal soul in danger,
secretly ate some Christmas plum-pudding that had been offered to him by
'rebellious' servants. But then, overcome with guilt and stomach-ache, he flew
to his father, crying out "Oh! Papa, Papa, I have eaten of flesh offered to
idols!" Philip Henry then "ran with me into the midst of the startled servants,
seized what remained of the pudding,... and ran till we reached the dust-heap,
when he flung the idolatrous confectionery on to the middle of the ashes, and
then raked it deep down into the mass."

A frightening episode for a nine-year-old -- but beautifully told. Only an
accomplished writer of comedy (and one who was steeped in Dickens) could
have invented a phrase as marvelous as "idolatrous confectionery," where the
triviality of the noun undermines the high seriousness of the adjective.

Compared to Amos and to the Plymouth Brethren and to Philip Henry Gosse, my
own resistance to Christmas is trivial. I'm a dissenter, but a dissenter in
moderation.

In fact, I'm not even a Puritan -- I'm delighted with the baked ham and the
sweet potatoes. Moreover, I have devised a Christmas custom of my own. Every
December 25, I reserve three hours to listen to Handel's Messiah -- not out of
piety or reverence, but because the oratorio is so marvelous that it's almost --
almost -- sacred.

There are many Messiahs, but In our house, the performance of choice is,
inevitably, the extremely intelligent Pearlman version (Boston Baroque Orchestra
and Chorus-- Martin Pearlman, Conductor [Telarc 80322]). Blessings and honor
and glory and hallelujahs be unto George Frederick Handel and unto his
unsurpassed oratorio.

So this year and every year: rejoice greatly but appropriately, ye sons and
daughters of Zion!

Source: 2014/01/politiciansstereotyping

Title: Stereotyping One Particular Class of Fellow Citizens
Date: January 12, 2014

i've been following the Bridgegate scandal -- the vindictive sabotaging of
traffic entering the George Washington Bridge by Governor Christie's staff with
the connivance and wink-wink approval of the governor hmself. I'm appalled --
is this the kind of man to whom we should offer the bully pulpit?

I've even gone so far as to read the internet comments to columns in the
New York Times. While some people who take the trouble to contribute  have a
reasonable point to make, there's a refrain that distresses me, all the more
so because it's a sentiment that no one bothers to refute. Here are three
representative examples.

"Like most politicians, the man [i.e. Governor Christie]  is a classic
sociopath."

"Politicians have a truth gene missing in their DNA."

"All, and I mean all. politicians are dishonest, deceitful, untruthful and
corrupt."

It's a common enough sentiment. We've all heard it.

One of our local school board members once said this to me: "When did I become
untrustworthy, a liar?  When I was citizen with kids in the school, I was an
honest well-meaning citizen.  But as soon as I was elected to the school
board, something must have happened to me, because  I began to be accused of
all kinds of chicanery and corruption. I went from 'citizen' to 'politician.'"

Or, you could say it this way: the stereotype kicked in.

I've never held public office myself, but I've known many "politicians" pretty
damn well-- members of school boards, members of our city council, county
officials and commissioners, many members of our state legislature, a couple of
state office-holders and at least two of our representatives to Congress. 
And here's what I know:  they're honest and talented people who
sacrifice time and money to serve the public. They work very hard and they
absorb a tremendous amount of abuse for little reward.

Of course there are vile and corrupt politicians. But there are also very
many public-spirited statesmen who rise to the challenge of governing this
complicated nation of ours.

Let us be fair to our fellow citizens.  And let us purge these ridiculous
stereotypes.

Source: 2014/01/three-dreams-in-one-ten-minute-period-at-3-in-the-morning-eeek

Title: Three Dreams in One Ten-Minute Period at 3 in the Morning, Eeek!
Date: January 29, 2014

The first (the most ordinary, the least wild):  I'm sitting in a basketball
stadium watching a game  (it's close to the end of the first half) when a fire
drill is announced. Everyone, including me and my "date," a mysterious unknown
woman whom my dreamatorium has conveniently supplied, leaves their seats. I'm
now outside but I'm cold and I remember that I've left behind my denim jacket. I
return to my place in the now-deserted arena but no jacket. Then I'm outside
again. I locate my date and tell her about the missing denim. She serenely
rises from her squat to reveal that she's been sitting on the jacket.  I
wonder:  did she try to steal it?  2) The scene shifts abruptly. I'm now back
fifty years, in graduate school, and I've been informed that a new requirement
for the degree has been instituted. Each semester, every student will have
 to drink a 20 oz. paper cup of a pink liquid (looks like Pepto-Bismol but
is decidedly more mucilaginous and nasty).  3) All of a sudden i'm being
pursued by a huge scary rhinoceros with an ovesize horn. I run, of course,
terrified. Fortunately, I come upon a cottage size stack of carrots (large,
grated, carefully arranged). I'm able to climb the pile, rather gracefully I
think, but the rhino can't get any traction and I easily outdistance him. I was
scared for a while but the carrots saved my life. Then I woke up.

Are there any interpreters of dreams out there?  Clearly, Dr. M. needs your
help. (Do not bother using words like "nutso" or "loco," please.  Serious
interpretations only.)

Source: 2014/02/shakespeare-exploits-the-oxymoron

Title: A New Machiavel
Date: February 23, 2014

I tried the first three installments -- a netflix diskful of episodes  --
of House of Cards. I plan to watch a few more, but I'm deep into negative
enthusiasm, not at all sure that I'm going to continue. Cards certainly grabs
you, and it's startling and theatrical, but it's also far too cynical and
depraved for my rose-colored tastes. I just don't believe in it. I know that
it's all the rage to assume that politicians are horrid and power-obsessed
-- but every one of them, all the time, without a moment of relaxation or
redemption?  And so I'm skeptical of every character, every twist in the plot,
every nasty turn of phrase. And because I'm skeptical, I just can't, as they
say, "get into it." Or at least, not all the way in.  (Full disclosure: during
episode three I fell into a 'deep rest,' sometimes denominated a minor nap.)

The character who dominates House of Cards is Kevin Spacey's Frank Underbelly
-- I mean  Underwood --  who is fascinating but not credible. Or rather, he
is not designed to be credible, because he regularly violates the fourth wall
and converses intimately with viewers. Underwood is ruthless, implacable,
ambitious, vengeful, depraved, vicious, malignant, and amusing. He turns his
audience into his co-conspirators.

And where have we seen this curious concatenation of traits before?  Think
back, fit audience though few, to your college class in the History of
English Drama. There you encountered the vice and his crossbred friend, the
machiavel,who were ubiquitous in medieval drama. Shakespeare brought this
semi- supernatural hybrid to perfection two separate times -- once in the
person of Richard of Gloucester in Richard III and then again as Iago in
Othello.

Richard of Gloucester winks to his audience that he "can smile, and murder
whiles I smile,/And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart, /And wet my
cheeks with artificial tears,/ And frame my face to all occasions."  Now if
that isn't Frank Underhill to a T, first spotted killing a puppy and a few
scenes later baldly and straightfacedly lying to his President. Richard can "set
the murderous Machiavel to school" in order to gain a crown; our unFrank friend
Frank once wanted to be secretary of state, but now he just wants revenge.
Richard and Iago are capable not only of falsity but even of murder to get what
they want. Both of them kill their own wives. "I'll have her, but I wlll not
keep her long," says Richard of Queen Anne.

And therefore If I were to offer advice to Zoe Barnes, the reckless young
reporter for the Washington Herald, I would suggest that she steer mighty clear
of Frank Underwood. I would tell her to read Othello post-post-haste and take
careful note of what happens to Desdemona's lady-in-waiting Emilia. Hint: "Fie,
your knife upon a woman."

Zoe, please, please, get out of there while the going is good!

In Shakespeare's plays, Richard and Iago both overreach and come to
grief. Richard is left to die on the battlefield and Iago is subjected to the
rigors of Venetian justice ("Torture will ope his lips.") And that's what is
supposed to happen to machiavels.

I'm curious as to what will happen to Frank Underhill. By rights he should
be publicly humiliated and die a ghastly death. But inasmuch as we live in
an exceedingly cynical age, we can guess that Frank will only die when Kevin
Spacey is offered better work, or when ratings plunge, or when the series jumps
its inherent shark.

Source: 2014/02/new-careers-for-me-me-me

Title: New Careers for Me Me Me
Date: February 23, 2014

I've written before about occupations that are not for me.  Among them are tour
guide (because of my directional dyslexia), trapeze artist (i'm terrified of
heights), surgeon (frightened of gore), and dog groomer. I've also discussed
possible options for future employment, such as my plan to become a power
forward in the NBA. However, I'm now starting to think that, what with my back
acting up again, and the NBA plagued with salary cap problems and an influx of
7-foot tall Europeans, that professional basketball might not be a realistic
possibility.

But I have two new ideas. The first is to become a leader of a religious cult.
I think I have what it takes: charisma, creativity, and ruthlessness. I haven't
exactly come up with a theology yet, but if that Scientology guy could get away
with Thetans and the "clear," I feel that I could come up with something better.
I'm aiming for a system of belief in which participants deed over all their
worldly goods to their leader, i.e. me. And also I'd like a harem of willing
maidens. I admit that some recent cult leaders have given the profession a black
eye (David Koresh, Jim Jones, Charles Manson) but I have in mind something
milder, something paternal or even grandpaternal. Less Kool-Aid, more chocolate
milkshake.

A second idea: hedge-fund billionaire. I admit that I don't know much
about hedge-funds, but I plan to get started right away by reading
the Wikipedia article. How hard can it be? It's not as though they
manufacture something or invent anything. And then, after you collect
a couple of billions, you get to have "dark money," off-shore accounts, and
your very own Super-Pac. This is a career with no discernible downside.

Source: 2014/03/three-comments-on-books

Title: Three Perspicuous Comments on "Books."
Date: March 03, 2014

Charlie Dressen (manager, Brooklyn Dodgers,1951-53):  "You  know something?
I never read a book in my whole life.... I can read newspapers and magazines.
But I never read a book. You think I should?"

Jean Harlow (actress, on her birthday wishes): "Don't get me a book. I already
got a book."

Anatole Broyard (critic): "If it hadn't been for books, we'd have been entirely
at the mercy of sex."

Source: 2014/03/my-diamond-jubilee

Title: My Diamond Jubilee
Date: March 09, 2014

My 75th, my diamond jubilee, is coming up in a few days, and it's about time
that family and friends gave serious thought to the celebration.

When Queen Elizabeth II had her jubilee just two years ago, there was a
specially-commissioned anthem, a service for two thousand folks at St. Paul's,
an equestrian extravaganza (550 horses), a flotilla of schooners on the Thames,
and something that involved the lighting of 4000 beacons world-wide.

Frankly, a bit much. A little over-the-top, if you know what I mean. 
Although who can fail to admire  the hat.

Last year, I suggested that a good choice for my birthday might be an
Irish "starter" castle.  The year before that, I hinted at one or two ancient
sculptures.  But, disappointingly, there were no takers. Birthdays number 73
and 74 were left unacknowledged -- to the shame of my fans.

But here is an opportunity for redemption. Diamonds for the diamond jubilee. I
would greatly appreciate a pair -- a singleton is tacky -- of those big hunking
earrings that the professional athletes wear. They can be easily purchased, I
understand, in the $900,000 to $1,100,000 range, depending on size and color.

My only reluctance is that piercing the ears would violate the integrity of my
body.  Also, I'm afraid of the pain. So it's either pressure clips or ear-
piercing under general anesthesia.

I wouldn't want to drop so precious an ornament and then lose it forever when I
vacuum the rug.

Gosh, now I'm worried if I can afford the insurance.

Source: 2014/03/morpheus-sleep-lamb

Title: The Arms of Morpheus
Date: March 16, 2014

I'm not a good sleeper -- never have been. While I'm very accomplished at going
to sleep, I'm deficient at staying there for the full eight hours. By two
o'clock in the morning, I'm awake -- reading, watching a previously-recorded
basketball or baseball game, or, more often, lying there with the body dormant
but the mind in a frenzy about our doomed civilization and about whether my
newest skin thingy has already metastasized.

So I decided that it was time for divine intervention.

Surprisingly, there's no patron saint of sleep. The closest is St. Dymphna,
but she's more properly, at least according to her website, the saint of
"mental and nervous disorders." Insomnia a nervous disorder?  I don't think
so, but on the other hand, she works cheap. To light a seven-day votive candle
at her shrine in Massillon, Ohio costs only $3.00 -- so what the heck. And it
can be done online, via Paypal. it's a bargain; why not give it a try?

Then there's St. Vitus, the patron saint of oversleeping, also not exactly my
problem. But St. Vitus is a busy fellow, inasmuch as he's also the patron saint
of actors, comedians, dancers, and epileptics when he's not busy warding off
lightning strikes and fending off attacks by wild animals. He's kind of the go-
to saint for all manner of things, but as far as i can tell, simple insomnia is
not in his portfolio.

Inasmuch as I'm even-handed about religions, I think I'll try Hypnos. who is
billed as a genuine sleep god. Hypnos is the father of Morpheus (the god of
dreams), brother of Thanatos (yes, that Thanatos) and the son of Nyx (night) and
Erebus (the deity of darkness). Quite the family tree. In order to placate the
entire group a three-buck candle would be clearly insufficient, even insulting.
I figured better to go whole-hog and sacrifice a lamb. However, there are no
lambs in my condo unit, and I was, frankly, afraid of making a mess, so I
thought that  perhaps a lamb chop would do just as well. I mean, how would
Hypnos know. So I checked the freezer and would you know it not a lamb chop to
be found. However, I did manage to locate a couple of pork chops which I think
will serve just as well. Tonight, I will eat them in honor of Hypnos. By the
way, I make a nice sauce out of orange juice, soy sauce, and garam masala. I'm
hoping that honoring the deity will earn me a couple of good nights' sleeps.

And as a backup, I'll have 5 mg of ambien at hand.

Source: 2014/03/nba-royalty

Title: NBA Aristocrats
Date: March 27, 2014

There's Sir Charles Barkley, of course, leading the way, and all those Kings
(Bernard, the king of Kings, but also Albert, Stacy and a score more). Dozens
of Earls, including the diminutive Boykins, and my favorite, nomenclature-wise,
Acie Earl. Also Brevin and many other Knights. Nor can we forget Marques Johnson
or Marquis Teague. And Mel Counts, the 7' foot guard. Baron Davis, Walter Dukes,
Tayshaun Prince. Royal Ivey. Let's not forget Mike "The Czar" Fratello.

While the big dipper was only a chamberlain, there's a notable double-dipper: 
Earl Barron.

There must be many more. Help me, metablogians. Surely I've just scratched the
royal surface.

March 29:  I can't believe that I forgot King James, who may be better than
KD, but certainly less fun to watch.

Source: 2014/04/written-six-years-ago-but-as-true-now-as-then

Title: Written in 2007, but as True Now as Then
Date: April 03, 2014

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain? It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good.  What could possibly stand in his way? Once
he sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some peace of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that although he was a black-hearted knave,
at least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade
us that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart."  But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself. Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the entire
Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster. "Full
of scorpions [should be] his brain." At this moment of writing, Cheney is
guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count -- who
can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even the most
rudimentary of consciences, on it lays the heavy burden of 60,000 to 100,000
Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has
lived in such dishonor/That the gods detest [his] baseness."  But Antony took
the proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman
fashion," let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating
himself and the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter.  I know
that you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the
internet, perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your
purpose. Dick -- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in
history.  At this point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest
end."  You'll immediately feel better.  It's a no-brainer. Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation
to suicide.  You are, as usual, falsely optimistic. Cheney can't off himself
because a) he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-
knowledge and d) he can't point a shotgun.  You cite the precedents of Othello
and Anthony but they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant.  Cheney is
a slug. Moreover, Cheney can't be "great of heart" -- he has no heart of his
own --either a transplant or some mechanical contraption."

April 4, 2014  Why is this man still alive?  Allowed to give interviews?  Is
there no justice in our sublunary world?

Source: 2014/04/my-kind-of-amnesia

Title: My Kind of Amnesia
Date: April 14, 2014

In Breaking Bad, Walter White disappears for a few days when he is kidnapped
-- he escapes only by murdering his meth-addled drug dealer. In order to
cover his tracks and account to his family for the missing days, he feigns
amnesia. And he's persuasive, possibly because everyone has seen so many
amnesia movies. He's so persuasive, in fact, that the doctors think that the
amnesia might recur. In order to get himself released from the hospital, he
confesses to the state shrink that he was only pretending. "There was no 'fugue
state,'" he admits.  That's a kind of theatrical amnesia in which I can believe
-- phony from start to finish.

Source: 2014/05/fuffa-fluff

Title: Fuffa -- Fluff
Date: May 07, 2014

Fuffa is a "cosa inutile, ciarpame" [a useless thing, trash] according
to Federico Roncoroni in Sillabario della Memoria (Milano, 2010). 
It's a dialectical (probably Milanese) word not found in most Italian
dictionaries. Roncoroni tells us that his aunt Evelina called the tiny balls
of material that sometimes form on the surface of socks "fuffa."  She likened
them to "furuncoli" [pimples]. The etymology of fuffa is obscure. Roncoroni
proposes that it might be merely onomatopoeic, related to English fluff which
signifies, as he says, "lanugine o peluria" [fuzz or nap]. But fluff, fuzzy
stuff in English, derives from Latin vellus [fleece] or "villus" [hair].  It's
most commonly used as a verb ("to fluff a pillow'). In theatrical jargon, a
person can fluff or flub his lines. Fluff is also a horrid marshmallow-like
confection that appeared in my childhood (though it dates to the 1920) and put
me off sweets for years. As far as I can tell, the meaning "a light woman"
as in "a bit of fluff" is not present in the Italian "fuffa." I doubt whether
"fuffa" and "fluff" are linked, unless "fuffa" also descends from "vellus."

Source: 2014/06/rocks-out-rocks-in

Title: Rocks Out, Rocks In
Date: June 08, 2014

I'm late as usual getting in the vegetable garden. After many years of adding
manure and compost and leaves, the soil is soft and fluffy. But every year,
rocks and more rocks.  When I first started this garden in 1978, I was pulling
out boulders; then large stones, then small stones, now one-inch stones and
pebbles. Why do I continue to do so?

Because my father took the rocks out of his garden. I remember once, as a
small child, saying to him, "Dad, you'll never get all the rocks out of your
garden."  "True enough, he replied, "but I'll have fewer rocks"  From which
response I realized that he was not an idealist but a meliorist, as I am.
So every year, a new crop of rocks. I put the rocks on the driveway, in the
low spots where puddles accumulate after a rainstorm.  It's ridiculous, I
know;  we order seven cubic yards of crushed stone for the driveway every few
years, so a bucket of rocks makes very little difference.  But if feels good
to perform two useful services at once:  rocks out of the garden, rocks on the
road.

Source: 2014/06/occupations-not-for-me-updated-edition

Title: Occupations Not For Me, Updated Edition
Date: June 10, 2014

Here are some career paths that it's just as well I didn't tread. Opportunities
for failure and misery.

1. Taxi driver in a large city (especially a city that's not on a grid, such as Boston or London.  Even the DC-diagonals drive me nuts).  I've earlier written about my incapacitating directional disability, but I neglected to mention that I tend to get into a bit of a panic when I'm lost --  I start driving much too fast and far too waywardly. So, dear friends, imagine me a befuddled cabbie, sweating super-profusely, while the fares in back scream bloody murder when I take the exact wrong turn for the fourth consecutive time. It would be a freakin' nightmare. Related occupations that won't work: tour guide, wilderness guide, tracker.

2. Dog-groomer. I've hinted at my lack of affection for doggies before.  I just don't think I'd do a good job blow-drying Fido or brushing Fifi's teeth. (Incidentally, I'm joined in my prejudice against curs by gentle Will himself, whose references to canines are uniformly unfriendly: the superbly wicked sisters in King Lear, for example, are "dog-hearted daughters.")

3. Trapeze artist. I'm terrified of heights and I have absolutely no sense of rhythm.  Imagine me launching myself at just the right moment to catch my partner by the ankles. Related opportunity for ignominious disgrace: dance instructor.

4.  Surgeon. I'm far too squeamish to be poking around in someone's innards. Even channel surfing has become a dangerous pastime since we accidentally acquired the live surgery channel. Motto:  "all gore, all the time." I have to keep clicking that remote lest I accidentally pause at an open-heart moment.  The FCC should mandate a warning and a five-second delay:  "Caution: palpitating inner organs on view shortly." Related non-opportunity: veterinary surgeon.

5. Hostage. Chained to a bed somewhere in the 'stans wouldn't work for me. I must have my oatmeal every morning at 7 a.m., and I need to move my bowels shortly afterward. Moreover, if I don't eat lunch right on time, I get wicked headaches. Not to mention that I don't function well in rooms that are either too hot or too cold or not well ventilated, and I can't stand tobacco. On the whole, I'd be a mighty cranky hostage.

6. Monk. Poverty I could manage, I suppose. Chastity would be a struggle but with plain fare, isolation, and cold showers I might succeed (but why?). Obedience?  Never. Not a chance. Nope. Not for me.

Source: 2014/07/two-possibly-three-improvements-to-soccer

Title: Two (Possibly Three) Improvements to Soccer
Date: July 10, 2014

Netherlands-Argentina was exciting and rather beautiful until it went to
penalty kicks. What a foolish way to find a winner! It's as if, in basketball,
tie games led to a foul-shooting contest, or if, in baseball, instead of
extra innings they started hitting fungoes for distance. Soccer travesties
itself by resorting to penalty kicks. A better solution: play until someone
scores. Sudden death. I mean, sudden victory. I would hope the game (the
match) would end before midfielders start to collapse from exhaustion.

Brazil-Germany offers a second opportunity for improvement. Is it not time
to institute a mercy rule.  When there's a mismatch in junior high girls
softball and one team gets ahead by ten runs, the game is called off. It's over.
It should be the same in soccer. Team A, let us say, runs up a five goal lead
-- stop the game, everyone go home.  Why should a team (Brazil, for example)
suffer interminable humiliation.

And a bonus recommendation: no biting. Recidivist biters should be banned for
life.

Source: 2014/07/on-the-kindle-with-tertius-and-rosamund

Title: On the Kindle with Tertius and Rosamund
Date: July 11, 2014

I'm reading Middlemarch again. It's either my fourth or fifth time through the
best novel ever written in the English language. If you want to know about the
nineteenth century, start with George Eliot.

I had the oddest feelings fifty pages in. (Actually, "pages" is an anachronism
because I am reading on the kindle.)  Lydgate is flirting with beautiful,
empty- headed Rosamund Vincy.  I thought "this time let him be smart;  let him
not marry Rosamund."  I must have been in an unusally plastic frame of mind,
or in some sort of reading reverie. I know that novels are immutable, but I
was hoping against hope that Lydgate had learned something since the last time
I read the novel. Even though he made a fool of himself with that actress in
Paris. And then last night, just before I turned out the lights, Lydgate did
it again -- fell for the blonde curls and the glistening eye. He's learned
nothing, not a thing, in the last ten years. And now I have to live through
the saga as his crush turns into crushing disappointment and bitterness. Marry
in haste, repent at leisure. Poor Lydgate.

The kindle changes the input but doesns't do a thing for the outcome.

Source: 2014/09/at-the-old-west-bradford-cemetery

Title: At the Old West Bradford Cemetery
Date: September 04, 2014

The old West Bradford cemetery, which is carved out of our land, is peopled by
the Worthleys, Hacketts, Kidders, and Sleepers who first settled this part of
Vermont. Some were long lived, some passed through this thoroughfare of woe only
briefly. There are o-so-many of those sad stone lozenges at the foot of a grave
that represent infants who died too young to be christened.

Our most disturbing gravestone, in my opinion, is the the one for Stanley
Franklin Dwinell, M.D. born in 1920 and who died along with James Scott
Dwinell (age 7), Peter Dewey Dwinell (age 6), and Jonathan Dwinell (age 2) all
on the same day, December 11, 1952.  What a horror, I thought -- a man and his
three young sons all at once. A tragedy. But what sort?  A plane crash?  A
boating accident? House fire?  Perhaps even an infectious disease.

An internet search came up empty-handed, so I enquired of our longer-tenured
neighbors. And here's the local legend. "Oh yes, the vet," I was told (although
the tombstone distinctly says M. D., rather than D. V. M).  "He was driving
along Route 5 in Fairlee one winter morning and it was an icy road and foggy and
he went out of control and all four of them died instantly. His wife was at home
drinking a cup of coffee when she got the phone call. She left the coffee half-
finished on the kitchen table, left the house without a word, and was never seen
again. Didn't even take her clothes. Just disappeared."

It's a good story and it sounds like the plot of a short story by Alice Munro
-- but I don't believe it.  The same gravestone reveals that Constance S.
Dwinell, wife of Doctor Stanley Franklin Dwinnel, died January 25, 1985, at age
65.

I'm trying to imagine the remainder of poor Constance's life. It's hard to
construct a scenario that isn't completely dreadful. Most likely, Constance
returned, shattered, to the small town in New Hampshire, let us say, where she
must have been born. She moved back into her parents' house and took a job as a
town librarian, her life blighted by the tragedy. She never remarried.

But I prefer to imagine that she moved to Paris (she had majored in French at
Wellesley, I'm guessing,) and never told a soul about her first family. There
she was wooed and won by Baron Guy de Condorcet de Noialles but could never
conceive a child. It was a long happy marriage. After Guy died, crashing his
motorcycle on the Riviera, she returned to the States a rich woman, and lived
out her life in a Park Avenue apartment in New York. Friends and neighbors
who had no idea of her first life were shocked when they read the will which
specified that she be buried, along with Stanley and the children, right here in
West Bradford.

That's my story and I'm sticking with it though I would very much like to know
the truth.

November 14, 2015  Larry Coffin, president of the Bradford Historical Society,
writes:

I would like to correct your information on Dr. Stanley Dwinell.  He and his
three sons were killed in a collision with a train on a crossing in Newbury,
Vt as he was going to treat a patient at Woodsville (NH) Cottage Hospital. His
father Dr. Franklin Dwinell was in a car following.

Source: 2014/09/overheard-dialogue-lobster-shop-in-maine

Title: Overheard Dialogue -- Lobster Shop in Maine
Date: September 13, 2014

Lady of mature (c. 80) years old to man of equal age.

"So he took me out on his boat. It was very small. Didn't even have a
bathroom. I had to use the bait bucket."

Source: 2014/10/six-leggedness

Title: Six-Leggedness
Date: October 13, 2014

I read Planet of the Bugs (Chicago, 2014) by Scott Richard Shaw, a Wyoming
entomologist. It's a good book on a great topic -- the evolution of insects. In
the acknowledgements, Shaw thanks his editor for helping him to "shape a bulky
manuscript into a sleeker book," but I think I would have much preferred the
fatter unpublished version, which I imagine would have been heavier on curious,
fascinating and sometimes lurid detail. I think that Shaw's editor may have
misunderestimated his potential enthusiastic readership.

Shaw loves his insects and writes the evolution of life bug-centrically. Instead
of the conventional telling, where everything leads ineluctably to majestic
us, homines sapientes, Shaw inscribes the triumph of the six-legged kind. For
example, Shaw disparages our (I mean mankind's) walking and running. "Two-legged
bipedal locomotion is so unstable and difficult to master that it seems highly
improbable and almost pointless." He has a point there. A child takes a year to
learn to walk, and even after he does so, he staggers like a drunken sailor for
several months. No other creature on earth is so ungainly at the outset.

Moreover, Shaw adds, six-leggedness optimizes balance and stability and has the
potential for rapid motion. "Six legged form is sublime. Fifty million insect
species can't possibly be wrong."

If I understand it correctly, most insect species propel themselves by
alternately moving one of their two leg tripods -- and tripods are inherently
stable.  It's a great system.

Now that I've achieved the "golden years," I spend much too much time worrying
about that I'm about to crash to the ground and break a wrist or a hip -- all
too common afflictions among the two-legged kind.  No one has ever seen a
beetle trip, or an ant sprawl embarrassingly on the sidewalk.

Too bad we don't have six legs. Or even four (the other two having evolved
into arms). We'd be better off. We'd need two pairs of hips, of course,
and copulation would be more complicated, but it would be worth it. Speed,
stability, grace. Four legs would definitely be sublime.

On the other hand, I'm glad that we evolved an internal skeleton, which the
insects never did. I wouldn't want to bother with an exoskeleton or carapace.
It would be ungainly, troublesome. And probably accompanied by all sorts of
emotional displays. "Don't pay any attention to him. He's moulting."

Source: 2014/10/like-1

Title: Like
Date: October 14, 2014

Waiting for the train at the White River Junction railroad station, I met
a young lady, a graduate student at Dartmouth. We engaged in a brief
conversation. I asked about her ambition and plans. She said, "I want to be,
like, a college professor." Like yikes. Like double yikes.

Source: 2014/10/nobody-cares

Title: Nobody Cares
Date: October 22, 2014

There's a brief sentence in The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth that
continues to move me no matter how frequently I return to it. I's a passage
that resonates in my latter-day soul.

Falstaff and Doll Tearsheet (whose name, obviously, indicates her profession)
are old acquaintances and old rivals who are evermore at odds. "They never
meet but they fall to discord."  They seem to delight in exchanging insults.
To Doll, Falstaff is a "muddy conger," "a huge full hogshead," "a poor ape,"
and even, when she is more affectionate, "a whoreson little tidy Bartholemew
boar-pig".  Falstaff is equally abusive. But at one point in the play, there is
a magical moment when Shakespeare allows Doll to propose a truce.

"Come," she says, "I'll be friends with thee, Jack, thou art going to the wars,
and whether I shall ever see thee again or no there is nobody cares."

I think that what electrifies me is the last phrase, "there is nobody cares.
"  A less imaginative, less empathetic writer than Shakespeare would
have ended the sentence more predictably: he would have written, "nobody
knows" and would have therefore repeated the commonplace that the future is
unknowable. But Shakespeare raises the ante -- as he so often does. "Nobody
cares" is demotic shorthand for "nobody else but we two care"-- which I take
to suggest that Doll reflects not that the universe is dicey but rather that we
are each of us isolated and unimportant except as we are valued by our nearest
friends and the people with whom we have gone through life.

The sentence is nostalgic in the best sense. It is not sentimental;  Doll
does not romanticize hers or Falstaff's past. Instead she faces the aleatory
universe bravely. You are at risk, it could turn out badly, let's be friends
now, all that matters is the moment. The sentence is valedictory and at the
same time extremely warm.

Perhaps I'm projecting my own feelings onto Doll Tearsheet. I'm at the point
in my life in which I value (perhaps even treasure) the people whom I've
worked with, or argued with, liked or loved.  (I have even come to value some
whom I've not loved.) They're all part of the fabric of my life and they are
all disappearing, one by one -- going to the wars, we might say. And nobody
cares. Except us.

Source: 2014/10/why-mike-gave-up-religion

Title: Why Mike Gave Up Religion
Date: October 23, 2014

My friend Mike, who is pushing eighty very hard, told me this story. "In
the 1940s we lived in Sarasota, where the Red Sox held spring training. I
had had rheumatic fever and my mother over-reacted and kept me in bed for
years. Nevertheless, I was an altar boy and I also would get out of the
house whenever I could to watch the Red Sox play -- Johnny Pesky, Johnny Doerr,
Rudy York, Vern Stephens, Dom DiMaggio, and of course Ted Williams. One day
I talked to Ted Williams and asked him for an autograph. He said he would
bring me a signed picture. He did, but I wasn't at home. Ted Williams came
to my house and I wasn't there!!  My mother said, 'a very tall man came by
and gave me this for you. I told him you were at church.' I thought, how can I
trust a religion that would let me be at church rather than at home when Ted
Williams called. That's when I stopped believing."  It's a great story and
I've recorded it exactly as he told it.

Source: 2014/10/when-i-lost-respect-for-authority-another-episode

Title: When I Lost Respect for Authority (Another Episode)
Date: October 30, 2014

We were playing punchball on the PS 217 "big court." It must have been
during school hours because Mrs. McGowan (a fifth grade teacher) was
the umpire and the players included the entire population of the class,
not just the regulars. Michael Lurie, the least athletic student in the
grade, and perhaps in the entire borough, was told  to play third base,
and obviously unfamiliar with the game and with Billy Cox, stationed both
feet directly on the white- painted base. Someone hit (punched) the
spaldeen toward him and he froze, but the ball landed precisely in his
crotch, and lodged, and after a bit he found it there and held it up. We all
knew that the batter was out, but Mrs. McGowan, as ignorant as Michael Lurie,
shouted, "he caught it illegally" and awarded first base to the batter. I
remember that several of us protested, but Mrs. Mc Gowan was adamant. It
was a miscarriage of justice. A violation of the rules. The umpire was
incompetent. How could I ever trust authority again?

Source: 2014/11/superhero-perils

Title: Superhero Perils
Date: November 06, 2014

I awoke this morning from a semi-nightmare all in a dither about Superman's
x-ray vision. Inasmuch as the blue-haired one can see through dense objects
(except, if I remember correctly, lead) then it follows as night the day
that he cannot help seeing through his own eyelids. Superman must therefore
suffer from what the sleep consultants call "poor sleep hygiene." Unable
to keep the light out of his own eyes, he must therefore be subject to a
degree of insomnia. No wonder he's always powing someone in the jaw -- he's
just not getting enough sleep.

Has anyone else given thought to this important topic?

Source: 2014/11/creating-space

Title: "Creating Space"
Date: November 14, 2014

If you listen to the announcers of the NBA games, basketball players defy the
laws and logic of physics. They "create space."

One of the greatest space-creators was Shaquille O. Others merely imitate his
technique. His most characteristic play was to drive his massive left shoulder
into the chest of the defender, knocking him backwards a couple of feet. When
he had gained a sufficient advantage and had room to maneuver, he would flip
the ball (awkwardly) toward the basket. HIs defender would as likely as not be
charged with a foul while the pre-Newtonian announcers would celebrate him for
'creating space.' And a beautiful game would be transformed into a brutal game.

And why is LeBron James allowed to create space on his every drive to
the basket?  He's gifted enough that he doesn't need the advantage; but
nevertheless, he routinely pushes off with his off hand, often lodging his off-
elbow in the chest of the hapless defender.

I often watch LeBron create space on hdtv where I've precorded the game. I can
therefore watch the same play again and again. In doing so I stop time, or run
time backwards. He creates space, I stop time.

So two can play at defying Einstein.

Source: 2014/11/sleeping

Title: Another Myth Debunked
Date: November 15, 2014

One day, back in the 50s, our neighborhood softball team was hosting a team
from some exotic location, such as Bensonhurst, at the PS 217 schoolyard. I
think I must have been playing either shortstop or second base, because I had an
excellent view of the earthshaking event that I'm about to describe.

It was the case that our guys were often a little less well-outfitted than
the opposition because we didn't have enough baseball gloves for the whole
team and had to borrow them from the visitors. Jimmy Nolan was playing first
base and early in the game, possibly in the first inning, someone on the
other team hit a grounder to third and the third baseman made a good on-target
throw to first. But Jimmy, who happened to be wearing an official but I
suspect borrowed first baseman's glove with a big pocket, reached out for the
throw with his right hand (he was a southpaw) but let the ball miss the glove.
He then casually caught the ball with his bare left hand which dangled
nonchalantly at his knee. I was impressed, as was everyone, and I thought,
"that's the way to show these visitors how tough we are -- we don't even need
the gloves that we've borrowed." I was proud to be a PS 217 Misfit.

Sixty years later, last week in fact, at a reunion of PS 217 softball players,
I asked Spike Cohen if he remembered the play. He did, much to my surprise.
"Oh yes," he said, 'and I even remember who threw the ball. It was Marv Lasky,
and he had a cannon for an arm." So The Play became even more dramatic
and mythical. I thought, wow, I'm not the only one who remembers that
catch, which ought to go down in history as one of the great iconic moments in
PS 217 schoolyard athletics. And then, since Jimmy himself was present at the
reunion, I asked him if he recalled the Great Event. He said he did. So I
asked him,"Why did you do that? Why did you let the ball go under the glove?
 Why did you catch it with the wrong hand?"  And he answered, "I misjudged the
throw. It was a mistake."

I was deflated, nay crushed. For all these many years, I had been convinced
that Jimmy had made that play on purpose to make a statement. But now I know
that it was merely an accident. And so another myth comes to be de-mythologized
by revisionist historiography.

Next thing you know, they'll try to tell us Babe Ruth didn't point to the
right- field bleachers just before hitting that home run.

Source: 2014/11/disasters-consoling

Title: Joy of Extinctions
Date: November 19, 2014

I am inordinately fond of mass extinctions. I find them consoling.

The most recent mass extinction, the newly-famous Yucatan-comet-iridium K-T
boundary event of 66 million years ago is one of my personal favorites.
To recall: a comet six or seven miles in diameter, zooming along at 65,00
miles per hour and therefore generating a good bit of momentum, smacked
into what is now the Yucatan peninsula with the force of a heck of a
large number of hydrogen bombs. The impact produced a crater that was
initially an astonishing 65 miles across and 18 miles deep, triggered massive
earthquakes as well as tsunamis half a mile high, and briefly heated the
earth's atmosphere to hundreds of degrees. Within minutes, everything as far
as Illinois became wasteland. Because of the blanket of smoke and dust,
sunlight could not reach the earth, so temperatures plummeted, completely
disrupting the world-wide chlorophyll-based food chain. At the same time,
downpours of acid rain corrosive enough to dissolve rocks killed everything
they touched. A full 80% of the world's animal species disappeared -- along
with half of all land plants.

Although it must have been quite a show, it was not as thorough a disaster as
the Permian extinction (252 million years ago) which killed 95% of all living
species, but it is, rather, comparable in scope to the Ordovician extinction
(444 million years ago), the Devonian (375 million years ago) and the Triassic
(201 million years ago). It's no wonder that folks in the know estimate that
99.9% of all the species that have ever existed have disappeared.

The knowledge that there will inevitably be another extinction helps to put
our daily woes in perspective. How can I worry about whether the grout
should be "Desert Sand" or "Forest Gray" or whether my newest skin thingy is
benign or dangerous when our species and the cool green earth itself are
doomed. Judgment day is a-coming, whether in the form of another wayfaring
comet, or a series of explosive volanoes, or the release of the nitrogen and
carbon now sequestered in the permafrost, or some event entirely unpredictable.
Something is going to happen, as sure as shooting. Perhaps, some think, it's
already happening.

So that's one benefit of a mass extinction -- it helps you sleep well at
night. Why worry about trivialities?

And also: if it weren't for the extinctions, we wouldn't be here at all. If
the dinosaurs hadn't been killed by the comet they would most likely have
continued to dominate the planet, and the descendants of velociraptors and
mosasaurs and thunder-lizards sure as heck weren't going to leave a lot of
breathing room for the proto-primates.

Extinctions are one of the many improbable accidents that got us here jolly    .

Source: 2014/11/stilts

Title: Still Another Occupation Not For Me
Date: November 21, 2014

So far my list includes taxi-driver, trapeze artist, surgeon, dog-groomer,
monk, and hostage. Here's another.

Last week I had a room on the twelfth floor of a new downtown Brooklyn hotel.
From my window I could watch a new skyscraper being assembled. The basic I-beam
members were in place and concrete floors and ceilings had been poured. But
the structure lacked external walls!!  Where there will be walls sometime
it the future, preferably before the building is leased and inhabited, was
what looked to be an orange plastic mesh, perhaps reinforced with a thin
cable or two. From my vantage point, I could could see right through to the
interior of the building. There men on aluminum stilts were spreading on
the ceilings something that might have been plaster but was more likely some
sort of curing preparation for raw concrete. Let me make this clear: men
on stilts were plastering ceilings in rooms that had no exterior walls and
where a slip or trip would send them plummeting twelve stories to the hard
sidewalk. Frankly, I found it difficult to watch without vivid and horrible
imaginings flashing across my vulnerable brain. So without hesitation I can
add to the set of occupations in which I would fail ignomiously, stilt-walker
in high-rise construction. A terrifying way to make a living, especially for
people like me, pre-frightened by heights.

Source: 2014/12/what-is-a-tax-cart

Title: What is a Tax-Cart?
Date: December 06, 2014

What indeed?  In Trollope's Barchester Towers, when Mrs Quiverful discovers
that her husband, rector of Puddingdale, is not to become warden of Hiram's
Hospital, she sets out to Barchester to confront the bishop. Not a walker,
and not the owner of a horse or carriage of her own, she "begged that Farmer
Subsoil would take her thither in his tax-cart."  A tax-cart, as far as the
dictionary is concerned, is a "small spring-cart on which a tax is paid." So it
is properly a "taxed-cart."  A "spring-cart" is a "springed-cart" -- i.e a cart
with springs. But were taxes paid on all vehicles? If so, why should this one
kind of vehicle be called a "tax-cart?" But if not, why should this particular
kind of vehicle be singled out of taxation. Trollope does not illuminate.

And so to the other nineteenth-century horsedrawn vehicles (barouche, basket
carriage, berlin, britchka, brougham, buckboard, buggy, cabriolet, caleche,
cariole, carryall, chaise, chariot, clarence, concord wagon, coupe, croydon,
curricle, cutter, daumont, dearborn, dennet, diligence, dog-cart, fiacre, fly,
fourgon, four-wheeler, gig, go-cart, governess cart, hansom, herdic, jaunty
car, jersey-wagon, kibitka, landau, patache, phaeton, pill-box, post-chaise,
rockaway, shandrydan, shay, sociable, spider-phaeton, spring-van, stanhope,
sulky, surrey, T-cart, telyezhka, tilbury, tarantass, trap, troika, victoria,
vis-a-vis, wagonette, whitechapel, and wurt) now add "tax-cart."

Source: 2014/12/winter-love

Title: Winter Love
Date: December 08, 2014

My daughter's nephew-in-law, Zach Appelman, is a talented actor setting out on
what might very well turn out to be a terrific career. (His ascent would be
more rapid if he would take his aunt-in-law's father's advice and change his
stage name to Zach Barrymore or Zach Zellweger, but the young man has too much
integrity to comply with aged opportunistic wisdom).

Zach recently played Hamlet at the Hartford Stage in Connecticut (Hartford
Courant: "a career-propelling performance that at times takes your breath
away"). I spoke with Zach at the recent family Thanksgiving and he told me
that the director of this Hamlet, Darko Tresnjak, made an effort to emphasize
the play's comic passages. It was a good idea, I think, because Hamlet is
both in reading and performance an intermittently hilarious piece of dramatic
art. But, added Zach, sometimes the audience laughed at moments that he
did not anticipate. He cited an example in the so-called "bedroom scene,"
where Hamlet assails Gertrude for marrying Claudius. Hamlet's rebuke of his
mother is harsh and dislocating. About her marriage to Claudius, he says

You cannot call it love;  for at your age

The hectic in the blood is tame, it's humble

It waits upon the judgment.

These lines apparently caused quite a commotion among the seniors in the
audience. It is not hard to imagine why. Hamlet, for all his sparkling
intelligence, is callow. He has youth's ignorance about middle-age sexuality
-- as the silver-threads-among-the-gold demographic must certainly have
recognized. How could Hamlet (or perhaps even young Shakespeare, a mere thirty-
five when he wrote the play), know that desire and passion increase in middle-
age as impetuous adolescent oestrus and fumblings are superseded by mature
appreciation and achievement.

I doubt that Shakespeare meant Hamlet's lines to be funny -- there's no
room for humor in the rhapsody of words that the prince directs at his
mommy. Nevertheless, a modern sophisticated and wrinkle-deep-in-time audience
cannot help but titter at Hamlet's grotesque misjudgment.

These observations on sex in youth and age were still percolating in my
waiting- for-wisdom brain while I re-read, for, what?  the fourth or fifth
or sixth time, Anthony Trollope's excellent 1857 novel, Barchester Towers. My
attention was caught, this time through, by one of Trollope's digressions,
very pertinent to the topic of autumnal love, and which I now transcribe in
a slightly reduced version and which I think is well worthy intense study,
especially by my readers of certain late-hectic ages.

"It is, we believe, [says Trollope] common with young men of five and twenty to
look on their seniors -- on men of, say, double their own age -- as so many
stocks and stones -- stocks and stones, that is, in regard to feminine beauty."

(Let me interject that for "young men of five and twenty", think "Hamlet." And
when Trollope talks of "feminine beauty," let us recognize that the phrase
is a  euphemistic Victorian surrogate for issues of human desire and
sexuality that conventional taboos made it impossible for Trollope to address
forthrightly.)

"There never was a greater mistake [continues Trollope]. Men of fifty don't
dance mazurkas, being generally too fat and wheezy; nor do they sit for hours
together on river banks at their mistresses' feet, being somewhat afraid of
rheumatism. But for real true love, love at first sight, love to devotion, love
that robs a man of his sleep, love [and here Trollope begins to quote from the
famous passage in Love's Labor's Lost] 'that will gaze an eagle blind, love that
will hear the lowest sound when the suspicious head of theft is stopped, love
that is like a Hercules still climbing trees in the Hesperides, we believe that
this best age is from forty-five to seventy."

Forty-five to seventy, ladies and gentleman. Just the age of the
men and women in the Hartford playhouse who snickered at Hamlet
junior's incomprehension of his mother's passions.

And then Trollope brings his excursus to conclusion with a great sentence in
which he both disses and dismisses immature youthful ardor:

"Up to that age [i.e. forty-five] men are generally given to mere flirting."

As perhaps Hamlet flirts with Ophelia.

It's intriguing that Trollope recognizes that men of seventy summers may still
be ardent lovers and appreciators of the flesh. If he had been a little older
and more experienced, he would have increased his estimate to seventy-five,
perhaps even eighty. After all, eighty is the new seventy, is it not?  Or he
might even have acknowledged that it ain't over until it's over.

Trollope was only forty-two when he wrote Barchester Towers, so perhaps he knew
that he was only capable of mere flirtation with Rose Heseltine. But he was
67 when he proposed, in the nasty dystopia The Fixed Period, that 68 was the
age at which all men should be required to give up the ghost. The Fixed Period
is a novel which, at least to this septuagenarian, provokes not titters but
guffaws. Poor Anthony T. had become so terribly sour, so unlike the Trollope of
Barchester.

Source: 2014/12/more-nba-onomastics

Title: More NBA Onomastics
Date: December 10, 2014

A surprising number of current NBA players take the floor with their names
reversed: first name for surname, surname for first. The king of this
confusion is LeBron James, who in any sensible universe would be named James
LeBron. And then there's the budding star Nerlens Noel. Who can possibly
doubt that Nerlens Noel is a copy editor's error for Nerlens, Noel -- the
lost comma precipitating the embarrassing inversion? The very same error
seems to have produced Leonard Kawhi, Jack Jarrett, Howard Dwight, Irving
Kyrie, Arthur Darrell, Leonard Meyers and Anthony Carmelo. Then there's Cory
Joseph, the Spurs' talented backup point guard, about whom Edward Arlington
Robinson wrote the poem -- o wait no, that was Richard Cory -- or Cory Richard,
as he would have been known if he had preferred b-ball to banking.

And there are also two closely related onomastic anomalies: the "two
first name syndrome" featuring Chis Paul and Paul George (with help from
Joel Anthony), and the "two surname syndrome," where the Dallas Mavericks
teammates Tyson Chandler and Chandler Parsons have completely confounded prae
with cog. Or should their team now be updated to Mavericks Dallas?

Source: 2014/12/airline-seats

Title: Unfriendly Skies
Date: December 14, 2014

I bought a February airline ticket to The Big Easy. I bought it online, as
we all do nowadays (whatever happened to travel agents?) I figured that they
would try to squeeze a few dollars in extra charges out of me, but I  was
surprised that the airline had the balls to demand $25.00 for my one piece of
carry-on luggage (not checked -- carry on!). And then I was completely floored
to discover that Frontier now adds an extra charge for a seat. Yes, a seat! A
seat is an additional charge, even though an airplane is not like a subway,
where you can strap-hang. Nor can you sit outside, on the wing. A seat is not
a an option or, goodness gracious! a luxury. And yet Frontier now exacts a few
bucks for the privilege of sitting down.

Frontier, I can tell you, lacks any sense of irony.

"Would you like air with your seat. There will be a small extra charge for
breathing."

I know we're supposed to feel sorry for the struggling airlines, but that's
a myth, a canard. The airlines are not starving. thank you very much. The
International Air Transport Association, the airlines' trade group, estimates
that the industry's profits were $11 billion in 2013, will be $19.9 billion this
year and will rise to $25 billion next year. (Billion!, not million.)  Why so
much? Because fuel costs continue to drop. And also because we passengers have
become accustomed to being crammed into smaller and smaller spaces and have been
taught to pay extra for every glass of orange juice. And to enjoy the luxury of
a chair.

Hey, fellow passengers!  Remember when oil prices spiked a few years ago
and the airlines added "fuel surcharges"? Well, fuel is down. Raise your
hand if you think you're going to get a "fuel rebate." Let me count the
hands. Hmm. Not so many.

Where do you think the $25 billion in profits will go. I'll give you three
guesses. A) Increase the salaries of stewards, baggage handlers and other
airport workers?  B. Lower the cost of airline travel for passengers in the
economy (i.e. steerage) classes?  C. Improve amenities for first-class
travelers?

Shock!!  The correct answer is C. According to The New York Times, improvements
in service "have been directed at the airlines’ most lucrative passengers,
who are flying in business class or paying for full-fare coach seats. Delta Air
Lines, for instance, announced on Monday that it renamed its business section
Delta One, instead of BusinessFirst, and said it would glorify the seats with
brand-new quilted covers. American Airlines announced this week that it would
spend $2 billion to improve customer experience at the airport and inside its
planes. Part of that investment includes adding more lie-flat seats for business
class passengers.

For the rich: "lie-flat seats," and "quilted seat covers." And what is American
Airlines doing for the rest of us, the not-rich. "In the back of the plane, it
introduced a class of fares called Basic Economy, the cheapest fares. Passengers
with those tickets, though, will not be able to book their seats in advance and
will not be able to refund or change those tickets."

It's still another example of the way the good ol' USA is becoming more and
more a class-ridden society. Billions for the few, sub-minimum wage for the
many. I wonder why the airlines don't go whole hog and separate passengers
not by front and back of the plane, but by plane itself. Class I planes -- all
sleek and shiny with free champagne supper and lie-flat quilted seats, and Class
II planes -- no seats at all, just a few square feet on the corrugated metal
floor. For only a few extra dollars, you will be able to reserve your very own
couple of square feet. Do you think I'm imagining some sort of wild dystopian
future? I don't think so. The way things are going, it's an inevitability.

Source: 2014/12/manstand

Title: "Man" Is Now an Adjective and not a Good One.
Date: December 23, 2014

I believe that I first heard "man" used as an adjective in the phrase "man cave"
-- which is, I believe, a place where guys go to isolate themselves from their
wimmen and famly and where they watch boxing on the TV, drink a lot of beer, and
puke on the shag rug. But recently I learned about the "man stand." "To do the
man stand" is when the husband waits at the door of the dress shop clutching
a bundle of packages while the old ball and chain decides between the 10 and
the 12 and between the gray one and the green. Sometimes a manstander parks
his carcass in a designated "man chair." And now there's a new one: the "man
spread", which describes the way a crude young guy with below-the-waist pants
sits in the subway, legs akimbo, indifferent to the gentle ladies and to the
tired old geezers who need to relax far more than he does.

"Man boobs," which are nothing more than unsightly fat, are sometimes
abbreviated to "moobs."  "Manparts" requires no elucidation.

In each of these cases, "man" is not used affectionately or admiringly. "Man,"
as an adjective, is anything but "manly." "Man" is primitive and insensitive,
an adjective of derogation and denigration.

January 4:  My penpalessa, SF, writes that in England the phrase "man flu" has
now become popular. A "man flu" is merely a cold that men (such babies they
are!!) make a fuss about, but which a woman would ignore.

Source: 2014/12/prophecy2015

Title: The Return of the Prophet
Date: December 31, 2014

Vivian de St. Vrain, fully accredited prophet (Senior Fellow, American
Society of Prophecy), has retreated to the mountaintop and has
returned with predictions for 2015. Here they are:

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known American or possibly European athlete will be accused of
taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be accused of taking bribes;

5)  questions will be raised about the safety of America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2015.  Let's
see whether a senior but world-class professional prophet still has enough on
the ball (a crystal ball) to foretell the future one more time.

Source: 2015/01/susan

Title: Amnesia on Film: Desperately Seeking Susan (1985)
Date: January 09, 2015

Desperately Seeking Susan offers a cartoon version of amnesia. Pow, Roberta
is knocked into a lamppost and doesn't know who she is. And then, a day
later, pow again, she is knocked to the ground, bumps her head, and her memory
returns intact. The film isn't interested in amnesia except as a plot device to
facilitate the doppelganger relationship between Roberta and Susan. Roberta is
a downtrodden cautious Fort Lee housewife; Susan is an anarchic adventuress.
In the course of the film, each woman tries on the other's identity. Without a
memory, but wearing Susan's clothes, Roberta "becomes" Susan, and Susan in turn
invades Roberta's home and tries on her clothes, her pool, and her husband. At
the end, Roberta has absorbed enough of Susan's pizzazz to leave her stifling
husband and Susan has changed enough so that she can enjoy a moment with the
boyfriend who has been desperately seeking her. It's an easy-to-watch film.
Rosanna Arquette is lovely as a perpetual naif and Laurie Metcalf is superb as
Roberta's short-tempered know-it-all sister-in-law. And it has more than one
brilliant line of dialogue. "I thought you were dead."  "Naw, I was in New
Jersey."  And my favorite: "How do you use the bird?"  -- which you have to
have been there to understand and appreciate. An enjoyable film; unless you
approach it with the idea that it has anything to do with real-life loss of
memory.

Source: 2015/01/henotheism

Title: Henotheism
Date: January 18, 2015

As a born-and-bred third-generation atheist, I never made much of an effort to
understand theology, which is, I gather, the study of the nature and attributes
of god or gods. But no god, nothing to study. No problem. Theology will
always be for me "the subject without an object." And therefore when I read
Michael Coogan's The Ten Commandments  (Yale, 2014), I was surprised by own
ignorance. For example, I had taken it for granted that the Bible was a
document of monotheism. No god but god, Jahweh. And also  that the monotheism
of the ancient Hebrews was their gift to civilization (though why to believe in
one god was a better idea than to believe in a plethora of godlings will always
remain a mystery to me). But Coogan makes it clear that I've gotten it all
wrong. The commandment "you shall have no other gods before my face" distinctly
postulates the existence of "other gods."

These other gods appear in the Bible in a number of guises and particularly
as '"the host of heaven." Some were apparently worshipped even in the Temple
itself. It is reported in Kings that the reformer Josiah ordered "all the
vessels made for Baal, for Asherah, and for all the host of heaven" be
removed from the sacred precincts. The ancient Hebrews were therefore not
monotheists, but henotheists (a lovely word new to me), which Coogan defines as
"the recognition that while other gods may and do exist, only one is to be
worshipped" (14).

So it seems that what has been represented to naive ol' me as a case of moral
development, from polytheism to monotheism, is better understood as a kind of
religious nationalism or jingoism: our god is better than your god -- so let's
everyone pay him exclusive attention. Or perhaps, more vulgarly but just as
accurately, in the words of the spiritual leader Hank Williams, move over little
god, big god moving in -- have I quoted this exactly right? -- just as Jahweh
moved in on El Shaddai and the rest of the crowd. One of my friends says that
the essence of organized religion is "my prince of peace can beat up your prince
of peace."

Source: 2015/01/chimpanzee-alzheimer

Title: Why Don't Chimpanzees Suffer from Alzheimer's?
Date: January 19, 2015

Why Indeed?  And also, while we're considering the question, why don't
chimpanzees get atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, endometriosis,
myocardial infarction, falciparum malaria, HIV infection, or epithelial
cancers?  Chimpanzees are, after all, our closest living relatives. We
share a common ancestry and we only embarked on separate path some six or
seven million years ago --a blink of an eye in evolutionary terms. Why is
it that we human beings, so superior, as we like to think, in so many ways
from our cousins -- in our big brains and delicate hand manipulations,
for example -- are subject to an array of diseases to which our inferior
relations are immune. What's the deal?

Here's the current thinking on this important problem (which I draw from
Eugene E. Harris's informative and up-to-date monograph Ancestors in our
Genome [Oxford, 1914]). As I understand it, human beings went through a
sort of bottleneck sometime in our recent (say 200,000 years ago) history
and our effective breeding population was reduced to a mere 10,000 or so
souls. When a population becomes so small, random genetic drift dominates
over natural selection, and so moderately deleterious but not incapacitating
mutations can survive and even thrive. The defective genes that would
be weeded out in larger populations persist in our genome. Hence our many
inherited susceptibilities and disorders.

But that's not the end of the story.  Yesterday there was a report that the
Ashkenazim went through "a severe bottleneck" six or eight hundred years ago
which reduced its population to about 350 individuals. O my, what a boon to
genetic drift, what a recipe for genetic disaster or genetic success, or more
exactly, both success and failure simultaneously.

And so our talents, our deficits, our strengths and weakness, our brains and our
bodies, are determined by arbitrary aleatory long-ago events. No surprise,
really, but another event in the continuously unfolding revelation.

Source: 2015/02/amnesia-black-angel

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Black Angel (1946)
Date: February 07, 2015

Black Angel is a good, fast-paced Cornell Woolrich mystery and certainly
one of the noiriest of all noirs. It features lots of grimy black-and-white
photography of seedy hotels and bars, and a nebbishy weakling who is falsely
accused of murder and who is rescued from execution by a last-second phone call
to the Governor. It also offers a blackmailing chantoosie and a hogshead of
red herrings. The plot turns on an unusual episode of amnesia. Martin Blair,
played by Cornellian Dan Duryea, has strangled his cheating ex-wife while in an
alcoholic haze but doesn't remember that he did so. He gets himself involved
with the attractive wife of a man who has been accused of the murder, abandons
alcohol for Coca-Cola and sets out the find the killer. Eventually he falls
off the wagon, and in a blackout suddenly "remembers" that he himself is the
perpetrator. "It's Korsakoff's syndrome," mumbles an authoritative doctor,
trying to add a glimmer of credibility to a doubtful turn of events.

I had never heard of Korsakoff's and I thought it was just mumbo-jumbo, but
it turns out there is such a condition: "Korsakoff's syndrome is a chronic
memory disorder caused by a severe deficiency of thiamine. It is most
commonly caused by alcohol misuse."

But Korsakoff's is not a come-and-go disease; it's a progressive deterioration.
Moreover, there's not the vaguest hint in the "literature" to suggest either
that a Korsakovian is likely to commit a murder and then forget it or that a
second bout of drinking can restore his memory.  That sort of stuff is strictly
Hollywood

Once again Hollywood amnesia proves to be the most flexible and variable of all
diseases.

Source: 2015/02/stoppers

Title: Stoppers
Date: February 17, 2015

I would have thought that I'd have had in the hopper all the senses, proper and
improper, of "'stopper."  But I've come a-cropper.

The most familiar stopper is, of course, the blocker of liquids, as for example
the cork that fits into the top of the wine bottle -- or the polished glass
stopper that used to slide into those old-fashioned ink bottles. And then
there's the stopper in baseball -- the ace pitcher, the "number one" on the
staff, who brings a  losing streak to a close. And also the show-stopper
-- the performer who freezes the show in its tracks, so excellently that he
or she earns several rounds of applause and encores. (Latterly, a supremely
attractive woman has come to be called a "show-stopper"; when she enters a room
all activities, even molecular motion itself, immediately cease).

But down here in South Florida, where I am enjoying a few days of indolent
hedonism, there's a stopper of which even the OED is ignorant. It's a plant
-- a bush or small tree. The best known stopper is the simpson, myricanthes
fragrans, demotically known to all as the nakedwood twinberry. It's a member
of the eucalyptus family and smells nutmeggy. The fruit is edible, as might
be expected of a distant cousin of the guava. Simpson stoppers are a food of
choice for Florida's state bird (not the pelican, as one might expect, but the
mockingbird). And there are other stoppers beside the aristocratic simpson: the
redberry stopper Eugenia foetida, whose leaves and flowers are foul-smelling; 
the white stopper; and the inedible Spanish stopper.

I have no clue about the etymology of "stopper" in this sense.  Neither does
anyone else.

Source: 2015/02/susanne-bier-love-is-all-you-need-the-bald-hairdresser-2013

Title: Susanne Bier:  Love is All You Need (The Bald Hairdresser) 2013
Date: February 21, 2015

There is unfortunately very little of the often superb Danish director Susanne
Bier in this darkish Hollywoodish comedy.  She's so much better when she stays
closer to her native themes.

The plot is built on an antique and hallowed cliche: northern Europeans migrate
to southern Italy to find freedom and to re-awaken love. In this case it's
Philip, a workaholic widower and Ida, the relict of a boorish unfaithful
husband, who make the journey. They (Pierce Brosnan and Tryne Dyrholm) carry
it off rather well. But the film has an incapacitating defect: three of the
supporting characters (Ida's husband Leif, Leif's mistress Thilde, and Philip's
ex sister-in-law Benedikte, played by Bier's favorite actress Paprika Steen) are
so broadly drawn and so melodramatically horrid that they don't belong in any
comedy that asks to be taken seriously. There are a few good scenes that almost
recall the director at her best: a conversation in which Philip momentarily
drops his guard and reveals his unresolved grief; another in which he tries to
make contact with this son while the Mediterranean waves lap at their feet; a
third in which mother and daughter talk about marriage. Redeeming moments these.
But for the most part Susanne Bier appears to be strait-jacketed by a plot for
which she has little empathy. The psychological complexity that should have
arisen from Ida's cancer and her breast surgery evaporates: a great opportunity
squandered, in my view.

Source: 2015/03/lost-books

Title: Lost Books
Date: March 01, 2015

If a person could rescue one of the many lost books of the Greeks and Romans,
which would it be? I think most ordinary walking-around-Americans would nominate
the lost second book of Aristotle's Poetics, about which Umberto Eco made such
a fuss, and which is presumed to be a philosophical analysis of the genre of
comedy.

I myself am not enamored of Aristotle's lit crit. I suspect that if the second
book had survived, it would only show that Aristotle had invented a vocabulary
to describe the various elements of comedy -- and as a result generations of
scholars would have felt an obligation to conduct sterile and inhibiting debates
about the precise interpretation of his various technical terms. So, therefore,
if I were interested in comedy, rather than rescuing the second book I'd prefer
to read Homer's lost Margites, famous among the ancients as a comic counterpart
to the Iliad and Odyssey. It might have been fun, and we would certainly learn a
lot more than we now know about the archaic Greek sense of humor. My suspicion
is that we moderns would find the Margites to be a trial, a puzzle, a genuine
challenge.

Not only comedies but tragedies also have perished. Anyone who has been dazzled
by the great Greeks would want to read the 60 or 70 lost plays of Aeschylus,
the hundred or so that have disappeared by Sophocles as well as the 60 or so
vanished plays of Euripides. No doubt our understanding of the great age of
Athens and Athenian religion and art and politics would have to be thoroughly
rethought. Nothing more tragic than the loss of the tragedies.

And then there is Livy's history of Rome in 142 books, of which only 35 (plus
fragments and reports) survive. How much more full would be our knowledge of the
last years of the republic with Livy as a guide.

But if I had to choose a single work of the ancients that has perished, I think
I would opt for one of the books that were written by Livy's student and friend,
the emperor Claudius. Claudius, whose first wife (and one of his better ones)
Plautia Urganilla was a native speaker of Etruscan, wrote two books about the
Etruscans: a general history, and a volume on the Etruscan language. It's this
second book that I would most want to rescue. Claudius was the last person known
to have been able to read Etruscan, a language which was becoming extinct in his
lifetime.

Etruscan was an isolate -- a language with no known relatives, like Basque. It
was written in an early (8th century) variety of Greek, so it can be recited,
but it cannot be understood. Etruscan contributed not only its alphabet but
a few words to Latin: "atrium," "histrio," "taberna," "stilus," and "cera,"
for example. Approximately 13,000 Etruscan inscriptions are in existence,
mostly on gravestones. There are also about 300 bronze mirrors with religious
or mythological scenes on one side, many with Etruscan inscriptions on the
obverse. They are found in the tombs of women who, it would seem, must have been
literate. There are no surviving Etruscan manuscripts but there is the Zagreb
mummy. Sometime around 125 in the last pre-Christian millennium, an Egyptian
technician re-used a linen Etruscan book to wrap a body. Twelve hundred legible
words survive. They seem to record prayers and invocations to the gods. Not much
else, except for a great linguistic mystery in the heart of civilized Europe.
Alas that Claudius's books did not make it through the dark age bottleneck!

Source: 2015/03/spontaneity

Title: Spontaneity
Date: March 03, 2015

A close relative has accused me of lacking spontaneity. Specifically, "I doubt
he ever did a spontaneous thing in his entire life."

I've been mulling over this attack and I can think of at least three spontaneous
actions that I have performed.  A) Frequently, in the middle of the afternoon,
without forethought or planning, I take a nap.  B) And closely related,
but certainly different, sometimes, waking up in the morning, I decide,
spontaneously, to lie in bed for another hour or so. And C), just yesterday,
when I trundled over to the Public Library to borrow the book on ancient
dead languages that I had reserved, I spontaneously pulled a second book (on
Neanderthals) off the shelf.

Now if those aren't plain and distinct instances of spontaneity I don't know
what.

Moreover, I am making a long list of spontaneous actions to perform in the near
future.

Source: 2015/03/ones-name

Title: One's Name
Date: March 11, 2015

Ludwig Wittgenstein, the renowned philosopher whose strict stringent strictures
about language inadvertently destroyed my youthful interest in philosophy, wrote
in one of his less rigorous moments that "a man's own name [should be] sacred
to him. Surely it is both the most important instrument given to him and also
something like a piece of jewelry hung round his neck at birth." Wittgenstein's
name at birth was "Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein" -- his Jewish origins
concealed behind a string of echt-German Christian names.

I've never thought that my own name was a piece of jewelry -- but if it were a
jewel, it was entirely a counterfeit.

My surname is an accident. My grandfather, according to the story, was born
into a family named Middlebank or perhaps Middlebrook. Because a sole male
child was exempted from the draft in darkest nineteenth-century Ukraine, he
was surreptitiously adopted into a childless family. As a result, the name
that he brought to America in 1895 was a merely a useful fiction. And then
there's my middle name, Hessel. The only Hessels I've ever been able to trace
are almost uniformly Danish. My grandmother on my father's side was born Eta
Hessel and it's from her that the name descended. But am I to believe that a
troop of Danes wandered into eastern Ukraine sometime before 1850 and left
progeny behind?  I doubt it. In any case, I don't feel any more Danish than I
feel anything else. And then my praenomen was borrowed out of the book of Job.
Why my atheist parents, who never ever attended religious services of any kind,
would have elected for me an obscure Hebrew name will always remain a complete
mystery. So the whole parcel is a fabrication, a construct, without integrity or
authenticity.

What name should I have had, a name I could finger like a rich jewel about my
neck. Something that would suit me?  Suggestions are welcome. I'm thinking
"Rocco" for a first name (it's so appropriate), but I'll need help on the middle
or middles and the family name.

Source: 2015/03/susanne-bier-lost-in-the-fire

Title: Susanne Bier:  Things We Lost in the Fire (2007)
Date: March 14, 2015

For the first twenty minutes or half-hour of Things We Lost in the Fire I
thought that Susanne Bier, my current favorite director, had succeeded in
transferring her wondrous Danish idiom into a big-name Hollywood production. I
loved the unusual but profound relationships, especially between Brian Burke,
the real-estate developer, and his childhood friend and heroin addict Jerry
Sunborne. It was all far-off-the-grid, but it rang true. It's not easy to make
a European movie in the American system. Nevertheless, I was disappointed when
the second half of the film fell into deep cliche and became a familiar saga of
addiction-recovery, complete with predictable confessions at the Narc-Anon shop.
Brian's wife Audrey, played by the impossibly radiant Halle Berry, dominates
the film equally as much with her acting as her beauty, but the script poses
insuperable challenges -- especially when she is asked to retain her sexual
innocence while snuggling in bed with Jerry. The direction is as might be
expected highly accomplished, but I'm concerned that Bier's fondness for extreme
close-ups, sometimes of only a single eye, has devolved into mere mannerism.
The film received passable reviews but was a box-office failure, which is,
unfortunately, not difficult to understand.

Source: 2015/03/on-the-mall

Title: On the Mall
Date: March 23, 2015

On the mall, smoking, wheels (i.e. bicycles and skateboards), and pets are
prohibited. Between forty and fifty signs and icons state the case very clearly.
Nevertheless, the rules are often flouted.

Smokers are furtive: they can't help themselves even though they show, by their
demeanor, that they are well aware that they're doing wrong. The bicyclists
are apologetic. Skateboarders are oblivious, totally. The dog-owners are
defiant. "No bureaucrat is going to tell me where I can walk my dog." The
beggars are entitled. This morning, one disheveled youth carried a sign that
read "Why lie?  I need to get fucked up." (I used occasionally to donate to
our "homeless" until I was taught that meals are readily available and that the
begged money goes to support alcohol and drug habits. Also I was taken aback
when a man to whom I gave two quarters returned them to me, saying, "I don't
take coins".)  Some of the buskers are fine musicians and earn their one or
five dollar bill but I think that there is something rather sad about their
forced cheer.

On the other hand, the strolling young folks, holding hands and radiantly in
love, are wonderful to behold, especially when there's a toddler or two trailing
them. And I also enjoy watching the strolling old folks, fifty or more years
into marriage, sometimes holding hands, sometimes wheelchairing it. Dyads of all
ages and kinds cheer and encourage me.

Source: 2015/04/olivier-truc

Title: Olivier Truc; Fiction; Age
Date: April 09, 2015

Olivier Truc's Forty Days Without Shadow came highly recommended, both by
the forty or so literary awards that it has garnered, and also by trusted
friends. It's a murder mystery -- or rather a "police procedural" -- and indeed
it is a very good "read." It's set in the northern reaches of Scandinavia
amidst tensions between the indigenous Lapps, or more properly Sami, and their
Swedish and Norwegian oppressors. It's got everything: a brutal murder, a
child molester; a budding but blighted romance between a veteran policeman
and his beautiful novice partner; a tough wise old "native" who clings to the
traditional ways; a search for an old gold mine; stolen Sami artifacts, and
enough red herrings to furnish a medium-size Stockholm restaurant. And snow,
lots of snow. Snowshoes, snowmobiles, snowstorms, snowdrifts.

And yet I had to discipline myself to keep on with the reading. Something,
perhaps age, has blighted my appetite for fiction -- not just genre fiction,
like this mystery, but all fiction. Let me confess: to read stories, rather than
to read history or biology or geology has come to seem frivolous. An indulgent
 waste of time when I could be learning something substantive.

I looked up some reviews of this novel. Let me quote one opinion: "the
background information about the Sami lifestyle will slow down the action and
readers may wish that Olivier Truc had left his documentary days behind."
Interesting, but I had exactly the opposite reaction. What kept me intrigued
and kept me plowing through the snowheaps was precisely the ethnographic and
historical detail that the reviewer deplores. I wasn't just being "entertained";
 I was learning something!

Five years ago, I reported on this very blague that in my youth I loved to
read science fiction and fantasy, but that somewhere along the line, I lost
my taste for such flights of imagination. (If anyone is interested, they can
find the relevant paragraph here.) I would say that my condition has worsened
-- my resistance to fantasy has now spread to almost all fiction. Odd that
I don't feel the same way about movies: I prefer fiction films, stories, to
documentaries.

Darwin carried his Virgil and his Milton to Tierra del Fuego and claimed
that the books sustained him throughout his Beagle days. But later, in his
autobiography, he revealed that he no longer found any pleasure in poetry.  I
can't compare myself to Darwin in any way except that we both grew older.  Yet
I wonder whether an impatience with fiction and a loss of aesthetic sensibility
isn't a characteristic of septuagenarians.

Source: 2015/04/bats

Title: Bats
Date: April 15, 2015

Bats originated approximately 50 million years ago. Although warm-blooded,
many have "thermostats" that allow body temperature to vary with ambient
temperature; they are therefore "heterothermic." There are 1300 living bat
species -- about 20% of all mammal species. The Long-tongued Fruit bat has a
wingspan of 1.5 centimeters; the Spectral Bat a wingspan of a meter. Many bats
sport "noseleaves"  --fleshy projections around the snout and nostrils -- which
aid in the transmission of sound. DNA studies have determined that the closest
living relatives of bats are not rodents but hoofed mammals and whales. There
are twenty bat families, nineteen of which employ laryngeal echolocation --
the twentieth relies on tongue clicks -- as well as ten extinct families. Bats
have five unique muscles: the occipitopollicaris connects the back of the head
to the hand and runs along the anterior edge of the wing. The coracocutaneous
anchors networks of elastic fibers to the armpit. The humeropatagialis tightens
and braces the distal parts of the wing membrane. The tensor plagiopatii
anchor the trailing edges of the wing. The depressor ossis syloformis controls
the interfemoral membrane between the hind legs. Hoary Bats can fly at 27
kilometers per hour. Migrating Silver Haired Bats fly at over fifty kilometers
per hour. The heart rate of an alert Little Brown Bat hanging in a roost at
room temperature is about 200 beats per minute but while flying the heart rate
increases to about 1000 beats per minute. The heart of a hibernating bat beats
five times a minute. Flying bats consume energy at about twelve times the rate
of resting bats. Bats can feel changes in air pressure with the skin of their
wings. Some bats' feet lock into place when hanging upside down, so no energy is
consumed except when the bat releases and drops. Common vampire bats engorged
with blood have difficulty regaining flight. They urinate copiously, then use
their long thumbs to provide extra lift leverage. Bats use echolocation (as
do toothed whales, dolphins, shrews and tenrecs). When Lazzaro Spallanzani
claimed  (in 1794) that bats could see with their ears, he was widely mocked.
"Does Signor Spallanzani also claim that bats can hear with their eyes?" 
Ultrasonic noises were not detected by scientists until 1938. Echolocation calls
cover a range of frequencies. A Little Brown Bat searching for prey usually
produces echolocations at the rate of twenty calls per second. but a Hoary Bat
will produce only five calls per second. Calls increase in frequency during
the actual attack. Bats can vary the length of the call from less than one
millisecond to over 50 milliseconds. Bats are very loud to those who can hear
them. A hunting bat can produce a sound that is twenty times more intense than
the alarm of a smoke detector. Bats, unique among mammals, can turn off their
hearing. At about two milliseconds before a vocalization is produced in the
larynx, muscles in the middle ear contract, disarticulating three bones in the
middle ear; then the ear is "reconnected" allowing it to hear the echo of the
sound it has just emitted. Bats can be insectivorous, carnivorous, frugivorous,
nectarivorous, piscivorous and sanguinovorous. Some bats eat birds, some eat
other bats. Eastern Red Bats eat both tent caterpillars and gypsy moths. They
must eat about 150 moths per night simply to retain their weight (thank you,
Eastern Red Bats). The upper incisors of vampire bats are greatly enlarged, but
since they don't chew their food, the cheek teeth are reduced to mere spicules.
More than 500 species of flowering plants are pollinated by bats. Bats may eat
up to 120% of their body weight each day. The common vampire bat can consume
about two tablespoons of blood during a single night. Tiger Moths produce clicks
that "jam" the echolocation patterns of bats. Because bats must minimize their
weight, their digestive systems are extremely efficient --  Little Brown Bats
move food through their system in twenty minutes. One million bats roost under
the Congress Avenue Bridge in Austin, Texas. Bats are capable of eating 500
mosquitoes an hour. Some bats hibernate but bats can also enter into a state of
torpor to consume less energy while roosting. Frio and Bracken caves in Texas
each house over ten million Brazilian Free-tailed Bats during the summer. Bamboo
bats roost in the hollow spaces in bamboo stems. In Borneo, Hardwicke's Wooly
Bat roosts in the leaves of Raffle's Pitcher Plant and donates its feces to the
plants nitrogen intake. Some Leaf-nosed bats bite the stems of banana and palm
leaves in order to create tents for roosting. White-throated Round-Eared bats
roost in excavated cavities of termite mounds. Hibernating Little Brown Bats
bats breathe once an hour. Most bats bear one offspring rather than twins or
multiples. Bats live surprisingly long lives. A banded Brandt's Myotis was at
least forty-four years old. Vesper Bats mate in the fall but the female stores
the sperm and does not ovulate until early spring. White nose disease is caused
by a European strain of a common soil fungus. Bat droppings can contain spores
that cause histoplasmosis in humans. Rabies, often bat-borne, kills 60,000 to
80,000 humans per year in Asia and Africa.

For more, see Bats: A World of Science and Mystery, by M. Brock Fenton and Nancy
B. Simmons (Chicago:  University Press, 2014).

Source: 2015/04/the-lobster-why

Title: The Lobster -- Why?
Date: April 18, 2015

Thomas Fairfax, a well-known nineteenth century lobster smack captain, wrote
convincingly that "lobsters are very good as an article of commerce, and pretty
enough to look at, after they're boiled, but, as to eating them, I prefer
castoff rubber shoes." George Hoag, a down-easterner, added that "if them
tourists want to come up from Boston and pay those prices, then, by Christ, let
them. Damn fools. Lobsters, hell, they're big cockroaches, that's what they are.
You won't catch me eating one, even if I could afford the damn things." Fairfax
and Hoag may be two of the most honest men in the history of American commerce.
Lobsters are loathsome, both in appearance and as culinary articles. The meat is
stringy tasteless gristle. And inaccessible to boot. And messy to attack. How
did modern "sophisticates" get themselves bamboozled into thinking that these
big bugs of the sea should be considered a gourmet item. It boggles the healthy,
balanced, sensible mind. Lobsters are hideous insect-like creatures. Who was the
first addled individual who took a look at a lobster and said, "looks good, I'll
try it." Eeew.

Then there's the practice of immersing live lobsters in boiling water. Just
remember to put your fingers in your ears while the poor creatures screech.
Human beings degrade themselves morally and aesthetically when they lower
themselves to such indifference. How can they torture a lobster and then pretend
that the poor things are palatable.

I've eaten a couple, may all the gods of the sea forgive me. Before I reached
the age of enlightenment I would go along to get along. I never pretended to
enjoy them, but, petty conformist that I was, I would participate in the horrid
feast. Now I'd rather eat kale and tofu, tasteless trendy manifestations of
liberal guilt, than violate my integrity with a severed claw or tail.

it's time for a moral revolution in America. Let's make a start by liberating
the lobster.

Source: 2015/05/-some

Title: My Favorite Suffix
Date: May 05, 2015

Not just my own, but surely every thinking person's favorite word-forming
element is "--some," perhaps because It appears in so many cheerful
formulations. If you experience a sudden, overpowering urge to transform a noun
to an adjective then  "--some's" the way to go.

Imagine yourself, for instance, writing a novel and searching for the words to
describe your ingénue heroine. She's not just "handsome" and "wholesome" but
also "blithesome," "lissome," "winsome" "toothsome," "cuddlesome" and perhaps
even "frolicsome."  Could you find a better word? Well, maybe. Perhaps "buxom?"

Most of these words are of obvious origin but a few are on the obscure side.
"Winsome," one of the language's most delightful (or delightsome) adjectives,
derives from the now defunct "wynn," meaning "joy". It's a word that apparently
hid out in illiterate northern English dialect for a couple of centuries before
it was resuscitated, to everyone's advantage, by Burns and Scott. "Lissome,"
which now means supple or graceful, comes from the old English "lithe" meaning
mild, gentle, or meek. "Buxom" is drawn from a stem meaning "bow" and for most
of the existence of the English language signified "compliant" or "obliging."
"Buxom" began to connote zaftigity only during the middle of the last century.
Here's the very best use of "buxom" in its long history.  It's by John Milton
-- the young Milton, not yet the epic Milton.

And then there's "fulsome" which for the longest time meant what it seems to
mean, then latterly acquired the learned connotation "odious," which it is now
in the process of shedding. And "awesome" which has deteriorated from "filled
with awe" to meaning "cool" -- and has become a favorite adjective of praise to
an entire cohort or generation of the vocabularially deprived.

No one can say, "unbuxom" or "unblithesome."  Yet we regularly say
"unwholesome."

For the record, the "--some" in "threesome" is an entire different "--some," 
as is the "--some" in "chromosome."

Source: 2015/05/third-and-fifith-wife

Title: Little Old Ladies
Date: May 15, 2015

I know that I'm not the only person in the world who's prone to snap judgments
and easy stereotyping.  I say this in apology, because yesterday I was guilty
of a spectacular misjudgement, a wildly incorrect speculation.  It's time to
kneel on ground glass, to scourge myself (metaphorically speaking).

One of the attendees of a support group that I attend is a "little old lady."
Elderly, gray in complexion and attire. Wizened, juiceless. She looks as though
nothing of any moment happened to her in all her eighty or eighty-five years.

Her husband, Steve, died last week. Here's the piece of her story that she
revealed.

"I was Steve's third and fifth wife. He was an airline pilot, so we traveled
together all over the world.  Steve had two children by his first wife; I had
five children by my first husband. I had so many babies because they started to
come in pairs. At his funeral I played some of the Bach preludes."

You, gentle imaginative readers, can fill in the blanks. There are many, several
novelsworth, in fact, starting with the obvious question, "who was wife number
four; tell me about her?"

Source: 2015/05/juliet-1595-2015

Title: Juliet 1595-2015
Date: May 19, 2015

Juliet 1595:  "My bounty is as boundless as the sea/ My love as deep. The more
I give to thee,/ The more I have, for both are infinite."

Juliet 2015:  "My bounty is as epic as the sea,/  My love as cool.  The more
I give to you,/ The more I have, for both are awesome."

Source: 2015/05/what-not-to-say

Title: What Not to Say
Date: May 21, 2015

Let us suppose that an old friend has just told you that his or her spouse
is suffering from Alzheimer's or some other horrible form of dementia. It's
very difficult to know what to say to your friend. You want be sympathetic and
consoling, and polite, but you just can't find the right words. Perhaps the
best you can do is to say nothing, just put your hand to your heart to indicate
compassion, or give the guy or gal a sincere hug.

And here are some sentences that you should definitely avoid  --  all of them
transcribed directly from real life.

1.  "Think of it as a growth opportunity."

2.  "My grandmother had Alzheimer's."

3.   "My spouse has celiac disease."

4.   "Everything happens for a reason."

5.   "You should have tried ginkgo."

6.   "Do you want to have a going away party when [s]he goes into the institution?"

Source: 2015/06/sleepers-1

Title: Sleepers
Date: June 07, 2015

In the catchment area of P. S. 217, as indeed in all of my home territory in
darkest Flatbush, there was very little immigration or emigration. People stayed
put, for the most part, and the students with whom you entered kindergarten were
the ones who were likely to graduate with you at the end of eighth grade.

I can think of two outsiders who came not from a near neighborhood but from the
rumored "outside world." One was Beryl McLeod, who arrived from Scotland, stayed
long enough to engender in me a most powerful and confusing pre-adolescent
crush, and then disappeared. Lovely Beryl spoke with a most exotic and
enchanting accent, Glaswegian if I remember correctly. And then there was Alan
Dean, who dropped in for a year or two from western Pennsylvania. He was a
diminutive tough boy, not very bright but competitive on the punch ball field.
He also spoke in a dialect unfamiliar to me and which I now judge to have been
country or Appalachian. One day in Miss Finsmith's crowded stuffy fifth-grade
classroom we pupils were asked to elucidate a picture that the teacher had
displayed. It was a young lad with a candle in his hand. I recall very clearly a
sentence of Alan Dean's: "you can see that it's nighttime because he's wearing
his sleepers."

Alan Dean's "sleepers" made a lifetime impression on me, not only because I had
never heard that specific term before, but because I wasn't until that moment
aware of dialectical differences in vocabulary. I knew about soda but I had
never heard of tonic; I knew about pancakes but had never heard of griddlecakes
or flapjacks, and I wore sneakers all day every day but knew nothing of tennis
shoes or tennies -- not to mention plimsolls. I was not only monolingual but
monodialectical, if there be such a word. For someone to employ the word
"sleepers" for an item of clothing that I knew only as "pajamas" was therefore a
transformational experience.

And a very sensible word, at that. Much to be preferred to other deplorable
dialectal terms for pajamas, as for example the twee diminutive "jammies,"
or worse, the lazy "pj's" (not doubt employed by the sort of people who would
call orange juice, O.J.), or even worser, the infantile reduplicative "jim-
jams."

So I was on the alert the next time that 'sleepers" swam into my imaginative
ken, which was when I first became acquainted with John Donne's clever little
love poem, "The Good Morrow," in which the poet claims that until he fell in
love, he was immature, unconscious:

Who the heck, I wondered, were these "seven sleepers?" Not, in fact, a
wardrobeful of pajamas nor (my first guess) a parody of the famous 'nine
worthies" of chivalry?  But no, inasmuch as Donne habitually and regularly
conflated religion and sex, he knew that the seven sleepers were a group of
enthusiastic early Christian converts who were imprisoned for their faith
in a cave near Ephesus, fell into miraculous sleep, and then woke up two
centuries later to discover to their delight that their city had adopted and
institutionalized their religion. Rips van Winkles of miraculous devotion.

Of other religious or literary sleepers surely the most prominent are Thoreau's.
In a poignant passage about railroads in Walden, Thoreau recalls that "sleepers"
is the demotic name for the wooden ties on which steel rails are laid. From
this suggestive bit of nomenclature, Thoreau elaborates a conceit about the
way the new industrialism favors some and crushes others. "We do not ride on
the railroad; it rides upon us. Did you ever think what those sleepers are
that underlie the railroad?  Each one is a man, an Irishman, or a Yankee man.
The rails are laid on them, and they are covered with sand, and the cars run
smoothly over them. They are sound sleepers, I assure you. And every few years a
new lot is laid down and run over; so that, if some have the pleasure of riding
on a rail, others have the misfortune to be ridden upon.” So "sleepers" live
on.

I have never heard this sense of "sleepers" in conversation, but then, I don't
talk about railroad-making all that much. Nevertheless, it is not difficult to
endorse the continued pertinence of Thoreau's witty comparison.

No doubt my regular metablogian readership has been waiting patiently for me to
mention that the "sleeper" is the first and easiest trick learned by beginners
with the yo-yo. At least, such was the case in the 1950s P. S. 217 schoolyard.
And a spy in a "sleeper cell." And a dark horse. A surprise. A film; in fact,
many films that are unexpected successes.

A lifetime of many and various "sleepers."

September 21, 2015.  Let me add that Sleepers are plentiful in the old West
Bradford cemetery, they being one of the first families to colonize the part of
Vermont in which I am now writing this paragraph. A quaker Sleeper disrupted a
church service in the 1790s, shouting at the congregational minister, 'Sir, you
preach false doctrine." There's a Sleeper farm right at the end of South Road,
just over the West Bradford line into Corinth. Never met them, don't know if
their family's historic religious enthusiasms have persisted.

Source: 2015/06/missing-mallard

Title: Missing Mallard
Date: June 08, 2015

Yesterday, and for the last week, there were two mallard in the pond: a buff-
brown female trailed incessantly by a shiny green head. Courting, if not already
nesting. But today there's just one, the female, and she's swimming round and
round, quacking, quacking. What happened to Mr. Mallard. Where is he?  Eaten by
fox or coyote or hawk?  Flown away to look for another, greener pond? Lost? On
a business trip?

I feel for her.

June 9:  This morning, no mallards. Neither the one nor the other. Modern
romance. Isn't it always the way?

Source: 2015/09/some-numbers

Title: Some Numbers
Date: September 18, 2015

Last night there was no moon and no clouds. It was so bright and clear that I
couldn't resist going out to take a gander at the stars. It was, once again, a
brilliant and dazzling spectacle.

I can never remember whether there are two hundred million or two hundred
billion stars in the Milky Way. Both numbers are so beyond my ability to grasp
that I wonder whether it even matters. But after marveling at the expanse
of stars, I returned to the computer and did the research. It's true and
astonishing: there are between 100 and 400 billion stars in our home galaxy.
(The astronomers, I have to say, give themselves quite a bit of leeway.) And
then I was reminded that there are an estimate hundred million galaxies in the
known universe.

I was feeling mighty small, mighty intimidated.

After a while, I went upstairs to dip back into the book on human anatomy that
I'm struggling to read. Here's a fact that I should have known, but didn't:
there are six trillion cells in the human body. More or less.

That's a a lot of cells. And a lot of stars. If a trillion is a thousand
billion, then there are a ten thousand times more cells in my own personal
body than there are galaxies in the universe, which is an interesting but not
particularly important statistic.

I feel as though there is some important conclusion that I should draw from
these numbers, but honestly I have nothing much to say beyond the usual awe --
that ordinary feeling of insignificance and impermanence. It's not exactly news
that I am merely a heap of cells in an obscure corner of a tiny planet of an
undistinguished star in a medium-size constellation.

And yet, sitting by the pond this sunny afternoon, watching a pair of
companionable ducks slowly swimming one after another, I have to say that this
particular transitory conglomeration of cells has been enjoying a mighty fine
day.

Source: 2015/10/my-grace

Title: My Grace
Date: October 05, 2015

I'm devoutly secular, just as I was raised. Moreover, almost all of my
friends are equally unreligious: either retired Catholics or atheist Jews or
freethinkers or lapsed UU's or never-wases. I was therefore taken aback and
a bit unsettled last week when at a friend and neighbor's dinner party, just
as the guests were starting to dig in, we all paused for a moment and held
hands while the head of the household thanked the Lord for providing. It was a
brief and inoffensive grace but still startling because so unfamiliar. I had
momentarily stepped into another world.

And then I thought, if I were preparing to deliver a "grace" before a
meal, what would I say?  Who would I thank?  For I readily confess that
I feel great gratitude every time that I lift a loaded fork to my hungry,
salivating mouth.

To begin, I wouldn't thank any god or gods, because I don't see the least
evidence or sign of the supernatural around the table. No god of the beets or
the chicken or the lasagna.

Instead, I would thank, sincerely and reverently, all the people, present and
past, who have in fact made a real and palpable contribution to the meal. Let us
think for a moment about the slice of bread. While I could not detect the real
presence of anything transcendent, yet the bread was immanent with the labor of
the farmer. And the trucker who delivered the fertilizer and the trucker who
took the wheat to market. And the guys at the John Deere factory in Moline who
made the tractor that harvested all the seven grains in my particular slice.
And the baker. Road builders. And for that matter, now that I think about it,
how about our intelligent Neolithic ancestors who first spotted the einkorn or
emmer and decided that it was a plant worth domesticating. Moreover, the butter
that I lavished on the bread did not arrive by flights of angels but through
its own particular chain of development and distribution. And then the wine,
the "merry cheerer of the heart" which wouldn't have cheered anyone's heart
if someone hadn't mastered the technology not only of wine-making, but also
of glass bottles. And I would also like to thank the furniture makers -- the
designers, the carpenters, the turners -- because there would be no sitting at
the table without their help. And therefore foresters and the manufacturers and
inventors of chain saws. I could go on and on, but I think the sitters-down at
my board would take my point. A moment's reflection reminds us that when we
collect ourselves for dinner, we profit from the efforts and endeavors of not
dozens but millions of people. Diachronic and synchronic, now and then.

It is to all of them that I offer my thanks, my gratia, my grace. And in doing
so I acknowledge my continuing connection to all members of our wonderful,
horrible species.

Source: 2015/10/rush-

Title: Liberal Water on Mars??
Date: October 18, 2015

Egregious Rush Limbaugh, who ranks number three on my list of the people who,
in the course of my lifetime, have done the most damage to the United States
of America (Dick Cheney and Antonin Scalia are one and two and Dick Nixon only
slithers in at number 6) speaks a language that is extraordinarily difficult
to parse. His sentences are shapeless, wayward, and undiagrammable, equally
indifferent to the conventions of language and the rules of logic. When you're
fact-free there's no compelling reason not to be grammar-free as well.

Now there's a new and appalling example of Limbaugh's resistance to reality.
NASA recently announced that the planet Mars must once have had flowing water
and might still have underground water. Limbaugh, if I read his tangled language
aright, not only rejects the discovery but claims that water on Mars is evidence
a "left-wing agenda"  at work. Wow, we are tempted to exclaim. Double wow.
Paranoia run amok.

How can Limbaugh present such a counter-factual notion with a straight face? 
In order to coherently present his "thoughts" on this subject, I will now
extract and re-assemble some of his phrases from the linguistic rats' nest in
which they are embedded. Here's his chain of "thought" reduced to its essence.
First of all, global warming is a myth. Secondly, NASA has been "corrupted
by the current regime" and has falsified climate data. Inasmuch as NASA is a
mendacious organization, its discoveries about flowing water must therefore also
be false. And because NASA is subject to a leftist regime, its claims must be
not only false but "a technique to advance the leftist agenda." A watery Mars is
therefore a "leftist' Mars. And so the circle is almost complete. Limbaugh knows
he's correct but hasn't quite figured out how it all works:  "I don't know what
it is, I would assume it would be something to do with global warming."  So
round and round we go.

While Limbaugh's logic is roundabout, his perspective cramped and his evidence,
how shall I say, perhaps a bit on the skimpy side -- all assertion and no fact
--  I feel that I must agree with his conclusion. Yes indeed, the discovery of
ancient flowing water on Mars is definitely "leftist"-- and is leftist in at
least two different ways.

Let us try to connect the subterranean dots inside the Limbaughian skull. What
is it that is so paranoia-inducing and threatening about Martian water? Well,
water on Mars might indicate life on Mars. If there is life on Mars, then there
might be life elsewhere in the universe. If life elsewhere in the universe,
then the creation story in Genesis is certainly incomplete and probably false.
No creation myth, no biblical absolutism. Moreover, if there is life elsewhere,
there are probably intelligent beings who are highly likely not to worship our
earthly gods and are probably not -- horror of horrors --  subscribe to Baptist
fundamentalism. Water on Mars therefore challenges his local and provincial
Truth. Limbaugh is therefore correct to see Martian water as 'leftist" in its
implications.

Watery Mars is yet another blow to conservative "thought." It's just like
evolution or the big bang -- in actuality like any truth that comes to be
discovered either by hard science or social science or by the unbiased study of
history. Truth and fact are anathema to radical conservative Limbaughians. Of
course they are repelled and confused by scientific discoveries.  Martian water
is still another manifestation of the continual drip drip drip of facts that
challenge their provincial world view and animate their paranoia.

Source: 2015/10/oil-the-women

Title: "Oil the Women"
Date: October 21, 2015

A friend recalls seeing a film, many years ago (1950s or 60s), in which a
character speaks the wonderful line, "0il the women." My friend cannot remember
the name of the movie or much about it, except that it was a desert "sword
and sandal" job in which a sheik or pasha or emir or something else very
"Orientalist," preparing for a lubricious but acceptable-to-the-League-of-
Decency orgy, utters the fabulous phrase.

I can't identify the film and the words don't google. Does anyone out there
in blaguelandia know where such an inspired bit of dialogue occurred. Who
said it?  And more importantly, what genius wrote it?

In the absence of real information, I'm free to create my own scenario. It's
got to be a 1950s film in now-faded Technicolor, and really cheesy. It's not a
real desert but a sound stage with minimal sand and and a few plastic rocks. The
inferior lighting allows you to see shadows on the stained backcloth that passes
for a vista. The costumes are off the rack and every once in a while there's a
visible zipper. A microphone appears briefly and intermittently at the top of
the screen. The part of the sheik is played not by Steve Cochran but by one of
his less-accomplished imitators. The dialogue is in pseudo-archaic phony-middle-
Eastern-accented English.

News comes of a victory in battle and the bejeweled and beturbaned emir, whose
heavy eyebrows dance above his too-heavily-kohled eyes, turns to his muscular
bodyguards and shouts, "bring out the food, bring out the drink, oil the women."

Anyway, that's the way I imagine it. But it's also possible that the line comes
from a parody of such a film. Could it be tucked away somewhere in a Marx
brothers movie? Or somewhere in one of Mel Brooks' historical skits. It's Monte
Pythonish but alas before their time.

Please help, friends of Vivian de St. Vrain. Who oiled what women?

Source: 2015/10/boobs

Title: Words of My Life -- Boobs
Date: October 22, 2015

When I was a boy, the word boob denoted a simpleton, a nincompoop-- what
Shakespeare calls a mooncalf and what in an earlier life I might have called
a schmuck or a schmendrick. "Boobs" was an everyday expression; so common and
pervasive that The Three Stooges might just as easily have been called the The
Three Boobs. There were other related uses of the word; "booby hatch" -- a semi-
humorous appellation for what was formerly called an insane asylum, and also
the "boob-tube" -- though whether the boob in that doublet denoted the machine
itself or the schmendricks who stared at it was never clear to me. But at some
point in my linguistic career the word "boob" re-emerged with a new primary
signification. It now seems to have become the most common word for the female
breast.

I do not like it when a breast is called a boob. It is disrespectful. A
breast is soft and nurturing but also erotic and enticing. A boob is
neither; it is a denatured object, stripped of its warm associations and
joined instead to foolishness and boobery. "Boob" is a deliberately
unsexual and undignified term. It is also, as Shakespeare says in a different
context, "base, vulgar and popular."

And available. If a person should happen to google the word "boob," perhaps
searching for information of an etymological kind, the first, second, third and
perhaps hundredth entry that he or she will encounter is for "boob selfies."
A "boob selfie," for readers equally as naïve as me, is a photograph which a
woman takes of her boobs and posts on the internet.

Jane Austen did not do this. Neither did George Eliot. I can't demonstrate
that the word "boob' is responsible for such a decadent display of immodesty,
but I do note that phrases such as "breast selfies" or "bosom selfies" are
inconceivable.

Nor did suicidal Cleopatra, when bringing the venomous asp to her breast, say
"Peace, peace/ Dost thou not see my baby at my boob/ That sucks the nurse
asleep."

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage.

Source: 2015/10/old-folks-show-how-its-done

Title: Old Folks Show How it's Done
Date: October 23, 2015

There are two memorable moments in Kent Haruf's competent, enjoyable and
posthumous novel, Our Souls at Night (2015). The first is the proposal that
Addie Moore make to Louis Waters that starts it all off. Addie and Louis are
long spouseless and in their seventies, solitary. Addie calls on Louis and
says, without much preparation, "I wonder if you would come and sleep in the
night with me." The second takes place after Addie and Louis have become a
couple and the local Holt, Colorado Nosey Parkers are beginning to gossip. The
lovers decide to confront the talkatives directly. "They stood at the corner
of Second and Main in the bright noon sun waiting for the light to change and
looked straight back at the people they met and greeted them and nodded and she
had her arm entwined with his and then they walked across the street to the
Holt Café where he opened the door for her followed her inside. They stood
waiting to be seated. People inside looked at them. They knew about half of
those sitting in the café, or at least knew who they were. The girl came and
said, is it the two of you?  It is, Louis said. We'd like one of those tables
out in the middle."  The forthrightness, the honesty in both of these scenes
is rather wonderful. And so it's sad that eventually the puritanism of the
Colorado plains wins out and the novel becomes a trifle ScarletLetter-y. But
good for the septuagenarians, I say, who show a lot more grit and juice than
their townsfolk and family.

Source: 2015/10/bulldogs

Title: More on Muff and Spot
Date: October 25, 2015

I enjoy good relations with animal -- respectful, sometimes even
affectionate. I remember with great fondness the many purring, playful cats
and kittens of my youth. I was once very taken with a calf named September
and, I confess, almost in love with the matriarch of a small herd of Morgans,
a lovely lady named Gillian. The twin Nigerian dwarf goats, Orville and
Wilbur, were, I think, special friends. But for some reason I've never taken to
dogs, even though I know the story about dog/human co-evolution. Doggy dogs
are moderately acceptable, but the various special breeds of dogs, dog-show
dogs, seem to me to be freaks and monstrosities. We should have left them as
wolves and not meddled.

Of all the various teratological breeds my least favorites are the ones who have
been hybridized into snoutlessness. Dogs deserve and need a snout.

I was once attacked by a snoutless ugly bulldog; its owner, who, incidentally,
had quite a snout himself, instead of apologizing profusely, made the utterly
unjustified claim that I had provoked the attack. The incident reinforced my
prejudice against bulldogs. It's not just that bulldogs are aggressive; let's
make no bones about it, it's that for some inexplicable perverse reason they've
been bred to be hideous. A travesty of a dog.

Nevertheless, I was startled to read the following paragraph in Richard C.
Francis' new book on domestication of animals (Domesticated, Evolution in a Man-
Made World, 2015):

The squashed face carries a heavy cost in and of itself. It starts with
breathing problems. The shortened snout causes the soft palate to bunch up in
front of the trachea in a way that impedes airflow. Since panting is the primary
way for dogs to cool, bulldogs are also vulnerable to death by overheating.
The mouth of a bulldog is also too small to accommodate its teeth, so they are
crowded and grow at odd angles, trapping food debris. Gum disease is rampant.
A bulldog's eyes don't seat properly In the skull and can pop out, even from
straining at a leash. Often the eyelids cannot close completely, resulting in
irritations and infection. The excessive skin folds often become infected.
Perhaps most telling, the bulldog's head has become too large to pass through
the birth canal; most births require Caesarean section.

Big mistake, the bulldog. We humans should have learned to leave well enough
alone.

Source: 2015/11/rose-zimbardo-1932-2015

Title: Rose Zimbardo (1932-2015)
Date: November 02, 2015

When I taught Shakespeare for the first time, at CCNY in the mid-60s, fresh out
of graduate school, I was mightily unprepared. I set myself the challenge of
teaching a new play every week for thirty weeks. So every weekend I would tackle
a play that I had read but not studied and then MWF try to explain it to my
unwilling cherubs. I learned a lot but I can't imagine that I was an effective
instructor, struggling, as I was, to keep my academic head above water (and, by
the way, deal with a colicky newborn at home).

But sometime during that first year I met Rose Zimbardo, who was teaching
another section of the course, and it was from Rose that I began to learn my
trade. She was a few significant years older than I, more experienced (and more
imaginative as well). Rose invited me to go for lunch with her and her great
friend Ed Quinn, who had recently completed, nominally with O. J. Campbell, but
in fact all by himself, the still useful Shakespeare Encyclopedia. Quinn knew
everything and Rose was chock full of theories about the plays, some sensible,
some borderline daft, but all provocative. Lunches for me with Ed and Rose
became a moveable seminar -- and it is not an exaggeration to say as valuable as
another Ph. D. I was challenged, inspired.

I lost that job (good fortune in the long run) and Rose moved on to Stony Brook.
I didn't meet Ed Quinn for many years, when I encountered him at Boston hotel
sometime in the 80s, and we had a moment to reminisce. I never set eyes on Rose
again. But I thought about her and Ed often and I look back with fondness and
gratitude for all they taught me.

Ed died a few years ago, a great loss. And now Rose.

Last year, through the miracle of the internet, I was able to exchange a few
emails with Rose. I hope I properly expressed my appreciation for all she had
done for me. It was my intention to visit her the next time I found myself in
California (she had retired to Davis, which she professed to loathe) as part of
my farewell tour.Too late, alas.

Rose was a fine scholar, an excellent teacher, and a great lady. Rest in peace,
old friend.

Source: 2015/11/enoughfeast

Title: Enough/ More
Date: November 11, 2015

"Enough" is a mighty peculiar looking word, but a good one nevertheless. It
frequently shows up in older texts as "enow." I don't know how the original
medieval velar fricative signified by "ough" evolved into so many different
pronunciations: e.g. although, through, hiccough, plough, rough.

My favorite enough proverb dates back to the fifteenth century, and is as
pertinent now as then: "enough is as good as a feast."  Our moralizing
ancestors knew that "the avaricious scraping together that knows no bounds" was
a vice, especially because it "renders us unfeeling to the wants of others." Yes
to a full belly, no to the excesses of the feast.

There's an oblique modern commentary on "enough is as good as a feast" in
Maxwell Anderson/John Huston's Key Largo. The dialogue is notable
and familiar, especially when we call to mind that the gangster Johnny Rocco is
played by Edward G. Robinson and the war hero Frank McCloud is Humphrey Bogart.

Johnny Rocco: There's only one Johnny Rocco.

James Temple: How do you account for it?

Frank McCloud: He knows what he wants. Don't you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Sure.

James Temple: What's that?

Frank McCloud: Tell him, Rocco.

Johnny Rocco: Well, I want uh ...

Frank McCloud: He wants more, don't you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Yeah. That's it. More. That's right! I want more!

James Temple: Will you ever get enough?

Frank McCloud: Will you, Rocco?

Johnny Rocco: Well, I never have. No, I guess I won't.

So there it is -- a nice contrast between "enough" and "more".  And
instructive, I think, in this day and age when our one-percenters seem to want
more and more, and are incapable of grasping that "enough is enough."

Source: 2015/11/ferns

Title: Ferns
Date: November 16, 2015

It's a little late in the day for me to embark on a career in pteridology. Too
many ferns, too little time. There may be a backup option: intimate, private
pteridophilia or even pteridomania.

But in fact, empty enthusiasm is no substitute for knowledge. It's mortifying
that after all these years of treading upon, admiring and sometimes even
transplanting them, I know almost nothing about the Ophioglassales or the
Marattiales, the Equisetums (although I can identify both the scouring rush
and the horsetail), the Hymenophyllales, the lygodium (which climbs with a
twining midrib), nor the aquatic Salviniales. And then there are the twelve
thousand separate and individual species of Polypodiales. Although I could not
help being aware of polypody ferns -- they're all over the place, sparkling in
the understory and thriving in forest clearings -- I could not name the name
of a single one save the extremely distinctive and graceful maidenhair and the
undistinguished plain (and poisonous) and absolutely ineradicable bracken.

Nor, until I read Robbin Moran's enchanting A Natural History of
Ferns (Portland, OR, 2004) did I have a clear idea of how ferns reproduce. Of
course I was familiar with the folklore upon which Shakespeare drew -- that the
seed of the fern is invisible and confers invisibility. There's a micro-debate
on the truth of this imaginative idea in an early scene of The First Part of
Henry the Fourth:

Gadshill:  We steal as in a castle, cocksure; we have the receipt [i.e. recipe]
of fern-seed, we walk invisible.

To which the skeptical chamberlain replies, "Nay, by my faith, I think you are
more beholding to the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible."

Our sometimes clever but often obtuse ancestors, knowing that all plant must
have seeds, and that ferns didn't, jumped to the conclusion that fern seeds must
be invisible. Well, there's a theory. It took a surprisingly long time for the
truth to out. In fact ferns bear very small, sometimes even microscopic spores,
visible, at best, as a fine dust. It was not until 1794 that John Lindsay
noticed that the spores produced a tiny green growth, nor until 1848 that
Michael Jerome Leszczyc-Suminski deployed his microscope to determine that these
so-called prothalli produced male and female sexual parts, and that from the
union of egg and motile sperm an embryonic plant with roots, leaves, and stems
was produced.

It seems like an unnecessarily complicated way to reproduce, but let's not judge
it harshly because it's worked very successfully for 345 million years, more or
less.

Of all the many ferns of past and present, the one that I would most like to see
with my own eyes fell by the evolutionary wayside 225 million years ago and is
unlikely to be resurrected in some vegetable Jurassic Park. They're the giant
lepidodendrons of the late Carboniferous, tree-size ferns that in the form of
coal are very likely providing right now the power for your and my computer.

One oddity of some lepidodendra  was that after fertilization they took
an unusual (perhaps even unique) path. The plant's root aborted while the
burgeoning shoot produced both the usual stem and also a downward-growing
rooting organ -- not a true root though it anchored the plant, but a root-like
system called a rhizomorph. Because the plant was a monocarp --that is, a plant
that grows for many years until mature, then flowers, fruits and dies -- both
the upside and the downside of the plant were, so to speak, term-limited. And
because the stem went both up and down, above ground and below ground, it was
remarkably symmetrical along the axis of the soil.

I wonder how a forest of lepidodendra would have appeared to a modern eye. Very
exotic, I imagine. Lepidoptera differed from modern trees in many ways, but
particularly in that their trunks were green with chlorophyll rather than bark-
brown. I think that a grove of them would have been littered with many uprooted
or rather uprhizomorphed plants. Quite a jungle, I should imagine, and quite a
delicious menu for the lumbering beasts who feasted upon it.

Source: 2015/11/welders-philosophers

Title: Welders Versus Philosophers
Date: November 23, 2015

I asked some friends how they understood Senator Marco Rubio's very blunt
statement that "Welders make more money than philosophers. We need more welders
and less philosophers."  I received a variety of answers.

My linguistically conservative friends asserted that we obviously need
grammarians more than either philosophers or welders, because Rubio doesn't
respect the difference between "less" and "fewer." I admit that "less
philosophers" clanks on my sensitive inner ear; nevertheless, I don't think that
it's wise to hold presidential candidates to high standards of usage. It would
be enough for them to grasp the issues. No one I know is so very prescriptivist
that he or she will vote for the candidate who knows the difference between
less and fewer. I confess to a longing for a more perfect language from our
leadership, but traditional  grammar is too much to ask, especially since it's
evident that our electorate easily acclimated to the barbarisms of bushlingo.

Others of my friends took issue with Rubio's unabashed materialism. They
parsed his statement to mean "welders make more money than philosophers and
therefore we should have more welders than philosophers." Welding is better than
philosophizing because it makes the bucks, gathers the green. If this is what
Rubio meant, then his argument is not only crass but wrong. Data from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics proves that both graduates with a philosophy degree and
professional philosophers (meaning professors of philosophy) enjoy much larger
salaries on average than welders. But even if welders did outearn philosophers,
Rubio's argument would still be monumentally vulgar. I don't know anyone who,
if push came to shove, assigns value strictly on the basis of earnings. Do we
not value men of the cloth, social workers, nurses, small farmers, G.I's, smoke-
jumpers and sometimes teachers more than we value pornstars and slumlords?
Einsteins more than reality TV celebrities? And as much as we respect the
crafts -- electricians, plumbers, tractor and auto mechanics -- we also know
that it is not the craftsmen but the philosophers who now as in the past are
going to help us think our way out of our plight. Just as Locke and Hume got
us out of Aristotle and the Bible and into the age of reason, and Darwin laid
the foundation for all the advances of the last hundred and fifty years in
biology and medicine, so we now need someone, desperately, equipped with deep
learning and an insightful brain, to generate the ideas that will get the new
messy electronic world, bedeviled with fundamentalists/terrorists, into some
kind of intellectual order. Welders are good, especially when you want something
fastened to a steel I-beam, but philosophers have their place as well. Rubio
is just too downright short-sighted for most of us. We know that money ain't
everything and we want our statesmen to know it as well. Rubio's assertion that
welders do more valuable work than thinkers participates in bottom-line American
anti-intellectualism. We're a can-do practical people; we can see what welders
do. Who knows what the heck those airy liberal philosophers do at those lefty
universities? Can they fix a fuse? Can they meet a payroll?

Another bunch of my friends objected that there's no reason why a person can't
be both a welder and a philosopher. Why set limits on human versatility? 
As it happens, I have in my own family a fellow who makes his living with
his brain but who also builds his own furniture, can wire a house, and has,
strange but true, taken up welding. But I think he'd be the first to admit
that he's not a pro at any of these crafts. We live in a world of specialists
and it's hard to be perfectly skilled at two crafts, let alone a craft plus
metaphysics or epistemology or logic. I understand the longing for the
philosopher-welder, but I don't think it's a realistic wish. It's utopian,
prelapsarian, perhaps even Marxist. After all, it was Marx who developed the
vision of post-capitalist communist society "where nobody has one exclusive
sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes,
[where] society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible
to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in
the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, philosophize after dinner, without
ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or philosopher" (German Ideology
[1845]). This is Marx at his least practical. I suspect that his hunters
and fishermen would return empty-handed, his herdsman would find that his
cows never come home, and his part-time philosophers would boggle over some
elementary error in logic or language. So no dice to the philosopher-welder,
I'm afraid. Not a starter, Karl.

What I myself would want to ask Rubio is this: how does it happen that there
are not enough welders?  Rubio puts his faith in the perfect workings of the
free market. In theory, the market should have solved the problem of the missing
welders by raising their salaries to make the job more enticing. And similarly,
it should have lowered the wages of philosophers to dry up the supply. Wait a
sec!!  Is it possible that the free capitalist market is not doing its job.
And if I or Marco Rubio propose that we establish more community colleges and
offer potential welders training in their craft at little or no cost, are we not
interfering with the proper working of capitalism and the free market? Picking
winners and losers, in the dread phrase.  t's centralized planning, almost
socialism to do so-- certainly anathema to the wing of the party to which Rubio
belongs. Riddle me that.

Bottom line:  it's helpful for Rubio to advocate for more welders. It's not
helpful (nor a credit to his candidacy) to set up a false antagonism between
welders and philosophers. Below the bottom line:  a democratic electorate
need thoughtful voters (let us call them philosophers). Welders need to be
philosopher-enough that they don't let themselves be snookered by some demagogue
who himself is bookless and factless and history-less. It's a challenge to
identify a thoughtful candidate when one of our major parties is offering a full
slate of empty but noisy barrels.

Source: 2015/11/baseballbabydream

Title: Another Amusing Dream
Date: November 27, 2015

I hit a ball sharply to right field into the cosmos and made it safely to
second base. (By "cosmos" I do not mean that I hit the ball into the universal
void, but rather into a patch of cosmos i.e. cosmos bipinnatus, the common
herbaceous perennial that was growingly thickly against the stadium wall,
something like the ivy at Wrigley.) I was standing on second, enjoying the
applause of 80,000 spectators at the old Yankee Stadium, when my daughter-in-law
suddenly appeared with her two-year-old toddler in tow and handed him to me,
saying, "you're in charge." She disappeared, so there I was on second holding
the boy by the hand. I told him to stay put, but on the next pitch he broke for
third, running as fast as his little legs could carry him. I called out to the
shortstop, "Now you're in charge."  At which point I cannot recall anything
further, except that I tried to follow the boy to third but I could hardly run
and it felt as though I was running through mucilage.

A curious dream. Dream professionals and analysts will no doubt be attracted by
the claim to significance embodied in the word "cosmos" and by the dreamer's --
that is to say my -- transparent urge to shirk responsibility.

Source: 2016/01/somnus-imago-mortis

Title: Somnus Imago Mortis
Date: January 02, 2016

Which translates as "sleep is the image of death." It's a medieval commonplace:
God has blessed us with sleep in order to prepare us for the long sleep of
death. A daily premonitory death.

I can't buy the theology. However, I believe that there's genuine truth to
somnus imago mortis.

I'm a bad sleeper, a tosser and turner. A person who's likely to read fifty
pages of a novel or watch a few innings of pre-recorded baseball between 2am and
3am. Even when I sleep I rarely fall into that deep trance-like state that I
remember from my childhood. I'm in a dream state or I'm far too aware of my
body, my surroundings, my worries.

But a few years ago, when I had the surgery, I was thoroughly anaesthetized
into a dead sleep. Nothing happened between the administration of the drug and
the moment I awakened: no dreams, no thoughts, no awareness. Nothing. I went
away and I came back, but from nowhere.

Let me tell you what happened when I returned to consciousness. I thought 
"wow, if that is what death is going to be like, then it's not so bad. It's
nothing to worry about, nothing at all to fear."

And I've held on to that insight. Perhaps ordinary somnus isn't the image of
death, but drugged sleep is unquestionably a state of being that gives real
rational secular practical meaning to ancient wisdom.

Source: 2016/01/predictions-2016

Title: Predictions -- 2016
Date: January 03, 2016

As is well known, Vivian de St. Vrain, fully accredited prophet (Senior
Fellow, American Society of Prophecy), has an unparalleled record of accurate
prognostication.  Vivian has once again retreated to the mountaintop and has
returned with a new set of predictions for the coming year.

Read and be dazzled, fit audience though few. Here's what's going to happen!

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)  a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce;  moreover, another (or
possibly the same) Hollywood star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the
same) actress will gain and lose a great deal of weight;

3)  a well-known American or possibly European athlete will be accused of
taking drugs;

4)  a politician will be accused of taking bribes;

5)  questions will be raised about the safety of America's food supply;

6)  there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

7)  there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

8)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East.

9)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of 2016.  Let's
see whether a senior but world-class professional prophet still has enough left
in the tank to foretell the future one more time.

Source: 2016/01/beetles

Title: Beetles
Date: January 12, 2016

Evolution was inordinately fond of beetles. According to the
coleopterists, there are some 400,000 species, with many more still to be
identified. Beetles are everywhere. Every time I introduce a new plant into my
garden, along comes a species of beetle new to me.

Nevertheless, I must admit, to my shame and embarrassment, that I can call
only a handful of beetles by name. Is it failure of curiosity, failure to pay
attention, failure of memory?  As Holmes might have said, I see but I do not
observe.

Here are the few I can identify. The pestiferous, omnivorous Japanese beetle, a
pest every year and occasionally a veritable plague. The Colorado potato beetle,
voracious on potatoes and annoying on eggplants. The extremely stupid box elder
but, which comes into the house every fall to die and desiccate. Ladybugs,
supposedly eaters of aphids. Lightning bugs, beautiful in the night, helpless by
day.The heavy bomber among beetles, the June bug. The rose chafer, early spring
consumer and disfigurer of anything white, especially the white flowers of
peonies. A variety of oil beetle that  hangs out a couple of inches below the
surface in good garden soil -- what does it do there?

That's about it;  all the rest are unidentified and unidentifiable shard-born
beetles. OK, off to the library I go to bring home some beetlebooks. This
ignorance cannot stand.

Source: 2016/01/what-we-watched-in-the-fifties-shane

Title: What We Watched in the Fifties:  Shane
Date: January 17, 2016

I didn't "get" Shane when I first saw it in 1953 when I just fourteen, and I
didn't ''get" it again last night when I watched it for the fourth or fifth
time, lifetime. It's a watchable film in my considered opinion but I have no
idea why various canon-creators have ranked it third or fourth among all 
Westerns. I revere Westerns but I can't revere Shane.

Not that there aren't some splendid moments. The first scene, when little
Joey with his kid-size rifle peers through the brush at a deer while, in the
distance, and through Joey's eyes, we see the figure of Shane a-horseback is an
excellent piece of film-making. We're going to see the whole movie through the
eyes of a child, the cinematography tells us. Moreover, it's going to be a film
about guns and Joey's love of guns and gunslingers. It's a very American story
shot through with the romance of weaponry, as is made clear right from the get-
go.

But it's downhill from there. The plot is minimal, classic, and familiar. A
Stranger Comes to Town. Even when I was a dewy youth I knew that Shane was going
to intervene in the struggle between the farmers and the ranchers. And that he
would resist as long as possible getting out his gun, and that his conversion to
violence would be cast as a Higher Moral Purpose. I had seen it all before, even
as an adolescent -- you can't negotiate with the bad guys; your weapon has to be
better than their weapon.

Van Heflin is the homesteader. He's a great, unappreciated actor, in my view.
But Alan Ladd is not credible as the mysterious stranger. First of all, he's
expressionless in face and monotonous in speech. Secondly, he lacks even a tad
of the charisma that's required of him. And thirdly, he's too small and skinny
for all the bareknuckle stuff. And Jean Arthur, I'm afraid, was simply too dowdy
to attract anyone's interest. The cast can't carry it off. Too much burden on
the child actor, Brandon de Wilde.

Why does Shane ride into the sunset at the conclusion of the story?  Why is
the most famous dialogue in the film, little Joey's plaintive "Shane, come
back. Come back, Shane?" There's really no good reason; nothing inside the
film compels his departure. Shane rides off because that's what the heroes of
Westerns do. The film is saturated with myth of the unconnected guy (well, he
does have his horse and his rifle) riding off, untrammeled by home, hearth, kids
and especially wives.

It's a powerful myth. My deep resistance to the film is that it is myth-driven
rather than character- or plot-driven. Shane doesn't create a myth; the myth
creates Shane.

Source: 2016/01/sonia-green-with-an-addition

Title: Sonia Green with an Addition
Date: January 24, 2016

I published this reminiscence some years ago:

My daughter continues to urge me to write something autobiographical. To which I
reply, it’s all autobiographical. But since she wants hard news, not indirect
revelation, I offer this account of my grandmother, born Sonia Chafetz, later,
by marriage, Sonia Usilewski and finally, after a legal name change, Sonia
Green. She was born in 1884 somewhere in darkest White Russia (now called
Belarus). I have no idea exactly where, but I know that she was a distinctly
rural girl -- she loved to fish, to pick berries, to grow plants. Of her life
in the old country, I know almost nothing -– only that she was raised in a
cottage with a dirt floor and that the family brought the cow inside in the
winter to keep the place warm. I know that she didn’t have a proper bed,
and that at least for part of her childhood she slept on the mantle over the
fireplace, which sounds mighty precarious to me. She couldn’t have had much
in the way of formal education, but she did read and write Yiddish and still
understood Russian in her old age. I know this because in the late 1940s or
early 50s I would occasionally sit with her and listen to the broadcast of
debates at the United Nations (in those days there were subsequent rather than
simultaneous translations) and she would render the Russian to me, as best she
could in her halting English. She never did become fluent in the only language
I knew so our conversations were stilted and confined to utilitarian topics.
When she was young--I’ve seen the pictures—she was dark, attractive, and
voluptuous. By the time I came to know her, when she was close to sixty, her
looks were long gone and she was disfigured by goiter and other diseases and
no doubt by the consequences of her many self-induced abortions.  The family
story was that both she and Joseph were engaged to other people when they
eloped to America (my grandfather deserting from the Russian army, where he had
been drafted for the usual twenty-year term, and where his salary was a ruble
every other month). They arrived in New York in August of 1904 from Rotterdam.
How they found their way from Minsk to Rotterdam I was never told, but the
Ellis Island records report that they came through London. My mother was born
in June of the following year, or just about ten months after her parents
arrived in this country. My mother’s story was that at first her parents had
only one pair of shoes between them, so that Sonia had to stay at home until
Joseph returned from work. The family settled in Harlem; my grandfather, who
was urban and more sophisticated than Sonia, had been trained as a pharmacist,
but never found work in his field in the new world. I don’t know what they
did for a living (was he some sort of salesman?) except that for a short time
my grandparents owned a delicatessen at the corner of 4th and 10th streets in
Greenwich Village. I’ve gone to that corner many times and tried imagine
such a restaurant, but of course not a clue remains. As far as I can guess,
their marriage was uneasy. My grandfather was frequently absent (my father once
darkly hinted, “I don’t know whether it was other women, or what”) and my
grandmother frequently ill. My father also told me that when he and mom married,
he laid down a prohibition—it was in the days when men made prohibitions--
that she wasn’t to act as intermediary between Sonia and Joseph any longer.
I know that my mother had to leave school six weeks into the ninth grade to
care for her mother and two younger brothers. But that’s about all I was
told and there are no documents. I have a few memories: Sonia trying to teach
me to play fan-tan and five hundred rummy -– I was as bad then as I am now
at card games; Sonia planting in wooden Philadelphia cream-cheese boxes every
orange or grapefruit seed that came into her house, so that her tiny apartment
had the pleasant aroma of a hot-house; Sonia growing avocados in the winter
but setting them in my father’s garden (just around the corner from her
third-floor walk up) in the summer. And I also remember her attempt to cure
my father’s sterile apple tree with an old-country remedy—rubbing the cut
half of an apple on the trunk in midwinter. I remember also stuffed cabbage,
the world's finest blintzes, and jars of apricot jam sealed with paraffin. In
her last years, Sonia lived with my parents; she had her own kitchen, a room
that had been remodeled from my former bedroom. She was weary of life and I
suspect that she died at least in part of malnutrition. I remember also that
she owned a pressed-glass ruby bowl that was always filled with hard candies. I
was allowed one candy per visit. When Sonia died in 1971, she had no money and
precious few possessions, but I inherited the bowl. It was pretty, and I’m
sorry to say that after a few years I accidentally broke it. But it was easily
replaced (it was in a popular pattern and every second-hand  store had the item
for sale) and I bought one for about $25.00. Some years afterward I broke the
second one and bought another, but by that time the price had gone up to $50.00.
So, although my inheritance in cold cash was a negative $75, I was left with
grateful appreciation and many warm memories.

Now I want to complete the story of the sterile apple tree.

My father had three fruit trees in his backyard garden on East 9 Street.  A
pear tree, which produced abundant fruit but not every year (it was a Seckel, if
I remember correctly, very sweet);  a peach tree, which was only occasionally
fruitful, probably because it was just a bit north of its proper range;  and an
apple (variety unknown) which was large and healthy, disease-free, but which for
some unknown reason never produced even a single blossom, let alone an actual
apple.  My grandmother Sonia Green explained to my father that when they had a
sterile apple in the old country, they would take a ripe apple, cut it in half,
and rub it on the trunk of the tree in mid-winter.  It always worked, claimed
grandma.  My father would have none of it.  "None of your superstition here,"
proclaimed. But one January he caught grandma apple in hand applying the folk
remedy.  He didn't say anything, but the next summer, he bought some apples and
tied them to the branches of the tree and took grandma to view them. She was
an intelligent old lady who immediately saw through the plot --but we all had a
good laugh and a good story to tell.

Source: 2016/01/squirmish

Title: Squirmish
Date: January 24, 2016

Sarah Palin, wordsmith, famous for her portmanteau "refudiate" (a blend of
refute and repudiate) has struck again with "squirmish," a coinage which
amalgamates "squirm" and "skirmish."  Here's the relevant sentence:

"Those are legitimate questions on both sides of the aisle, and another big
question that has to be asked is 'Are we at war?' I haven't heard the president
say that we are at war, and that's why I, too, am not knowing: Do we use the
term 'intervention'? Do we use 'war'? Do we use 'squirmish'? What is it?"

What, indeed?

I cherish the irony that the Governor is concerned with precision in language
and is troubled that our military actions in Libya lack proper definition.

I myself, an admirer of "squirmish," am puzzled by her use of the present
progressive "I am not knowing" where a native speaker of English would say, "I
do not know."  Is it an alaskanism with which I'm not familiar?  Did they
neglect to teach the present progressive at the University of Idaho, where Ms.
Palin earned her degree in Communication? Or is she perhaps an imperfectly-
trained foreign agent smuggled into the country by the Stasi or the KGB with the
mission of undermining the American polity?

Moreover, it is wonderful out of all hooping that "palin" means "backward" in
Greek.  As "trump" means "deceive" in French.

Source: 2016/01/weird-dreams

Title: Weird Dreams
Date: January 26, 2016

Folks who know me know that I'm not an imaginative or inventive human
being. I'm kind of dull, actually -- predictable, routinized, even humdrum.
What most people don't know is that I have an extremely vivid and creative
nighttime life. I dream big and I dream weird.

Take last night for example (an ordinary night by my standards). I was on
my way by NYC subway to Ebbets Field to see a 7:30 pm Brooklyn Dodgers night
game. I was accompanied by my elderly, arthritic father (in the dream I was
in my 20s or 30s). For some reason the train took a wrong turn and instead
of proceeding from DeKalb to Atlantic, took me and pop to Pacific Avenue. I
couldn't figure how to find a train going back to DeKalb so we went out on
the street to catch a cab. No cab would stop but a few people who were also
lost decided to rent a limousine. I was told that it would cost $50 apiece
but I agreed because my father was having trouble walking. However, when the
limousine came, he and I had lost our way and the car pulled away without
us. The next thing I knew pop and I were in a railroad car (it seemed like a
compartment in a European railroad and he was stretched out asleep and I had
in my arms a very pretty baby, whom I identified as my sister Susan who died
at age 9 months in 1938. She was sweet and gurgling until she let loose with
a tremendous flood of shit which covered my pants and even flooded over to
contaminate my father. "Who diapered this baby," I shouted. I had no equipment
to clean the child or myself. The conductor came over to help and offered to
stop the train but then the baby girl started to spew a huge quantity of vomit
all over me. I looked in her mouth and found a Band-Aid, which I removed, and
then, looking once again, found a roll of gauze, which I also removed. And then,
all of a sudden, I was no longer on the train but instead was visiting the home
of George Bush (the elder, not W) in Houston. I had been invited for dinner,
but before dinner was to be served I had to coach a grandson or great-nephew
of the former president in basketball, teaching him how to dunk. Afterward
we all sat down to dinner and I felt extremely awkward, wondering what would
have caused Mr. Bush to invite me, a Democrat. One of the guests asked me if
I ever shopped at Hill's In Bradford, Vermont and I had to report that Hill's
had closed. Then I was asked if I had ever eaten at the salad bar in the old
Greyhound station in White River Junction. I said that I had (it's true!!) and
then I woke up.

Man o' man that was something else.  Several novels worth of material for
someone with a daytime imagination, I should think.

Source: 2016/02/streetcar-conversation

Title: New Orleans Streetcar 0verheard Conversation.
Date: February 06, 2016

Cheerful, lively 70ish woman:  "I was alone for thirty years. I didn't
even have a date. He (man in a Mardi Gras green bowler hat) grew up in a
French-speaking family in Rhode Island,  We shacked up for a couple of
years. Then he wanted to get married. At our age it's all about finances, so
I said, why not?  He's funny. He's very good to me. He likes to do things. We
live six months of the year in Arizona and six months in Alaska, fifty miles
south of Fairbanks. There's good fishing. We're just here for a couple of
days. We're going on a cruise in the Caribbean. Now we're on our way to
find a restaurant that has the best hamburger in the entire south, he says."

Source: 2016/02/more-new-orleans-dialogue

Title: More New Orleans Dialogue
Date: February 06, 2016

At a restaurant at the corner of Jena and Freret, the over-tattooed waitress,
acknowledging our appreciation of the greens, fennel and kumquat salad, said,
memorably, "People do not understand the beauty of the kumquat."  An excellent
instance of found poetry. And all the more brilliant in context, because I
myself once asserted that "kumquat" is the most obscene-sounding word in the
English language.

Source: 2016/02/climates

Title: Althea Goss Pearlman (1939-2016)
Date: February 18, 2016

Althea Goss Pearlman, 76, of Boulder, died February 10, 2016 at
AltaVita Memory Care Centre in Longmont where she had resided for the last two
and a half years.

Althea was born in Paterson, New Jersey in 1939 to Daniel Goss and Anne Krull
Goss, both teachers of mathematics. She was raised in Utica, New York and
graduated as valedictorian from Utica Free Academy in 1956. She held degrees in
mathematics from Cornell University (where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa)
and Harvard University. She married Elihu Hessel Pearlman, whom she had met in a
first-semester chemistry class, in June, 1960.

Althea had many interests but her life revolved around her two passions:
teaching and family. Althea taught mathematics at Ithaca High School in Ithaca,
New York, at Warren Junior High School and Newton South High School in Newton,
Massachusetts, at the City College, CUNY, in New York City, at Platt Junior High
School in Boulder and, for twenty years, at Boulder High School. In 1991-92,
she was an Einstein Congressional Fellow in Washington, D.C, serving as an
advisor to the House of Representatives on mathematics teaching. She also spent
four years as a Clinical Professor in the School of Education at the University
of Colorado, Boulder, where she acted as a mentor and coach to prospective
teachers. For Althea, teaching was not a job or a profession, but a calling.
She was an artist whose medium was chalk and blackboard. She accumulated a
wall full of teaching awards, including, most notably, the Presidential Award
for the Teaching of Science and Mathematics (1987), but was most gratified not
by certificates but by appreciative letters from students whose lives she had
influenced.

Althea was an excellent and loving wife, mother, and grandmother. She is
survived by her husband, with whom she enjoyed a deep, spirited, and ever-
evolving love for more than half a century, by her children Nathaniel, Benjamin
and Eve, by their spouses Connie Chang, Kyla Holcomb Pearlman, and Jonathan
Soglin, by her seven grandchildren: Talia and Oliver Soglin of Alameda,
California, Ella and Lola Pearlman-Chang of Washington DC, Luke, Caleb and Asher
Pearlman of Boulder; and by her sister Paula Goss Gombas and husband Allen
Gombas of Lyman, New Hampshire. Althea's sister Phyllis Goss Murray died in
1998.

Althea's ashes will be buried in the family cemetery in West Bradford,
Vermont.  A memorial event in her honor will take place in the auditorium of
Casey Middle School, 1401 High Street, on Saturday, March 5, at 3:00 P. M.

The family would like to thank the skilled and sympathetic caregivers
at AltaVita and at New Century Hospice who made Althea's last years
as comfortable as possible.

Should anyone wish to make a gift in Althea's honor, the family recommends
the Althea Pearlman Memorial Fund at Boulder High School. Checks should be
made out to Treasurer, Boulder High School (at 1604 Arapahoe Avenue, Boulder,
Colorado 80302) and designated "Pearlman Memorial." A scholarship will be
awarded annually to an outstanding student of mathematics.

Source: 2016/02/i-love-a-tall-girl

Title: "I Love a Tall Girl"
Date: February 21, 2016

I never "got" T. S. Eliot. When I first became serious about poetry and
"intellectual" stuff, in the 50s, Eliot was the presiding grand khan of English
literature. Because Eliot liked Donne, my teachers liked Donne. Because Eliot
was down on Milton, my teachers were down on Milton. Eliot had pronounced
that "a dissociation of thought and feeling" occurred in the later seventeenth
century, and we all tried to interpret literature in the light of that putative,
imaginary divorce. Eliot discovered that Shakespeare's Hamlet was a failure
because it lacked an 'objective correlative." We were enjoined to wonder exactly
where that OC had gone. Nevertheless, I thought Hamlet was an exciting success
and still do. So do many discerning readers.

To me, Eliot's criticism was mysterious and his poetry was incomprehensible,
unmusical and occasionally repellent. "The Waste Land," his masterpiece,
was to me obscurantist, pretentious, show-offy and shallow. And yet I was
unquestionably an outlier. I studied the "Four Quartets" for weeks under the
able direction of a serious teacher and scholar, Arthur Mizener, but in the end
there was nothing there for me. My own insufficiency?  Perhaps.

I could not get around Eliot's public positions ("I am an Anglo-Catholic in
religion, a classicist in literature, and a royalist in politics"). To me,
these views were fringe, absurd, reactionary, borderline fascist. Eliot was
puritanical about sex, looked down his Brahmin nose at people not of his class
(see the Sweeney poems) and couldn't abide Jews.

When I taught a course called "History of Poetry in English," which I did for
many years, I would skip from the undeniably great poets of the World War
I generation (Brooke, Rosenberg, Sassoon, Thomas, Owen, Graves, Hardy) right to
Yeats and Frost, leaving Eliot in the deep lurch, possibly to the consternation
of my more sophisticated students.

So it gives me great pleasure to say that I've finally found a poem by the old
pretender that tickles me. It celebrates his second wife, whom he married in
1957 when he was sixty-eight and she was thirty, and remained unpublished until
it just now appeared in the second volume of the new Johns Hopkins edition. It's
not exactly juicy, but it seems to be honest and forthright:

I love a tall girl.

When we lie in bed

She on her back and I stretched upon her,

And our middle parts are busy with each other,

My toes play with her toes and my tongue with her tongue,

And all the parts are happy.

Because she is a tall girl.

To me, this brief lyric is worth forty Quartets.

Source: 2016/03/parking-garage-criminal

Title: Parking Garage Criminal;  Transients
Date: March 31, 2016

On February 11, an "intruder" was discovered in the parking garage of the
downtown condo where I now live. Actually, I found him myself. I had to run a
late night errand, unusual for me, and there he was, scruffy and dirty, hanging
out near the elevator. I said to him, "are you lost?" and he answered that he
was staying with a friend who lived in the building. It seemed fishy, but I was
in too much of a hurry to concern myself with him. But when I returned two hours
later I found him curled up in a stairwell, apparently sleeping. I notified
the police but I didn't stay around for the outcome because it was 2:30 in the
morning and I was exhausted from the night's events. It turned out that he had
stolen a bicycle and also entered a number of unlocked cars, including mine. We
know he was in my car because the police found my Volvo S70 owner's manual where
he had been sleeping. Whether he used it as reading material or as a makeshift
pillow I don't know.

Yesterday I was called by the police and told that perpetrator had been
arrested. It seems that he was recorded on a surveillance camera (I didn't
know we had one) in the garage and that his image was shown to the police who
specialize in dealing with our city's population of transients. ("Transient" is
the current term of art for people who have at various times called "homeless,"
"hobos," "bums," or "vagrants.") He was well known to the authorities and was
picked up; he readily confessed to the crimes. I asked what was going to happen
to him and whether there was any chance that he could rehabilitated. The police
lady with whom I spoke said that he would be sent to jail for a few months
and then be back on the street. "Sometimes we have someone who turns his life
around, but this guy has a history and he's not going to change. He's been in
the system for years. He had a place to live a while ago but preferred (her
word) to be out on the street. Drugs and alcohol. The shelters require that the
inhabitants be drug free and he can't stay clean."

Our fair city is popularly thought of as a mecca for transients. I don't know if
it's so, but I know that we have a very visible population of such folks. All
the downtown public institutions, such as the library, are dense with them. When
I walk the four blocks of the downtown mall, I'll be approached by 3-5 beggars.
And there will also be knot of five or six unwashed persons with backpacks and
blankets on two or three different benches. The local merchants complain, and
the transients are moved on, but they return.

I don't like the situation. I find it morally challenging. Do I give a man a
dollar, even though I know that the city and the churches provide adequate
food, and the money will go for contraband -- or do I avert my eyes?  If I
avert my eyes, am I treating the guy or gal as a non-person? But if I engage in
even the slightest conversation, I feel that I am condoning a way of life of
which I thoroughly disapprove. If it is my obligation to support the poor, am
I obligated to support the liquor and drug habits of the transient population?
How do I deal with the occasional, inconstant, but sometimes very strong feeling
of repulsion that I feel for the "houseless heads and unfed sides." Are we not
all members of the human population, of the family of man? If I ignore these
people, have I turned into a complacent, unsympathetic, hardened, unfeeling old
bourgeois, a scrooge, mouthing, "are there no prisons, are there no workhouses?"

I asked the police person, who has been dealing with the transient population
for many years, if she had any ideas about what to do. She knew of a number of
experiments in various cities which had some success, but all had ultimately
failed.

She said, "Lock your car door. Lock your apartment."

Source: 2016/04/junebug-1

Title: Junebug (2005)
Date: April 13, 2016

When I saw Junebug for the first time shortly after it appeared in 2005, I
enjoyed its gentle, affecting comedy. It's yet another "stranger comes to town"
enactment, although this time, for once, the stranger is a woman. Madeleine
Johnsen is a fortyish, worldly, sophisticated Chicago-based art-dealer. She
arrives in a small North Carolina Christian-saturated community accompanied by
her brand-new twenty-something husband, who is a native of the place. If they're
not deeply in love, they're certainly enjoying a time of sexual satisfaction,
perhaps even frenzy. As the film proceeds, a series of exquisite culture-clash
misunderstandings illuminate both city and country.

On last night's viewing, however, the film was far less amusing and more painful
than I remembered. Did I see it the first time with rose-colored glasses?

In the film's loveliest scene, the young husband George Johnsen, played
gracefully by Alessandro Nivola, is prevailed on at a church-basement social
to "give us a hymn," which he does rather beautifully, offering Will Lamartine
Thompson's ""Softly and Tenderly, Jesus Is Calling" which is an extremely
melodic but theologically naive piece of sentimentality. As he sings, obviously
very comfortable with the milieu and with the surroundings, the director's
camera focuses on his wife Madeleine's (i.e. Embeth Davidtz's) expressive face.

When I saw the film in 2005 or thereabouts, I thought Madeleine shone with
wonderment and appreciation. O, I thought, she sees and appreciates a new
dimension in her husband. This will lead to understanding between them and
help her to navigate the gulf between her and her new family. How could I have
been so undiscerning? This time, it was entirely clear that her reaction was
exactly the opposite of what I had previously attributed to her. Madeleine
doesn't get it at all. It's not appreciation, it's incomprehension, perhaps even
condescension. Madeleine, I'm sorry to say, doesn't understand her husband, his
culture, his religion, or his family. And indeed, subsequent events in the plot
confirmed my new pessimism, for every time Madeleine has to make a choice, she
does so with no accommodation to her husband's upbringing or values

She's glad to leave the place, she says at the end, but it's clear to me that
she's learned nothing and that there's trouble brewing.

Most of the attention that the film has garnered is owing to Amy Adams'
performance as George's pregnant child-like sister, which is indeed a remarkable
piece of acting. But for my money, it's the visiting husband and wife who steal
the show -- along with the intelligence and art of the director (Phil Morrison)
and the writer (Angus MacLachlan).

Source: 2016/04/de-somno

Title: De Somno
Date: April 14, 2016

I am a bad sleeper. I don't know if I'm technically an insomniac but I can say
in all honestly that for me, the nighttime is the hardest part of the day. It's
been this way for a long time. I''m good at going to sleep and I enjoy the
"first sleep" of two or three hours, but after that, say from 2 am on, it's an
adventure. Nightmares, tossing and turning, "fluff in the lung and a feverish
tongue," and mostly what I think of as "airplane sleep" -- that is, the kind of
semi-sleep, semi-awake borderline limbo which you're in when you're sitting up
in a crowded plane.

Moreover, things start to look mighty bleak in the 2-5 part of the morning.
Is that pain in my toe a bruise, or is it the beginning phase of gout or
neuropathy? Cancer of the instep? Will they want to amputate my leg at the knee?

Not so in the 1950s. Return we now to those days of yesteryear and recall
the most glorious sleepings of my life. I'm in my teens, and it's spring. A
weekend. I spend the morning at the PS 217 schoolyard, playing basketball. I'm
tireless once I get my second wind. After four or five hours, I drag myself
home for a roast beef dinner, stuff myself. Then I lie down, turn on the radio
and listen to Red Barber and Connie Desmond broadcast the Dodgers game (if it's
Sunday, perhaps a double-header). By the second inning, I'm deep in the arms of
Morpheus. Profound. Incomparable. A sleep beyond ordinary sleep. When I wake,
it's the seventh inning. I've been in sleeptopia for two hours.

Where are the sleeps of old time?

Source: 2016/04/whats-next

Title: What's Next?
Date: April 19, 2016

Our sun is halfway through its life cycle. Its luminosity increases 1% every
110 million years. Therefore the Earth ineluctably grows hotter and hotter.
In a billion years, life on its surface will be impossible. Global surface
temperatures will reach 117F and the oceans will evaporate. Water molecules in
the atmosphere will be broken apart by solar radiation and hydrogen molecules
will escape the planet. Eventually the sun will exhaust the hydrogen fuel in its
core. When it begins to exploit other material, its luminosity will increase a
thousandfold until it stabilizes with a radius about 250 times its present size.
It will consume Mercury and Venus but probably not the Earth which will become
locked into an orbit with only one side facing the sun (as the moon does to
the earth). This will mean impossibly hot temperatures on one side, impossibly
cold on the other. The moon's orbit will reduce to 11,000 miles causing it to
fracture, raining pieces of itself onto the Earth. Eventually the sun will lose
mass and gravitational pull and the earth will drift away into a remote orbit --
dark, cold, and lifeless.

(Adapted from Douglas Palmer, Earth in 100 Groundbreaking Discoveries (Firefly
Books, 2011.)

Source: 2016/04/los-angeles-uber-driver

Title: Los Angeles Uber Driver
Date: April 26, 2016

"I worked for Ethiopian Airlines in Ethiopia. I have a degree in business. One
time my wife came to America and she says she wants to stay here. I had so much
paperwork and investigation but now I am a legal immigrant. America is the land
of opportunity. I believe that one hundred per cent. I bought a house, it is my
house. In Ethiopia, I would have to bribe many big shots and one day they could
take the house anyway if someone wanted it. Here, no trouble. I had to leave
Ethiopia because I was opposed to the government. We had an election and 100% of
the people voted for the government, hah! We do not like Obama so much because
he visited Ethiopia and said it was a democracy. Our government is fighting
the terrorists in the Sudan so he pretends not to know the facts. I have two
children, they speak English but also Amharic. My wife is a nurse. It is good
here. I am an accountant at LAX but I drive for Uber on weekends and sometimes
at nights, extra money. Los Angeles is very expensive to live."

Source: 2016/04/at-the-getty-museum

Title: At the Getty Museum
Date: April 27, 2016

Dr. M.  "How long have you been a guard here?"

Guard:  "Seventeen years. You can't stand still. You have to change your
position, move around."

Dr. M.  "Has anything ever happened. Someone try to steal a painting?

Guard.  "No nothing. Nothing has ever happened."

Dr. M.  "No one descending on ropes from the ceiling, trying to snatch a
sculpture."

Guard.  "Nothing has ever happened. Wait, I forgot. Something did happen. Two
or three years ago, there was a woman, she had a can of soda in her bag. She
leaned over to look at one of the bronze sculptures, and the soda fell out of
her bag. It broke and sprayed some soda on the statue. They called a special
crew in to clean the sculpture. We closed down the entire wing."

Dr. M.  "Must have been exciting."

Guard.  "No, not really."

Source: 2016/05/a-couple-of-incomplete-stories-from-real-life

Title: A Couple of Incomplete Stories from Real Life, Embroidered and Novelized but Left Hanging
Date: May 06, 2016

1)  "My husband's niece, his sister's daughter, has been staying with us. She's
nineteen just about to turn twenty. For a couple of months now. She's working
on her English --the family is Finnish. She's also enjoying the local social
scene; she's out a lot a night, but that's not a problem. She's old enough to
be on her own. She's a nice girl, I thought, a good girl, kind of pretty in
a northern way. She helps out with the kids if I ask her. I had no complaint
until I started to notice that money was disappearing. At first, I thought I was
crazy, but I did a couple of experiments to make sure. I left my purse with the
wallet inside it  in a place where only Anniki could access it. I counted the
money carefully. Sure enough, when I came back a $20 was missing. I calculate
she must have taken about $300 so far. What should I do?  I can't ignore it. I
could hide my purse, hide the money, but either she'd find it or she'd know that
I knew. I have to tell my husband. I mean, it's his responsibility, isn't it?
 I don't care so much about the money, but I think, yes, she should reimburse
me. And she needs to know that she's on a wrong path. She's too old for this. I
think we should sent her back to Finland, tail between her legs. She needs to
learn a lesson."

2)  "I went back to South Dakota, haven't been there in a number of years,
maybe three or four. I have second cousin, he's in his sixties. A decent guy,
runs a wrecking service. Hard worker, no employees. Up all night sometimes.
Twenty years ago, his son, Jake Leath Percy married this lady from Oregon. She
got pregnant, had a baby, then skipped. No one ever saw her again. Returned to
Oregon, we speculate. Left the baby with Jake Leath. Well, Jake Leath proved to
be as incapable as his wife. On the road a lot. So my cousin Herb Percy kind of
adopted the child. He was a big kid for his age, didn't do particularly well in
school, but not a real trouble-maker. Herb did right by him. But then, and here
I'm unclear about the details, they did some sort of DNA testing, I don't know
why exactly,  and it turns out the kid isn't a Percy at all. Not biologically
related to Herb's son. She was pregnant by someone else. Not a surprise, if you
think about it. A cowbird kind of situation. But Herb brought him up, feels
responsible. Doesn't really like him so much, I think. He's six-four, takes up a
lot of room in the trailer. Drinks beer. And now it turns out he likes to start
fires."

Source: 2016/05/lola-on-romeo-and-juliet

Title: Lola on Romeo and Juliet
Date: May 18, 2016

The granddaughter, Lola, age 6 and a bit, has been reading to me -- a child's
version of Romeo and Juliet. The feud between the Montagues and the Capulets
distresses her. "Why do they have to fight. Why can't they just talk about it?
 Why don't they use their words?"

Source: 2016/06/wheres-the-gasplant

Title: Where's the Gasplant?
Date: June 22, 2016

I'm most fond of the gasplant, also called fraxinella or dittany or, when
formality is called for, dictamnus albus. It's a beautiful plant. In flower
it's an ornament to the perennial garden, and even when it's done blooming, it's
neat and orderly and retains a lovely shade of green throughout the summer.
Smells good too. It's a long-lived perennial, very hardy. It takes a number of
years to establish itself, but then lives almost indefinitely. If you have one,
you treasure it. I have two, both of which I took from the garden of my late
sister Phyllis when she died in 1998. Or should I say I had two, because over
the winter one of them went missing.

In the location where there should have been and always has been a fully-mature
gasplant, there was nothing -- not a leaf, not a twig, not a root. If the plant
had died, it would have left some evidence behind. It's a woody plant which dies
back to the ground each year, so every spring there is a bundle of dry hollow
stalks or kexes. But this year nothing. Not a shred.

What happened to Mr. Dittany. Here's a possibility. I transplanted him, put him
somewhere else, and then forgot that I had done so. An unlikely possibility.
I searched my brain but can't' recall moving it. I searched the grounds -- no
luck. If it wasn't me, was it someone else?  Did some malefactor steal the
gasplant?  I have never heard of a gang of perennial thieves. Is it possible
to believe that a nefarious individual entered the garden while I was away and
heisted an out-of-season gasplant, roots and all?  Not an hypothesis I can much
credit. Did the plant have enemies? If it's being held for ransom, I have yet to
receive the note. "We have your fraxinella. Either fork over $14.99 or we'll mow
it."

Another possibility: there never was a dittany. It was always a hallucination
of my decaying brain. Nope, no go. It's been in the same place for years. Many
people have seen it. I show it off -- it's so dramatic, so striking.

Or perhaps, it's a plot against me. Am I being gaslighted?  With a gasplant?

Source: 2016/08/sublime-prosaic-all-dialogue-drawn-from-real-life

Title: Sublime, Prosaic (all dialogue drawn from real life).
Date: August 02, 2016

She:  "I want to go outside to see the stars."  (Note perfect blank verse).

He.  "I want to go to the bathroom."

Source: 2016/10/elsa-morante-on-mussolini-

Title: Elsa Morante on Mussolini
Date: October 05, 2016

Elsa Morante, the distinguished Italian novelist, spent the war years in what
might be called internal exile, holed up, hungry, with her friend and later
husband Alberto Moravia in a one-room hut in Sant'Agata (both Morante and
Moravia were half Jewish). After Mussolini and his mistress Clara Petacci were
arrested and shot, hung upside down for all to see, Morante wrote about her
countrymen that "all of Mussolini's faults were either tolerated or encouraged
and applauded. Thus a people who tolerate the faults of their head of state are
complicit with these faults. But if they encourage and applaud them as well, it
is worse than being an accomplice, it makes them an accessory to these faults."
Mussolini was, according to Morante, a mediocre man, a crude man, a man outside
the culture. But Mussolini was also a perfect exemplar of the Italian people
who, she claimed, were such that they would rather given their vote to a strong
man than to a just man, and if they had to choose between their duty and their
profit -- even if they knew what their duty was -- they would choose their
profit.

It is difficult not to see an analogy to our beloved country at this election
season.

Source: 2016/10/pussygate

Title: Pussygate
Date: October 10, 2016

A textbook example of the unthinkable actually happening:

"It's good to be the king," says Mel Brooks (as Louis XVI) in The History of
the World, Part I, lifting the skirt of one of his lovely courtieresses in
order to dry-hump her. It's make-believe Hollywood pseudo-licentiousness. It's
outrageous, beyond the pale, and hilarious as long as it stays in the movie.

"It's good to be star," says Trump, bragging about his license to kiss women and
grab them by their "pussies."

What in comedy is amusing is in real life simply grotesque -- as is the
perpetrator of the atrocity, the maniacal Republican candidate for the most
powerful office on earth.

Source: 2016/12/orts

Title: Orts
Date: December 01, 2016

"Orts" is a rare but tasty word. Orts are the bits of bones, gristle, stems,
skins, pits and other inedibles that are left on the plate after one finishes
eating -- the stuff that is scraped directly into the garbage can. Orts are to
be distinguished from "leftovers" which are the uneaten remains of the meal that
are carefully sequestered for tomorrow's breakfast. Leftovers good, orts bad.

Shakespeare uses "orts" twice in the plays, both times metaphorically. The first
instance is in Julius Caesar, when Anthony tells Octavius how little he values
his colleague Lepidus. According to Anthony, Lepidus is "A barren-spirited
fellow; one that feeds/ On abjects, orts and imitations." In this instance, orts
seems to be prompted by the word "feed." A second appearance of the word orts
is in Troilus and Cressida. Troilus has discovered that his beloved Cressida
has been playing at fast and loose with Diomedes: "The bonds of heaven are
slipp'd, dissolved, and loosed/ And with another knot, five-finger-tied,/ The
fractions of her faith, orts of her love,/ The fragments, scraps, the bits and
greasy relics/ Of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed." It's a strong
speech and "orts of her love" is a powerful phrase, though rather obscure
nowadays to audiences for whom the "ort" is a mystery --which certainly includes
contemporary audiences.

Whether Shakespeare's first audiences would have required a footnote for orts
I do not know. It was never a frequently used word, though the OED attests its
presence in the language from 1440 to 1880. I don't know of any recent usages,
but once, when I was at lunch with a group of professional Shakespeareans, I
asked at the close of the meal, "What do we do with the orts" -- everyone at the
table knew exactly what I meant. Rather a specialized audience, however.

Orts should not be confused with Oorts. The Oort cloud is the presumed boundary
of the solar system, way out there, ten times further than Neptune, where the
comets are thought to reside until they are dislodged from their proper home
and come hurtling toward the inner planets. Orts and Oorts are both leftovers,
in the sense that they are the remains of an original creation, in the one
case chicken pot pie and in the other the universe. Orts are much smaller but
more palpable than Oorts. Makes a guy wonder what could possibly be denoted by
ooorts? Or oooorts?

Source: 2016/12/even-more-new-words

Title: Even More New Words
Date: December 08, 2016

Carinate, which sounds vaguely dental, actually describes the shape of a
particular kind of ceramic or metal vessel. An object which has a rounded base
and inward sloping sides is "carinated." Hypogea, which is drawn directly from
Greek under (hypo) and earth (gaia) means, obviously, underground, but in
the world of archaeology generally refers to an underground temple or tomb.
Catacombs and crypts, therefore, are both hypogea. A megaron was the great
hall of a Grecian palace but archaeologists use the word to describe the large
entrance room of any substantial structure. An exedra is a semicircular recess
set into a building's facade. It think of it, perhaps incorrectly, as a half
of a rotunda. A plinth is the base or platform on which a column or statue
rests. Ashlar is finely dressed stones, generally in the shape of a cube or
a rectangular solid. Ashlar construction is therefore different from rubble
masonry, in which walls are made of irregularly shaped or found stones. A
tophet is a burial place for children either sacrificed or dead of natural
causes; it's a word of Hebrew origin and recalls the valley near Jerusalem n
which ancient Canaanites sacrificed children to Moloch or Baal. I'm embarrassed
that I apparently never encountered the word annona, which characterizes the
grain supply of the city of Rome in ancient times.  Annona, the common noun,
is also personified or deified as "a theophany of the emperor's power to care
for his people through the provision of staples." Annona, the goddess, is
sometimes assimilated to her compatriot Ceres. Acephalous means headless, and
describes "clerics not under a bishop" or lines of verse missing a first foot.
In archaeology, it's a decapitated statue. A cist is simply a stone-lined
grave or shaft.

These splendid words are drawn from Shepherds, Sailors & Conquerors,
Archaeology and History in Sardinia from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages by
Stephen Dyson and Robert Rowland, 2007, which I read with great care,
enjoying especially the middle chapters on Sardinia's fascinating nuraghagic
civilizations.

Source: 2016/12/reposted

Title: Reposted:  "Crosspatch, / Draw the Latch" and Industrial Capitalism
Date: December 12, 2016

One of the most joyful of nursery rhymes, and a personal favorite, is this
brilliant piece of poetry:

Crosspatch,

Draw the latch.

Sit by the fire and spin.

Take a cup,

And drink it up.

Then call the neighbors in.

The clicky rhymes and jaunty meter are undeniably beautiful -- and there's much
more complexity than first meets the eye.

In the first triad, a "crosspatch," -- a "cross or ill-tempered person, usually
a girl or woman"-- is at work, spinning; in the second triad, she's exhorted to
drink and also to invite her neighbors "in" -- presumably into the room, or just
as likely, the tiny cottage-- where she lives alone. In the first strophe, the
theme is isolation, but in the second, isolation is challenged by the calls of
society and by the hope of a more satisfactory and convivial life.

What can we know about the surly individual addressed by the evocative
designation, "crosspatch?"  The first element in the name --"cross"-- implies
not only sourness, but also resistance, as in "cross-grained." The second
element--"patch"-- suggests that the crosspatch's discontent is not without
cause. We can infer that she's poor because she's a person whose garments are
either assembled from various rescued materials, as in "patchwork," or that her
clothes are, in another sense of the word patch, repaired. In addition, it's
possible that ill health has caused her skin to become "patchy." But "patch"
also signals a degree of mental stress, as in Shakespeare's "patched fool." In
this signification, patch derives from Italian pazzo, crazy. The crosspatch is
therefore disabled physically, socially and psychologically.

At the outset of the poem, our "crosspatch" sits glowering, impoverished,
perhaps muttering indistinctly, friendless, without family, her youth blighted
by poverty, huddled against the last embers of her dying fire. What is it
that she is spinning? No doubt she ekes out a meagre living in the impersonal
mercantilist "putting-out" system. Some exploitative proto-capitalist venturer
has delivered to her lonely door a quantity of unspun wool or cotton; her job
is to return the material to him in the processed form that will then be passed
on to an equally poor weaver, then to a tailor, etc. She works alone and never
sees the fruits of her labor except for the occasional, paltry farthing that
allows her a bare subsistence. No wonder she is slightly barmy and has "drawn
the latch" -- closed herself off from her fellows. But then, suddenly, comes
the antistrophe, and in a series of importunate injunctives the crosspatch is
solicited to rejoin the company of humanity. "Take a cup,/ And drink it up,/
Then call the neighbors in." What's in the cup?  Spiritous liquors, no doubt,
which, though designed to dull the pain of wage-slavery, also act to augment the
revelry with which the poem climaxes. The wine is not sipped, but it is drained
to the lees. And once the door is unlatched, and the neighbors -- neighbors of
both sexes, no doubt,-- are called "in," why then, let the libations and the
wild rumpus begin!  Alienated labor is suddenly set aside and replaced by the
natural bonds of one human being to another, and the stasis of the opening lines
of the poem transforms in a flash into a wildly kinetic bacchanal. Emotional
weakness transmutes into healthy liberated pleasure. Dour Puritanism, with its
punishing work ethic, yields to the spirit of holiday and to pagan, perhaps even
dionysian, excess. Here, in miniature, is the essence of the comic vision. In
a few powerful lines, freedom, good humor, and natural appetite triumph over
bondage, artificiality, social constriction and repression; the justifiably
sullen crosspatch, in a burst of energy, reintegrates herself into the social
nexus from which she has been banished.

Whether or not the crosspatch can permanently liberate herself from the
oppressions of industrial capitalism, or whether the anodyne and spurious relief
of alcohol is a merely transient solution is left unresolved. To ask a short
poem, however dense with meaning, to answer so difficult a question would, just
possibly, be to ask too much of it and, perhaps, to push the evidence the merest
tad too far.

Source: 2016/12/fango

Title: Fango
Date: December 18, 2016

I'm marvelously fond of the Italian word "fango," which translates into English
as "mud." "Fango" is expressive of the matter which it describes. To my ear,
the word fango sounds slimy and disreputable, perhaps even repulsive, while its
English counterpart "mud" is bland and lacks character. And "fangoso" is so much
more dramatic than "muddy."

But why fango?  How did fango infiltrate the Italian language? The Latin word
for mud is "lutum," which would naturally yield Italian "luto", which, as it
happens, is a word that does exist, but, so far, one that I've encountered only
in dictionaries. Fango it is, and gladly. Let us revel in fango.

Fango, according to my bank of etymological resources, appears to be of Germanic
origin and a distant cousin to the English word "fen," "a low land covered in
whole or part by water." Lots of fango in that there fen, obviously. There's
also a rare (my dictionary says 'poetical') French word "fange," for mud, but
the more common word is boue. Boue is one of a handful of French words (other
than toponyms) that are of Gaulish origin. So that when it came to mud, both
the Italian and French languages adopted indigenous rather than Latin words. And
for good reason: if there's any substance that is common rather than learned,
it's mud.

"Fango" bears no relation to English "fang." Fang is an oversized tooth, but
not in its earliest appearances. Old English fang denoted plunder or booty,
"a seizing or taking." The root meaning of grasp or capture is present in the
name of Good Master Fang, an ineffectual officer of the law in Shakespeare's The
Second Part of King Henry the Fourth. Yet fang as unquestionably tooth or toothy
in Duke Senior's metaphor in As You Like it, where "the icy fang/ And churlish
chiding of the winter's wind,... bites and blows upon my body."

Source: 2016/12/and-now-hes-come-out-of-his-coffin-to-advise-trump

Title: And Now He's Come out of his Coffin to Advise Trump!!
Date: December 22, 2016

I wrote the following long ago, republished it once. Here it is, relevant again.

What Doesn't Dick Cheney Commit Suicide?

Why doesn't Dick Cheney put a bullet in his brain? It would do him (and his
reputation) a world of good. What could possibly stand in his way? Once he
sprinkles the ratsbane on his porridge -- and, of course, leaves behind a
detailed and humble letter of apology --  he will begin to free his soul of sin
and to enjoy some peace of mind. When he has fallen on his sword, his lackeys
and toadies will be able to claim that although he was a black-hearted knave,
at least he wasn't a shameless black-hearted knave. They can try to persuade
us that although he was egregiously and dangerously wrong, he was, like another
suicide, Othello, "great of heart." But if Cheney continues in his surly,
obstinate, unapologetic lip-curling silence -- why then, he'll go down in the
books as an unrepentant demi-devil like Iago ("From this time forth I never will
speak word").

Cheney has brought disgrace upon our beloved nation and upon himself. Using
faked spy data, he suckered the ignorant, feckless Decider and almost the entire
Congress into invading Iraq. His war has been a monumental disaster. "Full
of scorpions [should be] his brain." At this moment of writing, Cheney is
guilty of killing 3260 American soldiers and maiming (by official count -- who
can possibly guess at the truth?) 24,314 others. If Cheney has even the most
rudimentary of consciences, on it lies the heavy burden of 60,000 to 100,000
Iraqi souls. The Dickster has cost America $414 billion dollars, loss of
prestige and the squandering of oceans of good will. Like Anthony, he "has
lived in such dishonor/That the gods detest [his] baseness." But Antony took
the proper course. When Cheney dispatches himself -- "after the high Roman
fashion," let's hope -- he'll have taken the first step toward rehabilitating
himself and the nation. For him not to do the deed would be ignoble.

Dick:  I know that you're hunkering in your bomb-proof shelter. I know
that you're up late at night, sleepless with guilt. You're cruising the
internet, perchance googling "Cheney + suicide," and you're wavering in your
purpose. Dick -- take my considered advice. I'm thinking of your place in
history.  At this point, "you have no friend,/ But resolution and the briefest
end."  You'll immediately feel better. It's a no-brainer. Go for it.

April 10.  Spike Schapiro comments:  "Dr. M. -- I've read your exhortation to
suicide. You are, as usual, falsely optimistic. Cheney can't off himself because
a) he's shameless and b) he's a total coward, and c) he has no self-knowledge
and d) he can't point a shotgun. You cite the precedents of Othello and Anthony
but they're both great spirits and therefore irrelevant. Cheney is a slug.
Moreover, Cheney can't be "great of heart" -- he has no heart of his own --it's
either a transplant or some mechanical contraption."

April 4, 2014  Why is this man still alive?  Allowed to give interviews?  Is
there no justice in our sublunary world?

December 22, 2016  Only a silver stake in his heart is going to do it. Mirrors,
garlic. Too late for prayers.

Source: 2017/01/poor-robert-mitchum-out-of-the-past-angel-face

Title: Poor Robert Mitchum (Out of the Past, Angel Face)
Date: January 02, 2017

On successive nights, we watched Out of the Past (1947) and Angel Face
(1953). Both are, as they say, "gripping" films. In my present situation,
"gripping" means that even though the nominal curtain rose on these movies after
9:00 pm, and I was in bed, comfortable, with a full stomach, I was sufficiently
gripped that I didn't waver or snooze or nap, even for a second. Such criteria
of excellence may not seem significant to younger folk, but trust me, loyal
readers, in these latter years, staying awake and engaged is a crucial critical
yardstick.

Both Out of the Past and Angel Face are superior noirs. In both films the
central character is played by Robert Mitchum. I couldn't detect a the least
tad of difference between the two parts he plays. You could lift his Jeff
Bailey from Out of the Past and plunk him down in Angel Face as Frank Jessup
and no one would notice, except that civilian Frank would lack private-eye
Jeff's semi- official trench coat and fedora. In both films, Mitchum's character
is expressionless and sleepy-eyed and smart but, once his testosterone kicks
in, falls prey to a clever, ruthless bad bad bad girl. Both characters know
that they're being framed for murder and yet can't just pack up and move to
Nebraska or Mexico or somewhere sensible -- as any human being outside of the
world of noir would do. You, the spectator, want to raise yourself from your
soft pillow and shout at the TV and at the guys Mitchum plays, "Hey you big
lug, what the heck are you doing. Use your noodle." But lunkhead Mitchum makes
mistake after mistake. I hope everyone who's reading this post has seen the
movies, because I don't want to spoil their pleasure in the endings, but let
me just say this -- Jeff, or Frank, or Bob, please next time don't get into an
automobile with a homicidal femme fatale in the last few frames of a murder
mystery and expect to escape alive. And if you must  do so, at least check
your so-called girlfriend's purse for a silver-handled Beretta. And under no
circumstances surrender to her the keys to the vehicle. Do the driving yourself.

These films have everything one would want in a classic film noir: a relentless
wicked ambitious beautiful dame who entraps an honest but naif and helpless
ingenu, and also snappy dialogue, a gloomy claustrophobic atmosphere, multiple
plot twists and turns, and the valueless atomistic society that Hobbes feared
would follow from curtailed authority. And much yearning for cash, which is
never in adequate supply. Lots of shadows and odd-angled photography. Some good,
complicated characters but a few who are merely melodramatically evil.

Mitchum's acting is much praised of late but I don't buy it: he's effective in a
way but monochromatic to a fault. A better actor is Kirk Douglas, who  projects
gleeful menace as a corrupt, criminal businessman. But to me both movies are
carried by their female leads. Dazzling Jane Greer as Kathie Moffat is equally
adept at innocence and villainy, often in the same scene, sometimes from moment
to moment. At the end of the film, when she's killing people left and right,
she wears a nun-like snood that only an accomplished actress could transform
into a brilliant metaphor. Equally splendid is Jean Simmons as the angel-faced
Diane Tremayne, who conveys innocence, ambition, obsession, and intermittent
but genuine madness with the raise of an eyebrow (and the help of excellent
lighting). And good girl Mona Freeman shines in a restaurant scene in which she
sees right through Tremayne's beauty to the dangerous craziness beneath.

Here's Mitchum and Greer together.

Source: 2017/01/it-happened-in-brooklyn-so-they-say

Title: It Happened in Brooklyn, so  they Say
Date: January 20, 2017

If it happened in Brooklyn, it must have happened in metaphorical or
mythological rather than real Brooklyn, because it's not the Brooklyn of my
memory. It Happened in Brooklyn is a 1947 musical, I guess you'd have to call
it, featuring still skinny Frank Sinatra and womanly Kathryn Grayson, and also
Jimmie Durante, who steals the show. And also the ever-luminous Gloria Grahame
in a very small role as an Army nurse in England. Brooklyn is evoked as a fairy
tale land where everyone is nice to everyone and jobs and money fall from the
trees -- kind of an urban big rock candy mountain. Not the case -- though
nowadays Brooklyn, which used to be mocked, is every Twenty-Something's land
of putative milk and theoretical honey. In truth there's nothing much that is
recognizably Brooklynian -- even in geography -- to my jaded old eyes except a
rather beautiful sequence of Frank Sinatra singing and "dancing" on Brooklyn
Bridge. Most of the action supposedly takes place in the basement of New Utrecht
High School, but in actual fact it's a Hollywood sound stage.

Sinatra, a returned soldier, thinks he's in love with Kathryn Grayson but she
prefers Peter Lawford, playing the shy grandson of an English Dook. The film is
worth seeing if only because Sinatra and Grayson sing, believe it or not, "La ci
darem la mano" from Don Giovanni -- as far as I know Sinatra's only foray into
grand opera.

If I had been the screenwriter, I would have had Gloria Grahame jump on a luxury
liner and return to Brooklyn for the climactic concluding scene, rather than
remaining, as she does, merely a sweet overseas memory of Frankie's.

Source: 2017/01/chicolini-on-trump

Title: Chicolini on Trump
Date: January 23, 2017

Our new president has an extraordinary ability to believe what he wants to
believe, no matter the fact. He mocks a disabled reporter, we all see it with
our own eyes, and yet he denies that he did so. He claims that his inauguration
was the best attended in history, and then we look at the pictures, and see
with our own eyes, not so. It is hard to know exactly how to interpret such
effrontery, such a remarkable disregard of facts.

I fear that he is actually pulling the wool over his own eyes. He's certainly
not pulling it over ours.

He is marooned in an absurd farcical world. He is drowning in duck soup.

Mrs. Teasdale:  Your Excellency! I thought you'd left.

Cihicolini: Oh, no, I no leave.

Mrs. Teasdale:  But I saw you with my own eyes!

Chicolini:  Well, who you gonna believe? Me or your own eyes?

Unfortunately, what in fiction is farce becomes tragedy in real
life. Nonsense, assimilated as truth in the mind of a person in power, cannot
be anything but incendiary.

Source: 2017/01/some-curious-italian-plurals

Title: A Few Curious Italian Plurals
Date: January 27, 2017

On the whole, Italian is a mighty regular language. Of course it has its
irregularities, but many fewer than, say, English. Plurals, for example, are
largely predictable, but with some curious exceptions. The masculine noun bue
(ox or sometimes, by extension, a dolt) seems to call for the plural form *bui,
but it's not so; it's buoi. Dio (god), becomes dei rather than *dii. The very
ordinary word uomo (man), yields the extraordinary plural uomini -- which is
strange indeed except to oldsters who remember homo, hominis from their high
school Latin class. The word for wing is ala and, if Italian were law-abiding,
its plural should be *ale but instead it's ali. Similarly, arma should yield
*arme, but doesn't; it's armi. Eco has the plural echi, which seems normal,
except that the singular is feminine and the plural masculine, so la eco but gli
echi. Some words, conversely, have masculine singulars but feminine plurals:
most notably, uovo (egg) which becomes uova rather than *uovi, while dito
(finger) becomes the odd masculine dita. Paio (pair) is similar; its plural is
paia. Il riso (a laugh) has the plural le risa. There's the same gender switch
with the truly curious word for ear -- orrechio becomes orecchie. There are a
few words with two slightly different plural forms, many of them words for parts
of the body, such as braccio (arm) which can become bracci or braccia;  ciglio
(eyebrow), which has plurals in cigli and ciglia; ginocchio (knee) which can be
either ginocchi or ginocchia, and osso (bone) which can be ossi or ossa. I'm
fond of muro (wall) the regular plural of which is muri (the walls of a house)
but also yields the irregular plural mura, which refers to the fortifications
or walls of a city.

Source: 2017/01/gratitude

Title: Sciascian Geography
Date: January 28, 2017

Years ago, I read, in translation of course, a few of Leonardo Sciascia's
Sicilian mysteries. Excellent books: The Day of the Owl (Il giorno della
civetta -- 1961)), Equal Danger (Uguale pericolo --1973), The Challenge (Il
contesto-- 1971). Last week I tried to read one of Sciascia's short stories
in its native Italian. A good idea, but quite a struggle. Too taxing for my
present fluency. Sciascia's vocabulary is enormous, mine is puny. Not to mention
Sicilian expressions that would be stumpers and require footnoting even for
mainland Italians.

The story I tackled is Il lungo viaggio, (The Long Voyage). Some impoverished
Sicilian peasants pay a man whom we would call a coyote to smuggle them into
America; he takes their entire savings, takes them on board his ship, and then
after ten excruciating days sets them right back down in Sicily. A sad tale of
exploitation, not, alas, irrelevant today.

Sciascian geography: the Sicilians think they are headed for the middle Atlantic
coast of North America, where they will find Nugioirsi, Nuovaiorche, and my very
favorite, Brucchilin.

Source: 2017/01/anseroca

Title: News from my Brain
Date: January 29, 2017

The twins and their older brother came to visit and were playing their favorite
new game, "hide the goose." The goose?  a two foot tall hollow plastic replica
perhaps originally a lawn ornament, now an excellent child's toy. Easy to find.
After the hiding game had gone on long enough, and was just starting to become
a trifle rambunctious, I tried to signal to my fellow student of Italian that
the time had come for the goose to retire for the day -- but try as I might, I
couldn't come up with a translation for the word goose. Later, after the lads
had left, I looked in the Italian dictionary for "goose." Oca, it said. A
strange, unanticipated word.

I tried to recall the Latin word for goose. Nothing. But after several hours
(and here comes the point of the story), a word suddenly floated to the surface
-- anser. Let me tell you now, fans of Dr. Metablog, that I was exceedingly
proud of myself. Fifty-five years or so after my last study of Latin, out popped
anser. Self-celebration knew no bounds.

After I had stopped crowing about my triumph, I started to marvel at the brain
-- not just my brain, but any brain. In what corner of the brain, in what
concatenation of synapses, had the word anser been lurking lo these many
decades. And what sort of ingenious search program needed only a few hours to
ferret it out?  Glaciers have melted, rivers have changed their course, and yet
anser remained unchanged, permanently embedded somewhere in my brain. It's kind
of miraculous, isn't it?

So how did Italian acquire oca rather than a word descended from anser. Why
not *asse, for example. My dictionary of classical Latin offers no alternative
to anser, but the Italian etymological dictionary explains that the late Latin
word for goose was auca, derived from a diminutive aucellus of avis (bird)
and it cites as cognates old French oue and Occitan auca. No doubt demotic auca
replaced the "book word" anser sometime in late antiquity.

The result of this investigation: next time, I will be able to say, with great
authority, "nascondi l'oca."

Source: 2017/02/what-everyone-should-know-about-hitchcock

Title: A "Hitch" Conundrum
Date: February 07, 2017

According to his biographer (Peter Ackroyd), Alfred Hitchcock "feared and
hated the body." When he was a student at St. Ignatius in London, whenever he
used the lavatory, he scrubbed it "so that it seemed as though no one had been
there." At maturity, Hitchcock stood 5' 5" and weighed approximately 300 pounds.
His marriage to Alma Reville (4'11") was mostly "white." He claimed that it
was "sexless" and that he was a "celibated" director, and that his daughter,
Patricia, was some sort of error. "If he was not the center of conversation
or attention at a dinner table, he would often doze off." He made a bet that
a property man would not be able to spend the night chained to a camera in a
dark studio, then sabotaged him with a bottle of brandy laced with a strong
laxative. He referred to his audience as the "moron millions." He was fond of
the great painters but had no interest in any "symbolic significance or inner
meaning." The actress Ann Todd reported that he had a schoolboy's obsession with
sex and "an endless supply of very nasty and vulgar stories and jokes. He was
a very sad person." He "had a fetish about women wearing glasses." One of his
secretaries reported that he bought her five or six pairs but if she appeared
without wearing one, "it irritated the devil out of him." During the making of
Psycho, Hitchcock would place one or more grotesque models of Norman Bates'
mummified mother in Janet Leigh's dressing room, just to hear her scream. "He
would also regale her with his fund of dirty stories just before she went on
camera." When asked, "what is the deep logic of your films," he replied, "to
make the spectator suffer." When an actor was dissatisfied with a performance,
Hitchcock refused another take, saying, "They'll never know in Peoria." While
"The Birds" was being filmed, he harassed Tippi Hedren mercilessly, sending her
flowers, specifying what clothes she could wear, keeping her from her daughter,
trying to convince co-workers that they were having an affair. He gave Hedren's
young daughter (Melanie Griffith) an image of her mother lying in a coffin.
Hitchcock's recurrent dream was that his penis was made of crystal.

Is it possible that so stunted a human being might become a great artist?  Or
is it rather that his obsessions, distortions and failures of human empathy
constitute a permanent barrier to greatness and that time will reveal that even
his best films are shallow and brittle -- all surface glitter?

Source: 2017/02/paraceratherium

Title: Largest Land Mammal Ever
Date: February 14, 2017

Source: 2017/02/oscars2017

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars (2017)
Date: February 27, 2017

My ensemble: plaid wool shirt by Woolrich; trousers by Lee (regular cut --
"smoky quartz" color); socks by Costco; shoes by New Balance (with orthopedic
inserts by Dr. Scholl); leather belt by Target; foundational undergarments by
Fruit of the Loom. Accessories: eyeglasses by Flexon; hearing aids by Phonak.
Hair by Joe.

I'd like to thank all the little people -- my fashion consultants, suppliers,
and supporters -- for their imagination and hard work. I couldn't have done it
without the entire team.

Source: 2017/03/myteachersjameshutton

Title: My Teachers:  James Hutton (1902-1980)
Date: March 01, 2017

The most erudite man that I ever encountered in my own person was James
Hutton, a professor of classics when I was an undergraduate at Cornell back
there in the 1950s. Professor Hutton bristled with knowledge -- nor is this my
opinion only, but one that is well attested by his international reputation and
by the list of his writings. Hutton wrote two enormous books (800 pages each!!)
that won him his scholarly spurs: The Greek Anthology in Italy (1935) and The
Greek Anthology in France and in the Latin Writers of the Netherlands to the
Year 1800 (1946). I encountered Professor Hutton in 1958 when, callow and poorly
educated, I enrolled in a Latin course called "Terence and Catullus" (of which
more later). But first, for those curious readers out there in bloglandia who
are on tenterhooks, painfully stretched like new wool and are wondering what
the heck is the "Greek Anthology" about which James Hutton composed his
pair of magna opera and around which his life centered -- turn we now to the
pages of the Encyclopedia Brittanica.

In brief, the Anthologia Graeca is a collection of poems, mostly epigrams, that
had a complicated ancient history, but originated perhaps with an anthology
complied by Meleager of Gadara in the first century BCE, which brought
together works by many ancients including Archilochus, Alcaeus, Anacreon and
Simonides (all big names in their time). There were a series of early editions
that do not survive but an authoritative version was made by Constantine
Cephalas in the 10th century. "Cephalas appended a number of other collections:
homoerotic verse collected by Straton of Sardis in the 2nd century AD; a
collection of  Christian epigrams found in churches; a collection of satirical
and convivial epigrams collected by Diogenianus as well as Christodorus's
description of statues in the Byzantine gymnasium of Zeuxippos; and a
collection of inscriptions from a temple in Cyzicus." And then in 1300 or
thereabouts Maximus Planudes brought together an edition which became standard,
which, while adding some poems, also deleted or bowdlerized many of those that
offended his puritanical Christian sensibilities. Planudes' anthology was the
only one known to Western Europe for many centuries; manuscript transmission was
superseded when an edition based on his work was printed in 1494.

There's a lot more but that's enough information for us to understand the area
which James Hutton worked. Professor Hutton knew the anthology backwards
and forwards and made it his business to trace its considerable influence
through the Latin and vernacular poetry of late antiquity and the medieval
and renaissance worlds. Quite an endeavor, in my opinion.

Hutton was a Scotsman, born in Airth, son of a sea captain, though from where
I sat (in a small seminar room in Goldwin Smith Hall!!), it was impossible
to imagine that he had ever been a child or even a young man. He came to the
US early in life and there was not a trace of Scotland in his speech. Hutton
entered Cornell as a freshman in 1920, received three degrees there, stayed
on to teach, and retired in 1973. According to his Cornell obituary, he was a
life- long bachelor. For most of his adulthood, he lived with his mother, Mrs.
Elizabeth Hutton, and he shared a house for many years with Professor Lane
Cooper, his teacher and another bachelor Cornell classicist. After the death of
his mother and of Cooper, he continued to live at 123 Roberts Place with his
cousin/housekeeper, Mrs. Margaret Green. Perhaps he was a delightful presence
among his friends, but to my eyes he was a pale, tall, gaunt, dry-as-a stick,
bony man devoid of humor or juice. Born only two years before my own father, he
seemed to be generations older.

Now a few words about Terence and Catullus, the twin subjects of my 1958 Latin
classroom experience.

Terence (Publius Terentius Afer) was Roman playwright possibly of Berber origin
but certainly originally a north African slave. Brought to Rome and freed,
he wrote six comedies, adapted from Greek originals, of which we students of
Professor Hutton plowed through three: Andria (166 BC); The Self-Tormentor (163
BC) and the Adelphi (160 BC). Terence drowned on a trip to Greece, age 25. His
must have been a marvelously romantic life, even though much curtailed. Too bad
we know only its barest outline.

Here's the title page to the first "modern" edition of Terence's works (1496)

In Terence's plays, young noblemen dally with prostitutes or mistresses even
as their fathers insist that they marry more respectable ladies. Plots, often
contrived by the dull hero's wily slave, fail to come to fruition because the
conspirators are carelessly overheard. Sometimes apparently unrelated women (one
rich, the other poor), turn out to be sisters. Sham marriages and double-dealing
are frequent. It is not uncommon that sons discover by accident, in the last
scene of the play, the identities of their biological fathers. When there are
plans to destroy female infants, the girls are rescued and raised secretly, only
to come forward as beauties at a critical juncture of the plot. Young noblemen
are prone to breaking into the houses of pimps to carry off the girls they
love. Generally, plays end with multiple and suitable marriages, the old folks
outwitted and the youngsters carrying the day. Slaves are freed.

Meanwhile, characters coin memorable aphorisms in succinct, elegant
Latin. Everyone knows "Homo sum, nihil a me alienum puto"  -- I am a man,
nothing human is alien to me.  But also quot homines tot sententiae: suus
cuique mos -- So many men, as many opinions; to each his own way. And "fortis
fortuna adiuvat" --  fortune favors the brave.  And "nullumst iam dictum quod
nos dictum sit prius" --nothing new is said that has not been said before. And
"amantium irae amoris integratio est" -- lover's quarrels are the renewal of
love.

But with all these comic goings-on and witty sayings, there was not one moment
that I can remember when Professor James Hutton laughed or smiled or indicated
in the least that the plays were clever or amusing. Instead, we discussed
grammatical questions with much emphasis on the differences between second
century and first century Latin. Dry as dust, it was. The opportunity to find
the common humanity of ancient Romans and 1950s Cornellians was missed, even
shirked.

Terence's louche and lively plots must have posed a problem for Professor
Hutton; Catullus of Verona, a poet of love and sex and bawdy, could only have
caused even more of a difficulty. In the edition in which we read Catullus, a
drab gray book which must have dated from the early part of the century, certain
of the more scabrous poems were omitted but, in a moment of confused prudery,
printed -- in a smaller font --in an appendix. I suspect that they were also
bowdlerized. Some of the words that Catullus used in his freer verse were not to
be found in our dictionary, which had also been cleansed. And in a translation
that I consulted (was it the Loeb?) the offending poems did appear, but only in
Italian. Was the idea that if anyone could read Italian he must be sophisticated
enough to deal with Catullan pornography. Perhaps my readers think that I'm
fantasizing or imagining this half-hearted censorship, but it's as true as true.
Swear.

Even after all these years, two of Catullus's poems stay in my mind. The best,
the most frequently republished and the most influential is known to classicists
as Catullus 5. It's a remarkable poem. Here's the Latin, which is not difficult.

Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus

Rumoresque senum severiorum

omnes unius aestimemus assis.

Soles occidere et redire possunt;

nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux

Nox est perpetua una dormienda

da mi basia mille, deinde centum

dein mille altera, dein secunda centum

deinde com milia multa fecerimus

conturbabimus illa, ne sciamus,

aut ne quis malus invidere possitor

cum tantum sciat esse basiorum.

And here's a translation. "Let us live, my Lesbia, and love. The gossipings of
stern old men let us value at just one penny.  Suns may set and rise again,
but us, when once the brief light has set, night is one perpetual sleep. Give
me a thousand kisses, then a hundred, then another thousand, then a second
hundred, then yet another thousand, then a hundred, then when we have counted
up many thousands, let us shake [the abacus] lest some evil man be envious when
he knows how many kisses there were." That is to say, Let us keep on making
love no matter what the old envious guys think. (Lesbia has nothing to do with
lesbians; it's just code for the name of the married woman with whom Catullus
was sleeping.)

I have no recollection of any discussion of this peach of a poem in 1958.
Perhaps we talked about the ingenious lux/Nox juxtaposition, but I am sure we
didn't touch on either the boasted adultery or the joys of sex. We were still
in the last gasp of Victoriana. We were pre-Beatles, pre-Kennedy, pre-readily
available contraceptives. Some things were not to be discussed.

The other poem that stands in my memory is Catullus 61, a joyous epithalamion
(or marriage song) which celebrates, with great gusto, the wedding of Vinia and
Manlius. It is sensual and almost hypnotic. It's frankness about sexual pleasure
pleased me in 1958, when such things were rare. Still pleases me.

But what about the omitted poems, the ones too "coarse" for our tender eyes and
ears?  How would James Hutton have dealt with them. Not at all, of course.
But now, censorship and self-censorship and propriety eased, we can read the
poem that begins Paedicabo ego vos et irrumabo. which I can now translate as
"I will fuck you in the ass and then fuck you in the face." And goes on from
there. Not part of the 1958 curriculum. In Professor Hutton's class, we were
more comfortable discussing a synezis of the genitive than any exercise of the
genitalia.

But I wonder, now, about, James Hutton, at home after a hard day of declining
and conjugating, at dinner with his mother and his bachelor roommate. What did
Professor Hutton think about Catullus's "paedicabo ego vos et irrumabo".

This I know: whether repelled or offended or secretly sympathetic, he certainly
did not share his feelings with his students.

Source: 2017/03/chinatown-odd-man-out

Title: Chinatown -- Odd Man Out
Date: March 03, 2017

At the Vivian de St. Vrain Theater, also known as the bedroom, pleasurably
supine on what Italians call the letto matrimoniale, we watch films from all
decades of cinema history. The new technologies deluge us with riches. Films
arrive by mail, by download, and on TCM and MGM and Encore Classics. It's all so
remarkably easy.

We especially enjoy unplanned, spontaneous juxtapositions. Two nights ago, for
example, we re-re-re-rewatched, on Encore, a film that must be on everyone's top
ten list, the great noir classic Chinatown. Dazzled we were, once again. And
then, last night, courtesy of the U. S. Post Office and Netflix, along came
Carol Reed's masterpiece, Odd Man Out. There was, trust me, no plan to follow
the one with the other -- but what a stroke of good fortune!!

Chinatown (1974) gives us a fully-realized Los Angeles in the 1930s. The plot
is complicated but not confusing. J. J. Gittes, a bored, compromised detective,
is smart enough to unravel the plan to steal the water and smart enough to
identify the murderer but nevertheless too innocent to grasp the unspeakable
corruption at the heart of the of Mulwray-Cross family. Odd Man Out (1947),
which also manages to make its Belfast setting as real as real, offers only
the slightest plot -- Johnny McQueen's desperate attempt to escape his city.
Yet what a remarkable story and how ably peopled with a variety of characters.
It becomes almost picaresque in organization as Johnny reels from adventure to
adventure, encountering Irish samaritans good, bad, and traitorous. On the
surface the films are miles apart --Los Angeles all bright colors and fancy
clothes, awash with prosperity, Belfast dark dark dark and gloomy. And yet the
two films seemed oddly similar.

The overlaps and echoes were such that we decided to investigate. Here's what
we discovered, via the wikipedia entry on Chinatown. "Filmmaker Roman Polanski
(the director of Chinatown) has repeatedly cited Odd Man Out as his favorite
film. 'I still consider it to be one of the best movies I've ever seen and a
film which made me want to pursue this career more than anything else....  I
always dreamed of doing things of this sort or that style.  To a certain extent
I must say that I somehow perpetuate the ideas of that movie in what I do.'"
 So our speculation about the similarities was validated. Unquestionably,
Polanski had Carol Reed in mind while making Chinatown.

Let us cut to the chase and (spoilers coming, so watch out!) concentrate on the
two films' last scenes. Johnny McQueen, badly wounded, is trying to make it
down to the docks to get himself out of Belfast. He's helped by his girlfriend
Kathleen Ryan. For a hopeful second, it appears that he's going to escape, but
the police surround him. He can no longer see, but he asks Kathleen, "Is it
far?"  Kathleen replies (and you have to be made of stone not to drop a tear),
"It's a long way, Johnny, but I'm coming with you." She shoots at the police and
they respond with "deadly force." It's suicide by cop -- a sad emotional love-
death Romeo and Juliet ending. The ending of Chinatown is much more hopeless.
Evelyn Mulwray tries to escape her father, corrupt and powerful Noah Cross. She
drives away with her daughter but a fusillade of police bullets kills her. Evil,
malevolent Cross wins everything -- the money, the land, the water, the child.
(Polanski even altered the original ending to make it darker, more like Odd Man
Out.) "Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown" --  i.e. inexplicable, impenetrable.

More on Polanski here.

Source: 2017/03/maestropit

Title: "Maestro to the Pit"
Date: March 07, 2017

Several times a year, we attend the opera -- that is, we wander over to the
Metropolitan Opera widescreen HD broadcasts at our local movie theater.
Last week, it was Dvorak's Rusalka --overproduced, over-costumed, a mighty
silly story, but nevertheless glorious. Sung in Czech. Of course, I didn't
understand a word, but then I never do expect to do so, even when the opera is
sung in a language with which I'm supposed to be on speaking terms. But it's not
the libretto which we savor, it's the music.

Nevertheless at each performance there's a solemn  moment when language moves
front and center. It comes after the preliminary fol-de-rol and acknowledgements
and interviews and trailers-for-next-month's performance are finally dispensed
with. Now, at long last, the camera locates the head-setted director, who sits
at huge intimidating console of buttons and knobs and switches and lights. And
now here they come, the words of magic and enchantment: "maestro to the pit."

In that pithy, incantatory sentence is encapsulated all the ritual power of
language. It's a hieratic moment. After such a magnificent statement,
everything else is anticlimax (linguistically speaking).

Freed by these words, the shamanic conductor heretofore invisible, steps up,
turns his back to the audience and faces the orchestra, brandishes his baton,
and initiates the business of the day.

"Maestro to the pit."  I love the idea that the generic term for conductor is
"maestro." I love the quasi-oxymoronic juxtaposition of "maestro" and "pit."
 In fact, I love the word "pit" in this context. Not a hole in the ground, nor
the pit of hell, nor a place in which to chuck pieces of dismembered bodies. No,
an orchestra pit, which is a horse of an entirely different color. Good thing
it's not the custom to say "conductor to the podium." How flat, how banal, how
unsacral. No dignity, no grandeur, no poetry.

No, it's "maestro to the pit." And let it always be so.

And by the way, I make a pretty good barbecue sauce, and I'm proud to say
that my spare ribs are semi-famous. Let the word go forth, that now and
forever, whenever I'm called to the grill, it's going to be "maestro to the
pit."

Source: 2017/03/youcancountonmeagain

Title: You Can Count on Me Again and Again
Date: March 10, 2017

All my movie-loving friends told me that I must watch Kenneth
Lonergan's Manchester-by-the-Sea (2016). That was before the film won all
those awards. So I crashed the Netflix line and there it was in my mailbox the
first day that it was released on disk. And indeed it's a fine film. No car
chases, no special effects, just real people wrestling their way through his
world of woe. Good dialogue. Excellent camera work, excellent editing, splendid
acting.

But half way through the film, I began to experience disappointment. An
unavoidable sense of dejavuitude. Wait, haven't I seen this before? And then I
remembered Lonergan's earlier film, You Can Count on Me (2000). Hmmm.

In YCCoM, 20ish small-town boy Terry Prescott is unsteady and unfocused because
he has lost his parents in an automobile accident. in MbtS, 30ish small-town boy
Lee Chandler is sullen and isolated because he has lost his children in a house
fire. In YCCoM,  Terry Prescott has a nephew, son of his much more grounded
sister, with whom he tries to connect. In MBtS, Lee Chandler has a nephew, son
of his brother, with whom he tries to connect. In YCCoM, Terry Prescott gets
into a fight with a guy he used to know very well. In MbtS, Lee Chandler gets
into a bar fight with a guy he's never met.  In YCCoM, Terry Prescott can't
stay put, has to be on the road; in MbtS, Lee Chandler is stuck at home, can't
get out of his rut.

The details are different, but it's unquestionably the same story, inverted. It
can almost be thought of as a sequel, with Casey Affleck recapitulating the role
created by Mark Ruffalo.

They're both excellent films -- just a trifle redundant. As a would-be
enthusiast of the later effort, I felt just a little cheated.

All writers, even the best, repeat themselves. Nevertheless, I'm hoping that
Kenneth Lonergan's next picture, to which I'm looking forward with great
anticipation, breaks out of the box, tries something entirely new.

Source: 2017/03/birthday2017

Title: Birthday Gifts for Me Me Me
Date: March 13, 2017

A few years ago I posted, right here on this blague, pictures of some handsome
objects that would make good birthday presents for yours truly. But one March 11
after another March 11 has come and gone, and -- nothing. Not a single reader,
acquaintance, friend, or relative has embraced the opportunity. There has not
been so much as a serious inquiry, even though my suggestions were eminently
sensible.

I'm going to try once again this year. After all, unemployment is down, the
stock market is up, and there's more loose change out there. (And perhaps more
escapism.) Moreover, there won't be many more birthdays for me -- I'm getting up
there in years. It's now or never.

So -- fans of Vivian de St. Vrain, and Vrainites everywhere, seize the day.

OK, steady now. What about a castle in Ireland? I would really enjoy a castle.
There are many on the market this year, and they're quite reasonably priced, as
castles go.

For example, here's Ballindooley, a starter Castle in Galway.

Even though it's small, it has undeniable "curb appeal." The realtor claims that
it was built toward the end of the 15th century in the Norman style and probably
for the DeBurgo family. The realtor also notes that there's "a new stone parapet
and that there have been recent repairs to the machicolations."

Inasmuch as I wouldn't dream of owning a castle where the machicolations were
all busted up, I'm happy for the reassurance. The price: a bargain at a mere
950,000 euros.

Though I wouldn't turn up my nose at Ballindooley, I would certainly prefer
Killaghy Castle at Mullinahone in Tipperary.

It's a better value. The original castle was built, the realtor claims (I
haven't seen the documentation) in the first decade of the 13th century. A "long
house" was added during Tudor times, and two more buildings were attached during
the 18th century -- so it's already been updated. Plus there are two walled
gardens with "excellent mature specimen trees."  An ominous note though: "price
upon request."

So, loyal readers, it's time for you to chip in your pennies and farthings and
join together for one big happy birthday celebration for me.

And please, don't forget that in order for me to care for your gift properly,
I'm going to need a bit of an endowment --  which I do not see as much of a
problem. Plus furnishings.

And by the way, for those of you who are not "in the know" about castles, a
"machicolation" is a "projecting gallery at the top of a castle wall, supported
by a row of corbeled arches and having openings in the floor through which
stones and boiling liquids could be dropped on attackers."

I like a castle that says, "all welcome."

Source: 2017/03/mallofme

Title: The Mall of Me
Date: March 16, 2017

I can, however, imagine a shopping mall designed for my particular and personal
satisfaction. It would be called "The Mall of Me."

Anchoring one end of the Mall of Me is a large book store, carrying both new
and used, but stocked with volumes of history, fine arts, crafts, popular
science, biography, travel, fiction, gardening and what used to be called
"natural history", with lots of room to browse and sit and read. Proviso: the
"bookstore of me" carries zero books on Spirituality, Self-Improvement, Soul
Regression, Tarot, Alternative Therapies, or Healing Arts. No books written by
TV pastors or repentant politicians recently released from prison or by instant
millionaires. No celebrity autobiographies. At the other end of the Mall of Me,
there's a shop selling music cds which  specializes in the great age of middle
European music from 1685 (birth of Bach) to 1911 (death of Mahler), but also
features a treasury of classic blues, bluegrass, American roots, popular song,
rock and roll, and gospel of the golden age. No New Age, No Rap, no Electronic.
Between my two "anchors," there will be a good garden store featuring expensive,
elegant, heavy-in-the-hand garden tools. No power mowers or power tools, but
when appropriate to the season, racks of seeds, preferably of heirloom and
antique vegetables. Next to it, a movie memorabilia and poster store, with large
collections from the earliest days of cinema right through 1950, especially
Shakespeare movies. And then I'd like a high-end antique store displaying walls
and shelves of classical and Asian works of art. Unfortunately, because of
budgetary constraints, I won't be doing any purchasing in this particular shop,
but I'll be pleased to browse in it, at least weekly, perhaps oftener. Also, a
cafe where a guy could purchase a hot chocolate and an almond croissant. I would
also like a store that specializes in 19th and early 20th century Caucasian rugs
and wall-hangings though here, once again -- it would be more for appreciating
than for actual buying. Subject to the same constraints, a baseball memorabilia
shop -- National League only. A high end crafts store. And as for restaurants:
a Jewish deli, modeled after the now defunct Second Avenue Delicatessen. An
imaginative Asian fusion restaurant. A bagel bakery. No fish, and certainly no
sushi. Perhaps a hole-in-the-wall one-person walk-in shop where a guy or gal
could help me with computer and cell phone anomalies and failures -- someone
who speaks in traditional English, not in acronyms. And then there will be
buskers: at one end of the mall, a string quartet; at the other end, a bluegrass
band. No fire-eaters, contortionists, or drummers banging on pots and pans. All
performers personally vetted by me. No panhandlers or noble solicitors with
their dread clipboards.

And of course, some intelligently-designed play areas for infants, new walkers
and small children. And some comfortable chairs for their parents (and me) to
sit and watch the kiddies frolic.

Yes, I think that will do it.  It's the Mall of Me.

Now that I think of it, everyone should have their own mall. Instead of vast
mall installations, let's have targeted malls. Individually designed and
executed.

Merchandising genius!!

Source: 2017/03/chalaza

Title: Chalaza
Date: March 21, 2017

If you asked me to guess what the word "chalaza" means, I'd say, from its sound,
that it would have to be an odd cactus-y looking plant that grows only in the
Atacama desert and flowers once a decade, or an extinct language formerly
spoken in the southern Caucasus mountains, or perhaps some sort of Levantine
breadstick. It's a strange exotic word. But if then I told you that you've seen
thousands, perhaps many thousands of chalazas (or chalazae) with your own eyes,
and eaten as many, you'd be perplexed, even startled. Because you have eaten
them.

Anyone who's cracked an egg has noticed two ropey white bands that extend from
the yolk and are rooted in the transparent albumen.

Here's some more information about chalazae which I quote from Tim Birkhead's
The Most Perfect Thing (2016), a detailed and most enthusiastic book all about
eggs.  "The role of the chalazae is to suspend the yolk within the albumen....
One end of each chalaza is attached to the ovum itself... and the other is
firmly lodged in the layer of dense viscous albumen, which itself is attached to
the shell membranes at the pointed and blunt ends of the egg. The chalazae allow
the yolk to rotate when the egg is turned so that the embryo always remains on
top of the yolk and within the inner liquid albumen layers. This self-righting
ability is [necessary] because the embryo develops on the least dense side of
the yolk. Keeping the embryo uppermost ensures that it is always closest to the
parent's brood patch for maximum warmth, but also closest to the inner surface
of the shell for maximum access to oxygen."

No chalazae, no chicks.

I'm astonished that although I have scrambled thousands of eggs, and certainly
noticed the "ropey strands," I never gave them the slightest thought. How
incurious of me!

Birkhead's book is a revelation. He is the egg man of our times. Occasionally
he gets so carried away with his joy in the egg that he veers into unconscious
comedy. I adore the phrase, "a renaissance in the study of eggshell
pigmentation."  Or, "guillemots are not quite unique in incubating
shit-covered eggs."  Or, "tinamous lay the most extraordinary and beautiful
eggs."  Or, "there is something sensual about eggs."

About the word chalaza: it's from the Greek meaning "small knot." Nor is it new:
it entered the language (in Latinized form) in 1704.

Some practical information: the more prominent the chalazae, the fresher the
egg.

Source: 2017/03/idomeno

Title: Gender-blind Casting?
Date: March 28, 2017

Last Saturday, we hiked to the multiplex to hear and watch the Met's HD
performance of Idomeneo. Once again, the opera did not disappoint. Early Mozart
and glorious, especially the rousing choruses, while soprano Nadine Sierra was
a luminous Illia. A silly story, of course, but for once there was a happy
ending --a young man and a young woman, of different heritages, were allowed to
marry-- hurrah. Not without the forgiveness of a god--in this case, Neptune,
who could have saved everyone a lot of trouble if he had been quicker to act
but unfortunately didn't bother to theophanize until the passing of four hours
(including extended intermissions) and three long acts of melodic anguish and
dread.

Nevertheless, I was troubled. "And what was it this time, Mr. Malcontent," you
ask.

It was the "trouser" role. The "hero" of the opera, Idamante, the guy who gets
the girl, was played by Alice Coote, a soprano, a middle-aged woman not at all
"boyish," but full-figured, prominently bosomed, and generously hipped. She was
costumed as an ancient Cretan soldier, with an ineffective corset under her
corselet and with a circle of what looked like old-fashioned elongated leather
shaving strops or giant bookmarks hanging from waist to ankle. But her outfit
did not fool me, even though I'm very good at suspending disbelief. Trust me, I
can suspend like crazy.

And I know that there's no point going to the opera if you can't suspend
disbelief. One would think that once you accept the idea that the performers are
going to aria at each other whenever they are together and aria at the audience
when they are alone, and that they are followed wherever they go by a 100-piece
orchestra, you can believe anything at all. But I have to admit that I boggled
at Coote/Idamante and that I was sufficiently distracted that my pleasure in the
opera was compromised, diminished. At the climax, I thought, "oh no, don't let
them kiss." (They didn't, when they should have, and would have, if Idamante had
been not a soprano but a tenor or baritone -- is it possible that the director
was as squeamish as I.)

Idamante is customarily (but not always) played by a soprano because the part
was originally written for a castrato, in this case Signor Vincenzo del Prato
(no doubt known to his buddies as del Prato the castrato, or perhaps, as gli
italiani would say, del Prato il castrato). I suppose that it is considered
"authentic" to sing the part in the register in which it was composed. But
why not transpose it down an octave and give it to a handsome tenor. Yes, it
would be different, but to my eyes, much better. After all, authenticity has
already been compromised --  Alice Coote is no Vincenzo del Prato. Nor do I
hear even the most enthusiastic supporters of "period" performances call for a
restoration of castrati.

Shakespeare's women were played by boys. But even the new Globe, with its fetish
for ancient ways, does not insist on a boy Cleopatra or a boy Juliet. And all to
the good, in my opinion.

Source: 2017/03/thescarf

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Scarf (1951)
Date: March 30, 2017

The Scarf is a most curious, eccentric film. Something of its oddity is conveyed
by TCM's one-sentence plot summary: "An asylum escapee meets a waitress and
hides on a turkey farm; supposedly he killed someone." The film was written and
directed by E. A. (Ewald Andre) Dupont, one of the many German refugees working
in Hollywood during and after the war, and features a splendid cast including
John Ireland, Mercedes McCambridge, Emlyn Williams and especially James Barton,
in a rather brilliant performance as a good-hearted, grizzled, hermit farmer
whose flock of turkeys serves as source of income and as watchdog and possibly
as metaphor.

John Howard Barrington escapes from an institution for the criminally insane.
It seems that he's been incarcerated for a murder that he can't remember
committing. Some sort of stress amnesia, the audience is expected to believe. He
falls in with Connie Carter, a forthright waitress-singer-floozy: she introduces
herself succinctly: "I'm no lily, not at all.  But my morals have no zipper.
Let it go at that."  Connie wears an unusual scarf; when Barrington notices
it he regains a smidgen of memory. It's going to be the clue to resolving his
amnesia.  After many an adventure and some good photography, it is revealed
that judge, jury and Barrington himself have been deceived. Barrington is
innocent and the real murderer and villain is Dr. David Dunbar, an effete
confidence man/psychologist who has hidden his own psychopathic past. At the
climax, all is revealed (with the help of the scarf) and turns out for the best
--  Barrington gets the girl, regains his memory and his innocence, and takes
up the serious business of farming turkeys.

I found The Scarf absolutely riveting although I had to suspend disbelief over
the many holes in the plot and some occasional crazy continuity problems. But
amnesia movies can be mighty flexible about such details.

And there's a subtext of theatrical repetition-compulsion:  Emlyn Williams, who
plays the maniac-murderer David Dunbar, "became an overnight star in 1935, with
his thriller Night Must Fall, which he wrote and also played the lead role of a
psychopathic murderer."

Source: 2017/04/bluegardenia

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Blue Gardenia (1953)
Date: April 03, 2017

Source: 2017/04/journalofacrime1934

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Journal of a Crime (1934)
Date: April 07, 2017

This pre-Code film deploys amnesia in a manner that is bizarre and possibly
unique. Paul, a playwright, is conducting a no ambiguity, no euphemism affair
with the actress Odette. His wife Francoise is jealous, so much so that she
shoots and kills her rival. And gets away with it. However, she is overcome with
guilt and falls into a profound depression, which the actress Ruth Chatterton
portrays convincingly, perhaps because her face lacks expression even when she
is jubilant. It appears for a while as though Francoise is going to succumb
to guilt. However, she is seriously injured in an automobile accident. She is
hospitalized but recovers, losing only her memory. But no memory, no guilt, and
in the end Francoise has recovered her husband and her health and happily sips
martinis on the Riviera. It's a rare case of therapeutic amnesia. Loss of memory
doesn't create a problem; it solves it. And why is Paul content to re-unite
with his wife the murderess? Because he is convinced that it is all God's
will -- a mighty shallow expedient. So God too is complicit in the murder and
its aftermath.

This was 1934; they couldn't have made it that way in 1935, when adultery and
crime were required to be punished.

Here's Ruth Chatterton, famous in her day but now almost forgotten:

Source: 2017/04/ww2memories

Title: World War II Memories
Date: April 10, 2017

I was six years old when the war ended in 1945, so my memories are few and
arise in no particular order. I remember hearing news reports on the radio
that were datelined "Moscow"-- but I conflated Moscow with Bosco, a brand of
chocolate syrup popular in the 1940s. I remember that the floor of our kitchen
was disfigured with an infinite number of black marks -- rubber was in short
supply and the substituted soles left nasty blotches. My mother said, "We'll
wait until the war is over to replace the linoleum." Many commodities were in
short supply: instead of butter there was a white oleomargerine into which a
packet of orange food color was mashed to simulate a credible yellow. There were
ration books and ration stamps for gasoline and sugar and coffee and greens.
My mother was furious that Mr. Lerner, who owned the fruit and vegetable shop
on 18th Avenue, sold black-market lettuces from the back of his store. A bus
driver was rude to a passenger; my mother said: "all the decent young men are
overseas." We saved our nickels and brought money to school to buy war bonds.
Following government advice, my father dug up his carefully tended lawn and
planted a "victory garden" of vegetables. There were frequent blackouts: my
father's friend Jack Patent sported a white hard hat because he was a warden.
My Uncle Dan, a major in the Army Air Corps, came home from the Burma border
for a thirty-day furlough and showed me his captured German Luger. We received
air mail letters from him and from other soldiers with details blacked out by
military censors. I complained to my mother: "Mrs. Callery (my first grade
teacher) isn't nice to me." My mother said, "You have to forgive her; she's lost
four of her boys in the war." Lost?  Four of her boys? I did not understand.
On a sunny spring day in 1945, we heard on the radio that President Roosevelt
was dead; my mother sat on the stoop and cried. And in August of that same
year, when our family was visiting someone on a lake somewhere, all of a sudden
the adults who had motor boats were zooming back and forth and shouting and
laughing. I asked what was happening and my father said, "the war is over."

Uncle Jack's tank was demolished by German cannon fire and he was the crew's
only survivor. He lived with shrapnel in his brain until the age of ninety-one.
Cousin Saul's older brother was killed in New Guinea, but Sarah, his mother,
"knew" that he was alive and waited for the knock on the door or the telephone
call until the end of her days. Meanwhile, the poor fellow's bones lay bleaching
at Buna or some other long-forgotten field of battle. Before the war, my mother
told me, we used to receive mail from the old country -- from the many members
of the Chafetz and Tomaszewski and Middlebank and Hessel families who had stayed
behind. "But after the war, nothing."

Can we, even now, bear to imagine what became of all those Malkas and Rifkas and
Levs and Mendels?

Source: 2017/04/loveletters19

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Love Letters (1945)
Date: April 17, 2017

Here's another film in the sub-genre that might be called a "Did I Do It."  And
still another case of "post-murder amnesia."

Singleton, who can't remember anything, even her own first name, is played by
Jennifer Jones with a kind of distant unfocused look about her. She is seriously
troubled; in addition to her amnesia, she's been the victim of a prank in which
Alan Quinton (Joseph Cotten) wrote her Cyrano-like love letters under the name
of the lout Roger Morland. She fell in love with the author of the letters, but
alas, deceived, married the lout. Now the lout has been murdered and Singleton,
blamed for it, is just out of the mental hospital where she was incarcerated.
Did she do it?  Of course not. She may not have a clue, but Alan and we the
audience suspect that she's too pretty and harmless to have done anything bad,
let alone committed a murder. Eventually, the truth outs and the real murderer
is revealed. Singleton regains her memory and gains the replacement husband (the
eloquent Alan that she wanted all along). It's a mighty unbelievable story but
whenever amnesia is involved, probability goes flying out the window.

Bosley Crowther, the New York Times film critic at the time, who never liked
anything, called it "sentimental twaddle." I myself, once disbelief is not only
suspended but obliterated, found it to be a quite an engaging mystery.

Source: 2017/04/a-letter-to-my

Title: A Letter to my Grandchildren
Date: April 18, 2017

What was it like in the 1940s when I was your age?  Very different. Milk was
delivered daily in bottles: a milk-wagon, drawn by a tired, plodding old horse,
appeared on East 9th Street three times a week before we sat down to breakfast.
There were also daily visits from a horse-drawn vegetable truck. An itinerant
knife-sharpener came once every couple of months. And also a very old man with
a large sack thrown over his back, singing out in the loudest voice I've ever
heard, 'I cash clothes." There were squarish automobiles (Packards, DeSotos,
Studebakers), but far fewer than today -- so few that kids would play punchball
and stickball right in the middle of the street, just stepping to the side to
let that occasional car whizz by. Kids also skated in the street, using clunky
metal skates that attached to the shoe by turning a "skate key." There was
no television, but everyone listened to the radio. "Portable" radios were as
big as bread boxes. Some people had refrigerators (much smaller than modern
ones), but most had "iceboxes." Every week, an ice delivery man would haul a
block of ice (about a foot-and-a-half square if I remember correctly) with
large tongs and set it in the icebox. Coal was delivered in barrels: men with
heavy gloves would roll the barrels from the truck to the ground-level coal
chute. All telephones were attached to the wall with wires. Long distance phone
calls were expensive and only for emergencies. People did not communicate by
e-mail or by texting, but by means of postcards and letters. A "letter" was a
piece of paper on which whole paragraphs were written; it was inserted into an
"envelope" and put in a "mail box" for delivery. Hard to believe, I know. There
were no word processors. I learned to write using a "straight pen." There were
no dvd's or cd's or streaming. Instead, we had "records," vinyl discs 12-inches
in diameter which were placed on a rotating "turntable" on which rested a hand
with a stylus, at first steel and then later diamond. It was primitive, I know,
but it worked rather well. There were no credit cards. Some people had checking
accounts, but 99% of commercial transactions were completed with "money." When I
started at P. S. 217, in 1944, I wore "knickers" (pants that went to just below
the knee and were held in place with elastic) and long socks. You can sometimes
see knickers in old illustrated books or in clothes museums. Men always wore
hats: fedoras or derbies or panamas or bowlers or pork-pies, usually made of
felt. Women wore hats too, some with veils, most of them godawful ugly. Young
folks "courted." In those days, before people became intimate, they would go
through a period in which they would "date" and talk and get to know each other.
This period could last for weeks or even months. Astonishing, I know, but trust
me, it happened that way in the old days. "The past is another country; they do
things differently there."

Source: 2017/04/oreofritteria

Title: Deepfried Oreos
Date: April 20, 2017

On the main street of Estes Park (Gateway to Rocky Mountain National Park),
a sign outside the restaurant advertised "deepfried oreos." I was both
flabbergasted and thunderstruck, not believing my eyes. But here's the evidence:

Just above ice cream and below "funnel cakes" (but that's another story). Is it
a hoax, or can there be such a thing? Absolutely, there's many a google-entry
on "deepfried oreos." Several different recipes, one more hideous than the next.
A piece of cuisine americaine that had somehow escaped me all these many years.

One of my waggish friends writes: "I should confess that the last time my wife
and I were in Paris, we sampled the deep fried Oreos at a little café on the
rue de Rivoli. The sommelier suggested a hearty Cabernet to take the edge off
the sweetness of the dish and the wine worked beautifully with the cookie
filling, an amalgam of flavors that made our senses tingle." I of course was
skeptical of his story. No knowledgeable sommelier would recommend a red wine
because it was well known that deepfried oreos were best served with champagne
or gatorade.

Is it possible that deepfried oreos could become part of the cuisine of old
Europe? Will it be the case that in every Italian village, just between the
macelleria and the quaint pasticceria there will be an oreofritteria? A
mom-and- pop oreofritteria using recipes that have been in the family for
centuries -- but in danger of being taken over by the big American chain,
a subsidiary of -- who knows what -- called Signor Oreofritto. A terrifying
prospect all around.

Source: 2017/04/sexual-dimorphism-why

Title: Sexual Dimorphism -- What's the point?
Date: April 25, 2017

By all rights I should have been attending to the intricate areas of my face
while shaving, but I lapsed into a reverie. My obsession of the moment--the
beard. Why? Why in the world do human males grow hair on their faces? What's the
point? The beard is completely valueless except to Gillette and Schick and now
Harry.

If the beard had a genuine function and if it honestly kept a person warm in
winter, then for what reason would evolution deprive the gals of equivalent
protection?

Do bearded males garner a larger share of the nubile maidens than the shaved and
beardless? Or a disproportionate share of the wealth? I know of no evidence that
they do so. The fact that most men shave their beards argues that beards lack
power or function.

It's sexual dimorphism without purpose or logic. My guess--and it's only a guess
--is that the beard-gene clung to a gene with a useful male purpose a couple of
hundred thousand years ago and never let go. Accidental hirsuteness.

I suppose that there are times when sexual dimorphism can be useful. Those
magnificent manes sported by the lions of the Serengeti certainly make a
formidable statement--noli me tangere and by the way remember to keep your paws
off the the ladies in my harem. I can see that--but then, the males of the
enormous extinct European lion managed without a ruff, as do Bengal tigers.

The gorgeous display of the male peacock is exuberant but inessential--more
subtle birds manage to signal their gender and their availability without such a
prodigious waste of resources.

I should be relieved that it's only the beard that I have to worry about.
Imagine if by some quirk of evolution, males of my species grew a big rack of
antlers. Way more inconvenient than a mere beard. What a bother!! I can easily
imagine myself lodged in a narrow doorway, or lying in bed trying to find a
comfortable position while the antlers scratch the headboard, put holes in the
pillow, or poke the eye of the beloved.

Perhaps an advanced civilization would demand that we disbud the antlers at
birth? Or we might go the other route and celebrate a magnificent set. We might
have evolved into a society that decorated or colored or polished the antlers.
"How are you wearing your antlers this winter?" "Natural brown, I think, this
year, but with golden highlights." Chains of "Mr. Antler" or "Antler King" shops
("discount on sharpening this week only"). And for guys declined into the vale
of years--prosthetic antlers.

Better a beard than antlers. Definitely.

Source: 2017/04/more-on-markwayne-mullings

Title: Representative Markwayne Mullin Back in the News
Date: April 27, 2017

Four years ago, I listened to a radio interview with Markwayne Mullin, a new
member of the House of Representatives from eastern Oklahoma, and was absolutely
flabbergasted. Astonished and dismayed, I wrote a few paragraphs about him.
Here''s what I said then: "It wasn't that he was inarticulate or stupid. It was
that he was so utterly smug, so absolutely and entirely certain of himself. He
has no doubts. He knows exactly what ails the country -- too much government
-- and he knows how to fix it -- lower taxes, less regulation, more free
untrammeled capitalism. He does not seem to be aware that the United States of
America is a big, complicated, multi-faceted country. Markwayne Mullin possesses
all the arrogance of ignorance, in spades."

And here he is, Representative Markwayne Mullin, smiling in front of the
mandatory flag.

I went on to report on Mullin's views, which were the usual list of utterly
unoriginal, thoughtless, simplistic tea party talking points. I concluded by
offering the hope (or might I say it) the prayer, which was "that Markwayne
Mullin, who as he begins his congressional career is superficial to the very
core of his being, will come to Washington, meet some folks from different parts
of the country and from different ethnic backgrounds, learn a little about the
world, come to an appreciation of the complexity of things, and grow up to be a
useful broad-minded compassionate public servant. It's not impossible, but it's
not going to happen until Mullin realizes that he doesn't know everything about
everything, and that the practices that made Mullin Plumbing such a success may
not be the same practices that will promote the general welfare over all of the
US of A. I'm hopeful, but frankly, I'm not at all optimistic."

Well, the calendar has shed a few leaves, and it's come to pass as I feared.
Representative Markwayne Mullin has no more brain than earwax. He's learned
nothing.

He's back in the news:

"An Oklahoma congressman is facing scrutiny after a video posted Monday showed
him telling constituents at a town hall that they do not pay his salary.

“You say you pay for me to do this? That’s bull crap. I pay for myself,”
Rep. Markwayne Mullin told constituents at a town hall in Jay, Oklahoma. "I paid
enough taxes before I got here and continue to through my company to pay my own
salary. This is a service. No one here pays me to go.”

“Pays you to go where?” a constituent objected.

“This is a service for me, not a career, and I thank God this is not how I
make my living,” Mullin responded.

“Oh please, then don’t run,” a constituent said."

As I understand the exchange, Mr. Mullin believes that inasmuch as the taxes
that he paid before he became a congressman exceeds the salary he now draws,
that he has limited or no responsibility to his constituents. Not at all a
persuasive argument, because like the rest of us, Mullin's taxes go to the
defense department and to HEW with a few dribs and drabs left over for social
programs and only a trickle for paying for the House of Representatives

But that's not the heart of the matter. The important question is this:  why
the heck is Mullin in congress? Obviously, he hates the job and and even more
obviously he hates his constituents. He has no respect for government.

Perhaps it's time for Mr. Mullin to reconsider his career. What everyone wants
in a representative is someone who will inform himself, be sensible, broad-
minded, be able to work with all parties, and be respectful of his constituents.
Mr. Mullin fails on all counts. Let's assume he's a good plumber. Look, Oklahoma
needs  good plumbers. Please, Mr. Mullin. Do the work you were called to.
Markwayne, go back to where you came from, fix those pipes, and stay away from
government. Please, don't run again. You've done your bit; let someone else take
a crack at it.

Source: 2017/04/leonardo-the-enlightened-lion

Title: "Leonardo the Enlightened Lion" by Ralph Ganesha Jefferson
Date: April 30, 2017

Once Leonardo defeated the old king and began to rule the pride, he evolved into
a more modern lion -- more sensitive, more sharing, and more mindful. While he
did not trim his mane or become less manly, he transitioned to a new kind of
male.

First he decided no longer to bite the necks of the lionesses whom he mounted.
Instead he wooed them gently with wine and flowers. He was a considerate mounter
-- always taking care that the experience was sweet for his lionesses. He
learned to roar more musically.

And soon after, he gave up the custom of breaking the backs of the kittens of
the previous king. Instead, he nurtured the babies and brought them porridge and
toys and stuffed animals. Nor did he drive the juvenile males into the bush. He
taught them to dance and to draw and to meditate.

And finally Leonardo stopped treating other animals as prey. He became a gazelle
guardian. Conscious of the environment, he encouraged all in his pride to eat
organic fruits and vegetables and wholesome ancient grains.

Nowadays Leonardo the enlightened lion starts each day with a large bowl of
gluten-free granola and yoghurt.

He's into wellness.

Source: 2017/05/lostchord

Title: "The Lost Chord"
Date: May 05, 2017

Insomnia once again -- a nightly affliction, a family trait. Perhaps we lack a
gene that lets others sleep from dusk to dawn. Have I noted here that I want my
tombstone inscribed with the motto, just beneath my name and dates, "No More
Insomnia, Forever."

During the wakeful nights, I've taken to listening to old-time radio. My
favorite: WHRO out of Norfolk, Virginia. Last night, I heard some tenor from
the 1920s (perhaps John McCormack) in a scratchy recording (tuba for bass) wail
or warble "The Lost Chord"-- quite the 3 am treat it was. A flood of memories
arose, because "The Lost Chord" was one of the songs that we learned during
the PS 217 assembly back there in Flatbush in the 1950s. I recalled with some
amusement that our determined "music specialist," Miss Georgia Keiselbach, a big
lumbering woman with a trained contralto voice, tried gamely to inculcate an
anguished mid-Victorian quasi religious parlor song into the minds of a roomful
of fidgety 10-year-olds. Quite an experience. I was entranced by Sir Arthur
Sullivan's melody, but I have to admit that the lyric was incomprehensible to me
then and is still quite a challenge to this day.

So I investigated. Onto the internet, which, fortunately, works very well at 4
am.

The words to "The Lost Chord" are by Adelaide Anne Procter, after Tennyson
apparently the most popular poet of her day, although I must confess that
I had never heard of her even though I'm supposed to know something about
nineteenth- century English literature.

Here's Ms. Procter's fervid poem:

Seated one day at the organ,I was weary and ill at ease,And my fingers wandered
idlyOver the noisy keys.I know not what I was playing,Or what I was dreaming
then;But I struck one chord of music Like the sound of a great Amen.It flooded
the crimson twilight,Like the close of an angel's psalm,And it lay on my fevered
spiritWith a touch of infinite calm.It quieted pain and sorrow,Like love
overcoming strife;It seemed the harmonious echoFrom our discordant life.It
linked all perplexed meaningsInto one perfect peace,And trembled away into
silenceAs if it were loth to cease.I have sought, but I seek it vainly,That one
lost chord divine,Which came from the soul of the organ,And entered into mine.It
may be that death's bright angelWill speak in that chord again,It may be that
only in Heav'nI shall hear that grand Amen.

I'll paraphrase (even though I know that paraphrase is not a nice thing to do
to a poem): in a reverie at the organ the poet experiences something grand
that is aesthetic, transcendent, ineffable, and fleeting. The "lost chord
divine" -- note the Miltonic deployment of adjectives -- stands for the hope
or wish or belief that there is such a place as heaven and that it's a place
where weariness, fever, pain, sorrow, perplexity, strife, and discord are
superseded by the "infinite calm" and "perfect peace" of the "grand Amen."  A
not unusual or extraordinary nineteenth-century sentiment where the hunt for the
disappearing god was frequently mediated by art -- in this particular case by
the art of music.

As long as I'm reducing the poem to its paraphraseable meaning, I might also add
that Procter, like many poets before and after her, has conflated religious and
sexual longing. I derive this meaning, inaccessible to the roomful of quavering
sopranos of which I was one, and very likely unsuspected by Miss Keiselbach
herself, from the vocabulary of passion in which the poem is couched: "crimson,"
"touch," "lay" "love," "trembled."  And from the sentence, "It came from the
soul of the organ,/  And entered into mine," where it might be argued, slightly
frivolously, that any line of poetry that contains "came" "organ" and "entered"
has got to be about a symbolic sexual encounter. Especially when the ambiguous
word "mine" can denote either "my soul" or "my organ." So in this extravagant
reading, in which it is once again clearly demonstrated that you can take the
boy out of Brooklyn but you can't take the Brooklyn out of the boy, "The Lost
Chord" is not only about the search for "perfect peace" but also for the perfect
orgasm which will provide infinite calm to the poetess when she "dies" -- a word
which is itself a Victorian euphemism for sexual climax. The lost chord is the
big O (and I don't mean Oscar R.)

Just for fun of it let me also adduce a couple of sentences from the wikipedia
article on Adelaide Anne Procter: "Modern critics argue that Procter's work is
significant for what it reveals about how Victorian women otherwise repressed
feelings." "One critic suggests that Procter may have been a lesbian and in
love with Matilda Hays; other critics have called Procter's relationship with
Hays 'emotionally intense.'" "Procter became engaged in 1858. The identity of
Procter's fiancé remains unknown, and the proposed marriage never took place."
"In 1851, Procter converted to Roman Catholicism." "Procter never married. She
became unhealthy, possibly due to her charity work, and died of tuberculosis at
the age of 38." I'll let my loyal readers connect the dots.

Source: 2017/05/hoop-words-once-more

Title: Greek and Latin Basketballese
Date: May 08, 2017

Now that we've at last come to the NBA playoffs and are heading toward another
Warriors-Cavaliers showdown, it's fitting that we reflect on basketball jargon,
which is distinguished by its many colorful monosyllables: hoops, hops, bigs,
stuff, slam, jam, slash, dish, board, glass, dunk, pick, screen, paint, lane,
point, wing, trey, rim, post, trap, "D", roll, box, press, tip, swish, bank,
brick, feed, stroke, hole, "J", rock, range.

But down-home slang is not basketball's only linguistic register.

Curiously, roundball jargon exhibits a contrary tendency toward polysyllabic
words of Greek and Latin origin. Some teams, for example, are said to be
"physical." "Physical" (from Gr. physicos = nature) means, in basketballese,
simply "rough" and does not imply that the other team plays either an ethereal
or spiritual game. It used to be that a guard played on the "outside" and
a center on the "inside"; nowadays they've become "perimeter" (Gr.) and
"interior" (L.) players. A fast break has become "transition offense." A
player doesn't drive to the basket; he "penetrates." Players no longer
jump; they "elevate"; they don't block an opponent's shot, they "reject"
it. In an odd linguistic development, a point guard no longer passes the
ball; he "distributes" (Latin: distribuere, to allot) it. In its ordinary
signification, to "distribute" a basketball would be to cut it into pieces
like a loaf of bread and give each teammate a slice, but not so in the language
of basketball. Only a few years ago, it was still possible to "switch" from
guarding one man in order to guard another; now players "rotate." "Rotate,"
derived from "rota," the Latin word for wheel, properly means "to turn on an
axis, to spin." A defender who did not switch but rotated would pirouette, and
pirouetting would not be an effective defensive strategy. (A better classical
upgrade for switch would be "revolve.") Even sillier than rotate: "rotate
over" or "rotate around"-- a usage that evokes the grotesquerie of a big guy
in a tutu pirouetting across the baseline -- a vision that is all the more
picturesque now that traditional basketball shorts have been replaced by big ol'
floppy bloomers. Just last night I heard a TV announcer declare that a seven-
foot tall player had "a lot of verticality." (I suppose that if he fell to
the floor he would have lots of "horizontality"). Players don't score; they
"convert," as in, "they had a transition opportunity  but failed to convert."
They don't push an opponent out of the way;  no, no, no, -- they create space
(Latin: creant spatium). Although I am not a physicist, I suspect that space
is something like matter, and can therefore neither be created nor destroyed. At
least not created by power forwards, however potent they may be. How silly of
me to object; neither the laws of physics nor the usual constraints of language
are binding on punditor basketballensis. OK, game's on; let's see how well they
play -- oops, sorry, how well they execute.

Source: 2017/05/enoughisasgoodasafeast

Title: "Enough is as Good as a Feast" or Possibly Better
Date: May 11, 2017

Source: 2017/10/theeventjune30

Title: What I Said at Our "Event"
Date: October 17, 2017

"Thank you all for coming. We appreciate it more than you can possibly imagine .
We've needed, and relied on, the support that all of you have given us         .

It's no secret that both Lynn and I have gone through some difficult times. It's
good to host a cheerful event.

A number of people have asked us about our use of the word "wed" in the
invitation that we sent to you. (We said, you remember, that we were 'wed" on
June 30). I don't want to mislead you. We didn't mean to imply that we involved
either state or church in our relationship. There didn't seem to be any point
for us to get married legally. People marry for the sake of children, but we've
decided that we're not going to have children.

Here's the story. Lynn and I wanted to acknowledge in a public way the
seriousness and permanence of our friendship -- for our families, and, I think,
especially for our grandchildren (there are ten of them). We wanted our families
to know that our relationship wasn't like some streetcar or trolley that you
hop on and hop off. So we decided to invite our most nuclear family to Lynn's
backyard garden for a brief "ceremony" -- just my children and grandchildren,
her children and grandchildren, her brother, my brother, the various spouses --
and pledge our love and fidelity. But then one of my daughters-in-law, Connie,
said that we couldn't ask people to fly in from all over the USA just for a
five minute ceremony. She suggested that we at least exchange rings. It seemed
like a good idea. So we walked over to Classic Facets on the Pearl Street Mall
and bought two not antique but vintage rings -- because we're vintage people.
Handsome rings, as you can see. And then as long as everyone was coming here a
day early we decided that we should have dinner the night before. And if you're
going to have a dinner you might as well have some music. So gradually the
"ceremony" evolved and grew. But more importantly -- and here's the point -- the
meaning of the event evolved as well. It became more significant, more profound,
more intimate. We never liked the phrase "commitment ceremony" or even the word
"commitment" because it sounds as though you are being sent either to jail or to
a mental institution, and we didn't have the vocabulary for what we intended to
do. But little by little, while we planned the event, and even more so, after
we performed the ceremony, we began to feel more and more married -- in all the
positive senses of the word. We can now say "wed" and mean it. I haven't yet
been able to say "husband" or "wife" but I suspect that one day in the not too
distant future those words will manifest themselves. But the point is that in
all the ways that matter, we are "wed."

When my Vermont friend Bert, who's just my age, got married 18 years ago, I said
to him, Bert, is it real --that you're head over heels in love at age 60? At the
time, it seemed so improbable. But now, here I am, just a year and a half short
of 80, and setting out on a new life. And 60 seems like dewy youth.

So let me repeat to you now what I said to Lynn on June 30. "I bring you my
children and my grandchildren, my prosthetic tooth, my lens implants, my hearing
aids, my non-standard but warm heart, and I take you and your children and
grandchildren and your titanium hip and arthritic finger and I say, "let us
make a life of it."

And let me just add that between us we have been married for 100 years (an
average of 50 apiece). So we ought to know what we're doing.

And what we're going to do is to ride this old trolley right to the end of the
line."

Source: 2017/10/yet-another-comcast-experience

Title: Yet Another Comcast Experience
Date: October 18, 2017

I had to change the name on my Comcast -- now they call it Xfinity -- account
(internet, TV, "landline"). In the pencil and paper days, you would just cross
out the old name and put in the new. But that's not how it works nowadays. I
didn't want to call the company and be put on hold for a half an hour, and then
accidentally disconnected, which happens pretty regularly, so I drove over to
the Xfinity storefront on Baseline. Very slick modern spacious venue. You're
supposed to sign in on the computer at the front desk, but the computer was down
so they just had a paper sign-up sheet -- embarrassing I would think to the
employees to have to resort to something as antique as a written list. I noticed
that I was tenth in line and I looked around and I saw that there were only
two clerks -- they're probably called "technicians" or some other highfalutin'
name, but they're clerks. I guessed a forty-five minute wait and I wasn't far
off. I had forgotten to bring my cell phone so I couldn't amuse myself with FB
or the NYT or texting friends so I looked at the various items for sale and I
immediately felt mighty ignorant. There were all sorts of devices that I didn't
know what they did, and if I did recognize them, they were described in language
that made not the slightest bit of sense to me. One cellphone, for example,
offered both CDMA and GSM. Which is probably a good thing, and maybe someone
could explain to me what they do and why you need both of them. And would  I
want the cellphone with or without the Qi charger? That sort of thing. There
were lots of connectors with fancy plugs for connecting one device to another,
which is good if you know what you want to connect, and why, and if you have
a solid grasp of your ports. So the forty-five minutes flew by and eventually
my name was called and there I was at the counter with this young guy with a
scruffy beard that looked like his lifetime growth of facial hair. I explained
that I wanted to change the name on the account and he got to work. It seems
that you can't just change the name but you have to cancel the one account and
set up a new one so we went through the "mother's maiden name" thing and "last
four digits of your social" and so on. It seemed to go on forever and every
once in a while my technician would look up and say sort of mournfully to me
"the computer's kind of slow today." While I was with him, two old guys, older
than me, brought their bills to the next technician over and said, essentially,
"I don't understand a thing about my bill. What am I paying for. What is this
charge." Both guys went away mollified by the explanation but both said that
they had to figure out how to reduce the monthly bill. And it's a fact that the
monthly bill is rather complex. For example, I don't know why I pay a $6.00
monthly "athletic fee" but the clerk explained that it allows the company to
televise high school football and small college football games which means that
I'd be able to see Cherry Creek play Fairview or the University of Northern
Colorado play Mesa College which is something I suppose though no particular
advantage to me inasmuch as I'm personally boycotting all football because of
the incidence of traumatic dementia. But that's not the point. It took between
half and hour and forty-five minutes for my technician to make all the changes
and I signed my name several times to acknowledge this and that which I didn't
entirely understand and I was about to leave at last, but my fuzzy-cheeked
technician gave me a piece of paper on which he highlighted a telephone number.
He said, "There's one more step. When you get home, you call this number and
they will "activate" your TV and your internet and your telephone. I said, why
don't you just call them, or hand me your telephone and I'll call the activator
now but he said that wasn't the way it was done -- I had to call from my home.
So I went home picked up the telephone, but it wasn't working. No dial tone.
Of course it wasn't working -- it hadn't been "activated." The message on the
telephone screen was "check tel line," but of course I had no idea how to do
that. How did Xfinity in their wisdom and experience expect a consumer to
activate an account from an inactivated telephone. A rather large glitch in the
system I would think. However, I'm a resourceful guy so I picked up my cell
phone and called the number. I got through immediately and went through the
sequence of this press 1 if that press 2 but there was no option for activating,
so I said, several times, "I would like to talk to a human being" and after a
number of iterations and going around the choices from 1 to 5 I got through to a
person. I explained the situation very carefully to my new clerk or technician
who sounded as though he could be in India and we did the mother's maiden name
thing and the last four digits of your social and I was put on hold several
times which always makes me very nervous and finally he came back and said
that he was going to transfer me to the "activation unit," who turned out to
be a pleasant-voiced lightly-accented woman who was all business, but it took
her about half an hour to activate me because Tel 2 kept lighting up on the
modem before Tel 1 which is apparently not the way it's supposed to happen.
But eventually it came to pass. I asked my new friend where she was physically
located and she said "the Philippines." So now I'm back in business and it only
took maybe three and a half hours at the very most to change the name on the
account. Which is much longer than it took to find out why I had a $13.00 charge
including a late payment fee on my Traveler's auto insurance (put on hold twice)
or why I'm paying for a electronic newspaper subscription but can't access the
newspaper on line (on hold three times), where I eventually gave up and canceled
the subscription (it had been a long day).

Source: 2017/10/broomjumping1

Title: "Jumping the Broom"
Date: October 19, 2017

In Charles Dickens' Great Expectations, it is reported that the woman who is
eventually revealed to be Estella's mother was married "over the broomstick
(as we say), to a tramping man." Dickens offers no explanation for "over the
broomstick," apparently assuming that it was a concept with which his readers
were familiar. There is in fact a long tradition of 'jumping the broom" to
certify informally a marriage sanctioned neither by state or church. It was
practiced in west Africa where it symbolized the sweeping away of the old life
and of a leap into the new world of fertility and increase. "Jumping the broom"
was also a frequent practice in southern American slave culture where legal
marriage was prohibited. The custom was a feature of ancient Celtic societies,
especially among the Welsh and the Picts. As practiced by the Picts, broom
jumping neither predicted nor solicited fertility.

Source: 2017/10/otsi

Title: Bringing Us up to Date on Otzi the Ice Man
Date: October 24, 2017

Otzi the freeze-dried 5300 year old Tyrolean man/mummy continues to be studied
and his corpse regularly yields new information.

Otzi was about 45 years old, stood 5'3" and weighed only about 110 pounds. He
had been wounded with an arrow in the shoulder which pierced an artery. He may
have bled to death or, alternatively, died from a blow to the head. He had brown
eyes, a dark beard, and long dark brown hair. He was wearing a bearskin hat, a
goat loincloth, a goat cloak, and goat leggings with deerskin laces. His shoes
were complex -- bearskin soles and deerskin uppers and were lined with hay --
presumably for both comfort and insulation. He had a calfskin belt in which he
carried flint and bone tools, including a flint dagger, a large bow and a quiver
of chamois hide reinforced with hazelwood. The quiver contained unfinished
arrows made of shoots from the guelder rose tree. He had a container constructed
of birch bark. He carried equipment for lighting a fire -- a flammable fungus,
a piece of pyrite, and a flint. Otzi also carried a woven net for trapping
prey and a mat made of grass fibers which probably served as a raincoat. And
frameworks of hazel twigs that most likely were snowshoes. His outfit consisted
of materials drawn from 18 different kinds of wood. His last meal, consumed
two hours before his death, was of various unidentified plant material, and a
helping of ibex meat. Otzi was lactose intolerant. His skin was marked in about
50 places with "tattoos" where charcoal had been rubbed into incisions. Some
ribs (he lacked a twelfth rib) and his nose bone had been previously broken but
had healed. He carried a stone ax with a copper edge --a rare and expensive
possession. To judge from the traces of arsenic in his body he might have been
a copper smith. An analysis of his mitochondria revealed that he belonged to
haplogroup K which was a typical marker of members of the farming culture that
was then expanding into Europe. His closest relatives today are found on Corsica
and Sardinia. He also belonged to a Y-chromosome haploid group G which which is
also associated with migrating farmers. He had a rare mutation known as G-L91
which has been discovered in 19 contemporary residents of the Tyrol. He was not
healthy. His knee joints were in bad shape and caused him considerable pain,
his teeth were worn down and inflamed, his lungs show traces of soot particles
probably from living in badly ventilated spaces. He suffered from Lyme disease,
rheumatism, intestinal parasites, hardened arteries, gallstones, and an ugly
growth on his little toe perhaps caused by frostbite. It would appear that he
had had a hard life.

Source: 2017/10/feeding-me

Title: Feeding Me
Date: October 29, 2017

I calculate that for the last seventy-five years I've eaten a box of raisins
every month (I'm a big fan of raisins and of dried fruit in general). A box of
raisins is about 5 inches tall, 4 inches wide and 2 inches deep, or forty cubic
inches. In a an average year, I eat 40 x 12 or 480 cubic inches of raisins. If
I maintained my raisin-eating pace, it would take me four years to eat through
a cubic foot of them. And it follows that in the last seventy-five years I've
eaten approximately 19 cubic feet of raisins, which amounts to a stack or block
of raisins three feet long, three feet wide and two feet high. That's a heck
of a lot of raisins. And that's just raisins --  I'm not even counting table
grapes, also eaten plentifully over the decades. And wine.

I myself did not breed, plant, trim, fertilize or harvest the Thompson Seedless
or Flame grapes. I did not fence the deer out of the orchard. No did I process
the grapes. Nor box, ship, load, unload, or stock them in the market. Someone
else made the boxes from wood that another person chainsawed to the ground. I
just brought the raisins home from the market and sprinkled them on my oatmeal.
Someone else, many someone elses, did all the hard work.

I wonder how many people and how much accumulated skill it took to provide me
with 19 lifetime cubic feet of raisins.

Then there's milk. I've drunk many many cartons of milk. I'm too lazy to do the
calculations, but I'm going to guess that I've consumed a hundred times more
cubic feet of milk than I have of raisins. Probably a spacious roomful. And
once again, I did not domesticate those fearsome wild European cattle, nor did
I breed or milk them, or pasteurize  the milk, or ship it. I did not invent
refrigeration, nor did I manufacture or install the refrigerators. I did not
drive the milk truck (itself the creation of many hands). I hunted and gathered
by walking to the market and plucking a carton (whole milk, vitamin D added)
from the case. Easy as pie.

And what about potatoes? And pasta?

I don't think I need to go through any other of the commodities I consume.
My point is simple: that it takes a titanic effort by society to keep me me
me going. That I am borne on the shoulders of farmers, truckers, engineers,
mechanics -- not to mention our neolithic ancestors who first looked at a cow
and thought "glass of cold milk" or at a wild grape and thought "those would
make good raisins if we could just get the moisture content down."

So to all those people who think they are "independent" and who assert that they
can fend for themselves, I say bullshit. If you eat anything at all, you're part
of the great web of humanity that stretches around the earth and also extends
back 65,000 years.

So when you sit down to eat, and offer a prayer, don't thank god. Thank your
industrious imaginative fellow humans.

Source: 2017/11/what-is-an-amana-board

Title: Do the Dodgers Have an Outfielder Named Bacchus Pederson?
Date: November 01, 2017

Judging from his spectacularly wonderful name you might guess that Bacchus
Pederson is either a character in a novel by Thomas Pynchon or the son of a
Swedish father and a patriotic Greek mother. Not so. He's the creation not of
eccentric parents or postmodern fiction the but of the voice recognition system
that's been close-captioning that 2017 Dodgers-Astros World Series. He's an
imaginary being. He does not exist. Except on the TV screen.

There is, however, a up-and-coming not-Greek-but-Jewish on-his-mother's-side
left hand hitting center fielder for the Los Angeles Dodgers named Joc Pederson.
And what is the relationship between Joc and Bacchus, you ask?

The other day (and the following morning because the game went on roughly
forever), I watched the epic 13-12 Houston win over the Dodgers. A most exciting
game. There was bad umpiring by the home plate official, there were balls
flying out of the bandbox and onto the short porches, there was some beautiful
defensive plays and some costly mental errors. See-saw, back and forth.

And yet more. Inasmuch as my veteran ears are past their prime and over the
hill, I now supplement my hearing with "close captioning." I try to catch
what Joe Buck and John Smoltz say and then watch as their words, or some
approximation of their words, flashes across the screen. It's an activity that
is almost as fascinating and much more amusing than the game itself. And it is
out of this experience that the fanciful mythological figure of Bacchus Pederson
emerges. Smoltz says "a fly ball to center and back goes Pederson." CC writes "a
fly ball to center and Bacchus Pederson." No human being would translate "back
goes" into "Bacchus". It's nonsensical and not even decent English grammar. t's
got to be a machine, an idiot savant machine, that, stumped by "back goes," has
located "Bacchus" in its word hoard.

And similarly, what is an "Amana board?"  Something wooden manufactured in the
Amana colonies in Iowa, you might guess. No, it's CC for "a man aboard."

CC produces all sorts of comic linguistic wonders because it's utterly
untethered to common sense.

When John Smoltz, a human being who knows all there is to know about pitching,
said that the left-hander was going to try to "bury it in the back foot,"
knowledgeable baseball fans would understand exactly what was meant. The lefty
intended to throw an unhittable pitch by coming as close as possible to the
left-handed batter's left foot. However, readers would have to be mighty clever
to interpret the meaningless wild CC phrase "Marriott in the back foot."

Other electronic locutions were easier. Not much of problem with "hit it into
the upper tank" or "rubbing him of a double" or "sacrifice bump" or "Taylor will
eat it off."

Some CC flights of fancy require a little more interpretive skill. Will the
Dodger manager replace his pitcher with "a fresher god?" Perhaps a "fresher
guy." Did the pitching staff "hand out seven rocks?" Seven walks is more likely.
Do the Dodgers have a right fielder named Yossi el Pogue?  No, but they do have
Yasiel Puig. Was a reliever taken out after "a short student?" Naw, it was a
short stint. Did a pitch come "in her half" of the plate?  Who is "her"?  But
no, it was "inner half." Is it possible that a batter "applied to center?"  No
but he might very well have "flied to center."

Here's one that is Impossible to comprehend: "Turner headset hard." I had to
rewind and listen again: "Turner hits it hard."

Sometimes CC sounds vaguely spiritual. "Flies want to center," says CC. Do they
really, I ask. But what Joe Buck said was "flies one to center."

My favorites, aside from the immortal Bacchus Pederson, are errors that make no
sense at all. What does it mean to say that a pitcher is a "shortest writer."
And that he "threw his lighter."  The correct locutions: he was a "short
strider" who "threw his slider."

Voice recognition systems are technological marvels, no doubt. But they have a
way to go. There's still a place at the table for humans.

Source: 2017/11/a-word-problem

Title: A "Word Problem"
Date: November 04, 2017

If one 4 1/2 year old grandson can launch five foot stream of urine from where
he stands to the base of a tree, how many 80-year-old grandfathers would it take
to equal the performance?

Some answers:  a) 20 (tag team line of grampas each contributing 4").  b) does
it count if I hurl my Depends?  c) I know the answer but I forgot.

Source: 2017/11/all-you-need-to-know-about-antres

Title: All You Need to Know about Antres
Date: November 12, 2017

"Antres" is among the rarest of rare words. Shakespeare's Othello speaks of
"antres vast and deserts idle" in the magnificent oration in which he takes
issue with the Venetian bigotry that claimed that he was only able to win
white Desdemona by employing drugs and witchcraft. No, it wasn't because he
was a sorcerer; it was because he was accomplished, heroic, romantic. "Antres"
is one of the exotic words that defines the great African general as a
non-Venetian -- an outlander, an "erring barbarian," an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger."

Shakespeare coined "antres" just for the occasion, deriving it from Latin
antrum, a cave. He never used "antres" again, nor did anyone else until
Keats fleetingly revived the word two centuries afterward. "Antres" never
domesticated into English and remains curious and remote, eternally in need
of an explanatory footnote. It is unlikely that Shakespeare expected that a
popular or even a courtly audience would grasp "antres" at first hearing. It's
a risky word, but Shakespeare didn't become Shakespeare without taking risks.

The playwright coupled the neologism "antres" to another shiny new Latinism
to produce "antres vast," a phrase which translates into the language
of 2017 as "really big caves." Yet no translation can do justice to
the spacious resonance of "antres vast." The caverns to which Othello
refers are monstrously huge -- grown grander and even more inaccessible
because Shakespeare ingeniously placed the modifier after rather than before
the noun. "Antres vast" are a hundredfold more mysterious -- darker, more
echoic, more glinty with stalactites and stalagmites -- than "vast antres."

"Antres vast" occurs in tandem with a second and equally remarkable noun-
adjective combination: "deserts idle." Othello reports that before he came to
Venice, he had not only traversed "rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose
heads touch heaven" but had also dwelt among "antres vast and deserts
idle." Strictly speaking, deserts cannot be "idle," but they can be vacant
or useless. "Deserts idle" reinforces and augments "antres vast." Taken
together, the two phrases are infinitely more evocative than either alone.

As a structure of sound, "antres vast and deserts idle" pivots on the "d"
of "and" and the "d" of "deserts" and it positions "antres" and "idle"
in symmetrical opposition. The two key words are dissimilar yet cleverly
interlinked, each comprised of an open vowel (Antres, Idle), a dental (anTres,
iDle), and a liquid (antRes, idLe). It is not by accident that "antres vast
and deserts idle" is such a euphonious and mouth-filling phrase.

Shakespeare not only invented "antres" for Othello's oration but also took
care to surround it with other linguistic novelties. For example: Othello
claims to have encountered "cannibals that each other eat/ The anthropophagi."
"Cannibal" is now a commonplace noun, but in 1604 it was a newcomer to the
language. "Cannibal" derives from "Carib," the name of a recently-encountered
people-- reputed to be man-eaters --who gave their appellation to the sea in
which they lived. "Cannibal" was sufficiently strange--it had only made harbor
in England (arriving by way of Spain) in the 1550s--that Shakespeare felt a
need to define it, which he did once in English ("that each other eat") and
once in Greek ("anthropophagi"). "Anthropophagi," a word that had originated
with Herodotus, was as new to English--and as seldom employed--as "cannibal."

"Antres vast," "deserts idle," "cannibals" and "anthropophagi" play crucial
parts in Othello's stirring autobiographical fragment.

I spake of most disastrous chances,

Of moving accidents by flood and field,

Of hair-breadth scapes i'th'imminent deadly breach,

Of being taken by the insolent foe

And sold to slavery;  of my redemption thence,

And portance in my travel's history:

Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,

Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,

It was my hint to speak -- such was the process.

And of the cannibals that each other eat,

The anthropophagi, and men whose heads

Do grow beneath their shoulders.

It's an astonishing story, each element more incredible than the one that
precedes it. Hair-breadth escapes?  Every hero can boast of them. Redemption
from slavery? A bit less likely. Hills whose heads touch heaven? A pardonable
hyperbole. Cannibals?  Surely, less believable still. The Othello landscape
then crosses the border from exotic to fabulous when it adduces "men whose
heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders." These headless men are the
blemmyae -- Nubian or sometimes Ethiopian -- who were a feature of 
pseudo-anthropological folklore from Pliny to Sir Walter Raleigh. The skepticism
that these monstrous creatures ought to provoke is diluted because the road to
the blemmyes passes through "antres vast and deserts idle." If audiences
had not been lulled and seduced by "antres," they might dismiss Othello as a
mere braggart soldier-- rather than admire him for the near-magician that he
becomes in his self- dramatization.

Shakespeare had yet another purpose for "antres vast." In the sentence that
treads on the heels of the "men whose heads/ Do grow beneath their shoulders,"
Othello abruptly turned his attention to Desdemona. His language dulls. "This
(i.e. his exotic narrative) to hear would Desdemona seriously incline,/ But
still the house affairs would draw her hence." Shakespeare strategically
contrasts Othello's vocabulary to Desdemona's when he juxtaposes "antres
vast" to "house affairs." Only the tinnest of ears can fail to be struck
by the difference between the two phrases. Antres vast--house affairs; house
affairs-- antres vast. The gap between these two most pregnant phrases is small
enough to allow the electric impulses of sex and romance to spark, but is too
wide to allow genuine understanding or empathy to shoot the gap. The tragedy
of Desdemona and Othello arises out of the unbridgeable space between "antres
vast" and "house affairs."

Shakespeare therefore knew exactly what he was about when he invented the word
"antres."

If he had been in a more antic mood, less determined
to characterize Othello's massive dignity, he might have coined a word from
another Latin word for cave, e.g. spelunca.  But "spelunkies vast" --
or even "spelunkies splendid" -- could not possibly do the work of "antres
vast."

Source: 2017/11/the-farmer-in-the-dell

Title: The Cheese Stands Alone
Date: November 13, 2017

Certainly in the 1940s and perhaps in later decades, first-graders all over
America were taught an "activity" based on a song called "The Farmer in the
Dell." Older readers of this blague, if they are courageous enough to delve into
long-forgotten and repressed pockets of the past, might dare to summon up the
memory.

Here's the game:  Ten young waifs, divided equally by gender, formed a circle
holding hands around the Chosen One who was designated the "farmer." The gamins
(and gamines) sang the following song:

The farmer in the dell,

The farmer in the dell.

Heigh-ho the derry-o,

The farmer in the dell.

While they sang, the "farmer" walked around the inside of the circle and chose
a partner from the circle of children. Then the tune was repeated with the key
word altered:

The farmer takes a wife,

The farmer takes a wife,

Heigh-ho the derry-o

The farmer takes a wife.

The "wife" then joined him inside the circle, and the plot thickened. Now they
sang:

"The wife takes a child,

The wife takes a child;

Heigh-ho the derry-o

The wife takes a child."

And so on down and down the great chain of being.

"The child takes a nurse...

"The nurse takes a cow...

"The cow takes a dog...

"The dog takes a cat...

"The cat takes a mouse..."

And finally, when all the players have been chosen but one, the game ended on
the following exclusionary note:

"The cheese stands alone.

The cheese stands alone.

Heigh-ho the derry-o,

The cheese stands alone."

What was the point of this weird game? Why was it included in the
"curriculum?"  Even seventy years later, it seems to be not fun but gratuitous
cruelty. The most popular, the handsomest boy picks the most alluring young
lady, and then choices are made in order of status. The game seems to have been
devised to reinforce a hierarchical social structure. It was unAmerican, neither
democratic or egalitarian. In retrospect, the game was triumphalist with regard
to the farmer and his wife and harsh as all get out to the mouse and the cheese.
If literary critics were to get their hands on this verse, they would be forced
to notice the tragic pattern -- marriage at the outset followed by inevitable
decline into isolation and soul-death.

Needless to say, I myself identify not with the prosperous farmer and his
vivacious wife, but with the lumpish cheese. Velveeta it probably was, a big
shapeless orange block of it, because no fancy aristocratic European cheeses
were known to those of us who grew up in the 1940s PS 217 schoolyard. A sad
cheese, inanimate, excluded from society, unchosen, least loved. Does the entire
history of poetry offer a more mournful note than "the cheese stands alone?"
Poor poor pitiful solitary neglected cheese.

In recompense (it's too late for an apology) let us remember, three quarters of
a century later, that cheeses have feelings too.

And for the curious, a "dell" is "a small valley in a forest, tucked away from
the rest of civilization." At the corner of Newkirk and Coney Island Avenue,
where PS 217 was to be found, there were, trust me, no wooded dells. Concrete
sidewalks, chain-link fences, yes. Dells no. Delis, but no dells.

Source: 2017/11/a-new-fear

Title: A New Fear
Date: November 16, 2017

When I was a exceedingly young fellow (teens and twenties), I suffered from a
great fear of death. It was not obsessive or constant, but enough to keep me
lying awake at night, sometimes in a sweaty panic. It was not a fear of death
itself, nor a concern about anguish in an afterlife -- hell a story which I
always regarded as a pathetic fiction and fraud. No, my fear was that I would
miss out on things. Children, grandchildren, springtimes, love, baseball,
mountains, travel, books, knowledge, corn and hamburgers in August, the works.
I wanted to live to an old age for the experiences. I well remember that in the
1960s, when I was barely out of adolescence, I would project myself forward to
the distant future, as far as to the year 2000, the new millennium. I remember
thinking, if I can just make it to 2000, when I'll be sixty-one, I'll have lived
a full life. I'll be ready to go.

Well, 2000 has long ago come and gone, and here I am, pushing eighty, and in
excellent, almost miraculous health. Such good health, in fact, that on good
days I climb our neighboring foothills like a gazelle. (On bad days, even
walking downhill seems as though I'm slogging through a swamp of mucilage, but
that's another matter.)

I no longer fear death. No matter what else happens to me, I'm not going to die
young, with my promises, such as they were, unfulfilled.

But the fear of dying young has been superseded by a new fear -- the fear of
living too long. When did the transition occur?

I don't want to outlive my time. I don't want to outlive my friends, my family,
my health. I'm already the senior member, the patriarch, of my extended
family -- not just the direct line from my grandparents, but of the extended
cousinhood. In my family, there are no elders and only a couple of near-coevals.
I don't want to become an isolate. Even more so, I don't want to lose my
mobility or my mind. I don't want to find myself in a nursing home, pee on my
pants, bedridden, "locked-in". And I'm going to do everything I can to avoid
allowing myself to get into that situation. I've seen people in that trap at
close hand too many times -- and it ain't pretty.

Meanwhile, I'm enjoying the perspective of the moment. I'm glad that I managed
to get to this point. From where I stand, I can remember my grandparents and
I know my grandchildren. I'm at the midpoint, the apex, of five generations.
I marvel at the changes -- recall, will you, that my grandfather was born in
darkest Ukraine in 1863, my youngest grandchildren were born in hi-tech Boulder,
Colorado in 2013. Need I say more?

Source: 2017/11/spearefirstspeech

Title: Shakespeare Gets Going
Date: November 21, 2017

Setting aside the suspicion that The First Part of Henry the Sixth is a
collaborative work or perhaps even a "prequel" to Parts Two and Three, the
play can be read as if its first few lines were the earliest example of
Shakespeare's playwriting. If so, then, what can be learned, right there at
the very beginning, by looking closely at Act one, scene one, line one?

Here's the first considerable speech in the play -- just about the very
moment, let us imagine, in which Mr. W. S.'s "rough and all-unable" goose quill
touched paper. Thirty-seven or thirty-eight astonishing plays lie in the
future.

The adventure begins as Gloucester eulogizes the recently-deceased
Henry V. The speech is not brilliant, not accomplished; in fact, it's just
plain vanilla ordinary. But it's a seed, a kernel.

Gloucester:   England ne'er had a king until his time.

Virtue he had, deserving to command:

His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams:

His arms spread wider that a dragon's wings;

His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire

More dazzled and drove back his enemies

Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.

What should I say?  his deeds exceed all speech:

He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.

A reader or playgoer would have to be superbly insightful to predict that this
Shakespeare would become the Shakespeare. This opening speech is a a mighty
flat piece of rhetoric.

It's formulaic  -- simply a litany or list. First comes an item, a
noun (virtue, sword, arms, eyes, deeds) which is then amplified by a
hyperbolic qualifier (beams, wings, fire, sun). It's open-ended; it could
go on indefinitely. But because it's so much a formula, there's no
surprise--there's no mystery or excitement about where Gloucester is heading.

Moreover, for each element in the list, there's a congruence between the
unit of thought and the unit of verse. The sentiment of each of the first
four items on the list is exactly contained in a five-beat, ten-syllable line
of verse--a pedestrian procedure which Shakespeare would soon transcend. And
finally, there's an excess of old-fashioned, traditional alliteration: "His
Brandish'd sward did Blind me with his Beams" "affects the letter" and browbeats
the brain with the letter B. It goes almost without saying that there's nothing
in this speech that is particular (Elizabethans would say peculiar) to either
Gloucester or Henry. This is Anyduke reciting sentences about Anyking.

But then something truly amazing occurs.  Although it looks as
though Gloucester is gathering his strength and his breath for a speech that
might go on for forty lines and which would celebrate many more of the late
kings's amazing attributes, he suddenly changes plans and truncates his
intention:  "What should I say?  his deeds exceed all speech."

Gloucester seems to have run out of rhetorical gas. He is frustrated because he
simply doesn't have the words. He throws in the rhetorical towel, so to speak.
He surrenders. And he's right to do so, because at this early moment neither he
nor Shakespeare has the power to generate a language that is equal to Henry's
deeds. Better to stop speaking if you are utterly unable to say what you want to
say.

Yet what is the task of such a playwright as Shakespeare?

It is not to do exactly what Gloucester admits that he cannot do? -- to find the
words that are commensurate with the deed -- as Shakespeare certainly will when
he returns to Henry in the 1598 play which concludes and climaxes this sequence
of eight history plays. In a decade, Shakespeare will move from the pathos of
"What shall I say?" to a rich eloquence that is up to the task.

"What shall I say?" is therefore an important question -- the most important
question of all, in fact -- and the playwright asks it right here at the
outset. Readers can watch and learn as Shakespeare little by little, in play
after play, gradually invents a rhetorical style in which speech not only
equals but eventually comes to exceed all deeds.

Source: 2017/11/oneill-nebraska

Title: O'Neill, Nebraska
Date: November 24, 2017

Source: 2017/11/lydiamariachild

Title: "Hurrah for the Pumpkin Pie"
Date: November 29, 2017

Another Thanksgiving come and gone, and here am I in a nostalgic mood, harking
back to those songs that we sang in the PS 217 "assembly" in the 40s and 50s
of the last millennium. With Miss Georgia Keiselbach at the piano, we marched,
in size places, decorated in white shirts and green ties, into the school
auditorium and warbled our dear little hearts out every Thursday at 10:00 am.

I remember very well the stirring but perplexing Thanksgiving hymn that began

We gather together to ask the Lord’s blessing;He chastens and hastens His will
to make known.The wicked oppressing now cease from distressing.Sing praises to
His Name; He forgets not His own.

Looking backward, I admit that I understood the first line of the stanza but was
pretty much boggled by what came next. "Chasten" and "hasten" make a wonderful
internal rhyme, but who does He hasten and how exactly does He chasten? 
A syntactical mystery for sure. Were we expected to believe that the Great
Signifier in the Sky "chastens and hastens" His own will?  Why in the world
should he be asked to do so?

Nor did I grasp the meaning of third line, because I didn't recognize that "the
wicked oppressing" meant "the oppressing wicked" or more precisely "the wicked
who are oppressing someone." But who were they "oppressing"? Apparently, the
"distressing", that is, the people who are distressed. And who, to be more
specific, were the innocent distressed who were being oppressed. Us?  Our
teachers? Let me now confess that I sang then and remember at this moment the
line as "now cease us from distressing", thinking that we, the pupils, must
have been the "wicked" and that it was our now enlightened task to cease from
oppressing the distressed. I read the line as a provocation to guilt, even
though I knew that I myself, third-grader, had never oppressed anyone.

Nor was I the only confused 10-year-old, because BB, my PS 217 classmate and
consultant on our assemblies, remembered the line as "The wicked oppressing now
seize us from distressing" -- a sentence which is way beyond my parsing skills.

Of the last line of the quatrain, I grasped "Sing praises to his name" but "He
forgets not His own" opened another can of confused worms. I construed "His own"
to be shorthand for "his own name." But what kind of Lord forgets his own name?
 As BB, equally misled, says, 'it's god, just three letters; how hard is that?"

The hymn goes on for another four puzzling stanzas, though to tell truth, I
don't remember whether they were required of us PS 217 choristers. I for one am
retrospectively pleased that we omitted the stanza that included the lines "We
praise thee, O God, our Redeemer, Creator,/ In grateful devotion our tribute we
bring" which surely seemed even then a trifle too theological.

Despite the fact that I was mostly clueless, I rather enjoyed belting out the
hymn's anapests. It's a joyous, rollicking piece of music. Whether it was
appropriate for a public school in the heart of immigrant Brooklyn is another
question. But hey, it was the 50s, before we all became so multicultural.

Nevertheless, out of spirit of curiosity, and because it's now so easy even for
us lazybones to investigate such questions, I turned once again to wikipedia and
typed in "We gather together." Warning: surprise in store.

It's a Christian hymn (of course) written in 1597 by one Adrianus Valerius to
celebrate the victory in the Battle of Turnhout, a turning point in the Dutch
Protestant war of liberation against Spanish Catholic domination. It first
appeared in print in a 1626 collection of Dutch folk and patriotic songs but
didn't find its way to the New World until 1903 and became popular only in
1935 when it was included in the "national hymnal of the Methodist-Episcopal
Church." During World War II, which was entering its last phase when I was
a kindergartner in PS 217, the hymn became popular because "'the wicked
oppressing' was understood to refer to Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan." Which
is, I suppose, how an anti-Catholic Protestant hymn came to be included in our
curriculum. After all, it was out of such strange and unpredictable meldings and
divagations that Brooklyn/American culture was formed.

"We gather together" was not our only Thanksgiving song. We also sang th       e
entirely unobjectionabl                                                        e

Over the river, and through the wood,

To Grandmother's house we go;

The horse knows the way to carry the sleigh

Through the white and drifted snow - oh.

I found this song lovely but otherworldly, because my own particular grandmother
lived not over the river but in a tiny third-floor walk-up on distinctly
unpastoral Coney Island Avenue, where there was an occasional tired horse,
pulling a vegetable wagon, but there were few sleighs.

But as it turns out, "Over the river" too has a history.

That's a portrait of its author, Lydia Maria Child. She looks rather forbidding,
as though she might have taught sixth grade at PS 217, but on further
investigation she turns out to have been a radical and revolutionary woman to
whose accomplishments I wish we had been introduced. Born in 1802, she started
her writing career with the novel Hobomok which depicts and approves of the
marriage of an Indian man and a white woman. It caused a small scandal. In 1833,
she published An Appeal in Favor of that Class of Americans Called Africans
which proposed the immediate emancipation of slaves, arguing that slavery was
as harmful to slave-owners as to the enslaved. It was the first anti-slavery
book printed in America. Ms. Child was also an early advocate of women's rights
and spoke favorably of sexual passion. Of course she was ostracized from polite
society. In 1844, she published the small innocuous poem for which she is
remembered, which concludes "Hurrah for the fun! Is the pudding done?/Hurrah for
the pumpkin pie!" -- a sentiment to which there can be no possible objection or
dissent.

Source: 2017/12/grassley

Title: Why I Am So Damned Pissed at Charles Grassley
Date: December 07, 2017

Inasmuch "on horror's head horrors accumulate" every single Trump day, I
wonder why an atrocity out of the mouth of Senator Charles Grassley (of once
progressive Iowa) pisses me off to the top of my bent. Over the top, actually,
even though he's probably no worse than the others.

In an aha!! moment with the Des Moines Register, Senator Grassley defended his
vote against the inheritance tax thusly: "I think not having the estate tax
recognizes the people that are investing as opposed to those that are just
spending every darn penny they have, whether it's on booze or women or movies."
 His very words. Out of his own ignorant head.

Why am I so enraged? Let us count the ways.

First, it goes without saying that Grassley doesn't know that most ordinary
citizens have a hard time making ends meet. That they raid the kids' piggy-bank
at the end of every month. That they regularly postpone filling that
prescription or repairing the car until next month's paycheck arrives. That they
can't invest in stocks because they're busy "investing" in bananas and oatmeal
and potatoes, not because they're frittering their money away on playthings.
Grassley is completely out of touch with reality -- with the way real people
live.

But it's worse than that. It's not only that he's unconnected to his
constituents  --  he oozes contempt for them (and therefore for me). Wasting
their money on movies, the poor ignorant slobs. If they had self-control and
brains of Chuck Grassley quality, why they'd go out and buy a couple of hundred
shares of a good growth stock and contribute to the American economy. He's worse
than Marie Antoinette, who, bad as she was, never said, "let them buy stocks."

And therefore it follows in the universe of Grassley values that the tax system
should penalize the improvident and reward the rich. (Which it already does in
myriad ways, most obviously by taxing unearned income -- e.g. capital growth --
at half the rate of sweat labor).

And in Chuck Grassley's view, to reward the rich and penalize the poor is the
higher morality -- because  the rich will invest and the poor will do nothing
but spend every darn penny.  To those who have much shall be given, even if
they don't need or want it.

And while I'm stoking my indignation, let me add that I'm offended by the
Chuckster's sanctimonious "darn" -- he can thieve from the working class but
he's too prissy to swear while doing so. And I'm also just slightly off my gourd
that he includes "women" among the vices of regular Iowans -- as though (if I
understand his point) all money is earned and spent by "men." I think that the
dumb Chuck slipped -- let down his guard for a second -- and revealed that in
his heart he doesn't acknowledge that women are wage-earners nor that they are
wage-earners who vote.

And I am also pissed because the whole argument against the estate tax is
fraudulent. The case for repeal has nothing to do with small farmers or small
businessmen. It already excludes the first $11,000,000 of estates and therefore
affects only a very small number of multimillionaires and billionaires who can
well afford to contribute a bit to the general welfare. The sole purpose, and
the intended effect of the repeal, is to satisfy the greed of a handful or
plutocrats who want to pass their wealth to their heirs and therefore maintain a
perpetual class of wealthy aristocrats. Just like France before the revolution,
when the titled were exempted from taxation. Chuck -- do  your realize that
your sentiments are profoundly unAmerican.

So let me say to Senator Charles Grassley, with respect for the high office that
you hold and with as much love as I can muster, Chuck, you are a moron, and you
can take your insulting opinions, roll them up, and stick them where the sun
don't shine.

Source: 2017/12/mucilage

Title: Notes on "Mucilage."
Date: December 11, 2017

“Mucilage” is a word whose sound is wildly inappropriate to its meaning.
In the world of adhesive nomenclature, “paste” is good and “glue” is
even better. Trisyllabic mucilage ought to denote something far more serious --
perhaps a problem involving waste disposal ("OK, we've rescued the elephants,
but what are we going to do with all that mucilage.")

In my life, mucilage made its mark long before glue arrived on the scene. In
Brooklyn (and perhaps elsewhere) 1940s schoolchildren were issued small curvy
bottles of the yellow stuff, each fitted with a red-rubber tip which was slit
so that a drop or two of mucilage could be emitted when the bottle was pressed
to the surface of your construction-paper or doily project. Actually, the slit
regularly became caked and occluded and the hardened mucilage had to be scraped
off with your fingernails. It was a lot like nose-picking.

LePage’s Mucilage, I believe it was called. We said Page as "page" but
surely LePage's Mucilage if pronounced Frenchly (le pahje) would be far more
euphonious. Some claim that if you were building a model airplane, you would
use mucilage on your fuselage, but I believe such an assertion to be the kind of
persiflage at which I take umbrage.

And yes, the word is a descendant and cousin of Latin mucus, meaning mucus.

Unbeknownst to 1940s me, mucilage has a life outside the bottle. It is a
glycoprotein and exopolysaccharide found in most plants where it helps to store
water and thicken membranes. I have now learned that the sticky stuff on the
leaf tips of the insect-catching sundews that live at the edge of our pond is a
form of mucilage.

I would be curious to know from what plants William Nelson LePage distilled the
vast vats of mucilage that were diluted and parceled out to schoolchildren,
who then spent the hour after "Arts and Crafts" removing nasty mucilage scale
from their fingers. But I do now know why schools loved the stuff  -- because
vegetable mucilage is, if not exactly edible, not poisonous either. No hoofs
were harmed during its production.

Once having established the mucilage monopoly, Mr. LePage must have brought
home zillions. And if his descendants were as sticky-fingered as I suspect
they must have been, they will be enjoying the profits on their yachts or in
their Manhattan penthouses to this day while we 1940s pupils are left with only
memory-traces of mucilage's peculiar feel and odor.

Other words of my life:

slouch,

cishet,

yips

ramps

jot and tittle

worship

hack

Source: 2017/12/ladyonatrain

Title: Lady on a Train (1945)
Date: December 12, 2017

When you start to watch a 1945 black-and-white movie called Lady on a Train you
have certain expectations, especially when you're told in advance that it's
about a woman who sees a murder take place from a train window. And when the
movie features such noir stalwarts as Dan Duryea and Ralph Bellamy. And
especially when the title of the movie evokes The Lady Vanishes and Lady in the
Lake and Strangers on a Train. But Lady on a Train is not what you might think
it's going to be; in fact, it's a film that never has a clue about what it is or
wants to be. It's an unsatisfying hodgepodge.

There are some films that are so bad that they become fascinating for sheer
awfulness. Lady on a Train is that kind of awful. It starts out noir-y and
offers, intermittently, fistfights and mistaken identities and shadows, lots of
shadows, and enough red herrings to feed cast and crew for the entire time the
film was in production. But it also takes a shot at comedy -- not sophisticated
banter but broad farce: in one scene, trying to hide herself from a hired
gunsel, the heroine disguises herself as a chair and moves around from place
to place just as she would in an Abbott and Costello vehicle. And then, if
farce/noir weren't enough of a burden, at three separate times during the
events, with the least possible justification, Deanna Durbin, playing at being a
detective, breaks into song, but only because she's Deanna Durbin, not because
the film requires her to do so. So it's a noir-farce-sentimental musical. It
just don't work, except for connoisseurs of badness.

Plus it features two of the ugliest hats ever to come out of the Hollywood
chapeau-shop:

After making this film (and another clunker) Deanna Durbin left Hollywood, where
she had been the highest paid woman in America, married and moved to France,
never appeared on stage or on film again -- and reassumed her birthname, Edna
Mae Durbin. It's a decision one can respect.

Source: 2017/12/lodz

Title: Written For the Great-Great-Grandchildren of Solomon Goss (1878-1972)
Date: December 19, 2017

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, Asher:

Althea's grandfather, Solomon Goss (born Guza), who contributed 1/16 of your
genetic inheritance, fled Poland after the worker's rebellion in Lodz in 1905,
walked across Europe to Rotterdam where he boarded a ship and traveled steerage-
class to Philadelphia. He had been a silk weaver in the old country and was able
to find similar work here. In two years he saved enough money to pay for second-
class passage (not the dreaded steerage) for his young bride Miriam Halpern.

Solomon Goss played his part in the wave of political and social unrest that
rocked the Russian Empire in the first years of the twentieth century --
uprisings that preceded and anticipated the 1917 Russian Revolution. The
resistance had at its root the exploitation of workers especially in rapidly
industrializing cities like Lodz (which had grown six-fold in a generation), in
the state policy of enforced Russification, in czarist tyranny both cruel and
arbitrary, and in heady intellectual and Marxist ferment both in universities
and in informal worker self-education projects. The workers' strikes and revolts
in Lodz (the city, though Polish, was then incorporated into the Empire) were
part of that great historical process. The Lodz Insurrection, also called the
June Days, was one of the largest of these local rebellions. Following months
of unrest and strikes, repressed by Russian police and soldiers, enraged
workers began building barricades and assaulting police and military patrols.
Additional troops, including the hated Cossacks, were called in. By June 23, the
city and commerce was immobilized. Martial law was declared. But rocks proved
futile against bullets and horses. By June 25, the uprising was crushed. It was
officially reported that several hundred workers were killed but modern scholars
estimate that between 1000 and 2000 died and many more were injured. There were
arrests and imprisonments and executions. In this atmosphere Solomon Goss, who
had manned the barricades, wisely decided that his time in Lodz had come to an
end.

I do not know how he was able to walk to the Netherlands and shipboard. A
secular non-believer, he would not have been welcomed at local synagogues. Were
there way-stations manned by sympathetic socialists?  How did he eat?  Where
did he sleep? He never talked about his trek and if anyone ever asked him, they
did not pass the information along to me.

When he came to America he found work in the silk mills in and around Paterson,
New Jersey, which was then known as the "Silk City." Weavers were skilled
workers. Most were immigrants from traditional silk-weaving areas in England,
Germany, and Italy but there was also a considerable influx from Lodz itself.
The working day was ten hours long with a half day on Saturday and the new
fifty-five hour week was considered a victory for the workers. Between 1881 and
1900 there were nearly 140 strikes. By the first decade of the 20th century,
practically every mill had one or more labor organizations.

Solomon Goss told me that when he would take a job in a mill, he would
immediately set out to organize and radicalize his comrades. As a result, he
said, he was frequently fired. But he was, he claimed, a very skilled worker,
able to operate four looms at once (he looked down on American-trained workers
whom he thought of as inferior and whom he derided as "Columbus weavers)."

By 1913, close to 5,000 Jewish men and women worked in the Paterson silk
factories. It was in Paterson that Solomon Goss must have participated in one
of the crucial events in American labor history, the Paterson silk strike. In
February. nearly 300 mills and dye houses were closed, as 24,000 men, women,
and children joined in an industry-wide strike. The strikers' demands were
radical. They wanted an eight-hour day as well as increases in wages. Workers
agreed that no one would return to work until all of the owners accepted their
terms. Picket lines kept "scabs" and strike breakers out of the mills. More than
2,000 workers allowed themselves to be arrested, flooding the jails. But mill
owners held firm and refused to meet with the workers. By the end of May, the
workers' solidarity cracked. English-speaking and better paid workers voted to
accept settlements with individual mill owners. At the same time workers started
to cross the picket lines. In July the central strike committee voted to endorse
shop-by-shop settlements. The Paterson silk strike collapsed and owners conceded
nothing. "Your power is in your folded arms," IWW leader "Big Bill" Haywood had
said. But the mill owners, with greater resources, outlasted the hungry workers.

I do not know how Solomon Goss responded to this second crushing defeat nor
when he abandoned the silk trade. But in the 1940s, when Althea first knew
him, he operated a "candy store" in Clifton Heights, New Jersey. When I met
him in the late 50s, he had long ago sold the store and moved with Miriam to a
tiny apartment in Utica, New York, where his son Dan and wife "Grandma Anne"
(your great-grandma) lived. The man who had once been a proud unionist and
socialist and who considered himself a follower of Daniel de Leon, founder of
the Socialist Worker's Party, had drifted into conservatism, even voting for
Richard Nixon in 1972. Defeat and poverty and deracination had not ennobled
him. On the contrary, he was to my eyes a mean old man, given to gratuitously
cruel and cutting remarks. His default stance toward me and toward the world was
scorn. Miriam died in the late 60s; Solomon, having alienated his friends and
relations, lived out his widowhood in a single room in a hotel in Rockaway and
ultimately in the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale, where, a secularist to
the end, he complained to Althea and to me about the intermittently broadcast
Hebrew prayers.

I find it almost impossible to reconcile the two sides of the man: the sour,
sad, nasty old reactionary that he became and the heroic youthful fighter for
social justice who fought the Cossacks, walked seven hundred miles from Lodz to
Rotterdam and, I like to imagine, welcomed his beloved, radiant bride at the New
York dock with tears in his eyes.

Source: 2017/12/eleveneleven

Title: An Enigmatic Nighttime Experience
Date: December 26, 2017

The person with whom I share a bed reported that last night, following some
incomprehensible mutterings, I sleep talked, clear as a bell, the sentence
fragment "four ones, which I interpret as eleven hundred and eleven."

I have absolutely no remembrance of saying these words, nor of any dream that
might provide them with a context.

Some observations:

a) I'm mighty proud of myself for having a dream that was so literate.  I mean,
"interpret."  Not your run-of-the-mill sleep vocabulary.

b) What could "four ones" refer to?  Four aces?  Some sort of runic          ?
inscription  Score keeping                                                    ?

c)  What about eleven hundred and eleven?  A late antiquity or early medieval
date?  A quantity, but of what?

d)  Why did some part of my brain feel obliged to "interpret" the phrase "four
ones?" Did my right brain think that my left brain was communicating in code?

Altogether inexplicable. But fascinating. The brain seems to have  a mind of
its own.

Source: 2018/01/constantine

Title: More Genealogy Written for my Grandchildren
Date: January 02, 2018

Dear grandchildren:

I once asked my father, your great-grandfather Emanuel Pearlman, where in the
Ukraine we originated. He said that he was told that it was a village called
(and here he used a very deep guttural initial consonant) Xhosantin-gebernya
 -- an answer that left me not much enlightened. If he knew more -- and I don't
think he did -- he didn't say. Our family did not cultivate nostalgia for the
old country. Nor much curiosity either. We had no reason to yearn.

But new information about our past has recently come to me. According to a
correspondence between my late cousin Marion and a distant Israeli relative,
it is now clear that our family hails from the the town of StaryConstantine --
also called Starokostiantiyniv in Ukrainian and Alt Konstantine in Yiddish.
It was a small city of perhaps 30,000 people at its height, founded, as far
as wikipedia and I can figure, in the sixteenth century by a noble or wealthy
person named Konstanty Ostrogski who built himself a castle sometime during the
1560s. Castles are built for protection in lawless places, but then, most places
were lawless in late medieval Europe. Old Constantine is in northern Ukraine
at the junction of the Ikopot and Sluch rivers. Here's a picture of the Old
Constantine castle across from the Sluch:

But when, you ask, did your and my ancestors settle in Old Constantine?  I
remember it mentioned when I was a child that our family came to the Ukraine
from "the west", which I assumed to be Germany because my grandmother Eta's
maiden name was Hessel (though in fact Hessel is more commonly Danish rather
than German). The Jewish community in Old Constantine dates to the sixteenth
century, it is reported. "The town’s Jews suffered Cossack onslaughts during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. At the end of the nineteenth century,
more than half of the town’s population was Jewish." That's all we know.

However, in the nineteenth century, there lived in Old Constantine a husband and
wife named Yaakov and Menucha Sheindl Perelman. They dwelt in a house on the
corner of Ragnedinshkaya and Bolshaya Vasikovshaya streets (a house which was
destroyed during the second world war). Yaakov Mikolshtein Perelman was born
about 1830, lived a long life, and died in about 1920. According to the story,
he resided in the one house his entire life. His wife, Menucha Sheindl came
from Radomyshyl, a village not far from Old Constantine that was historically
a center of Jewish settlement. (In 1797 a total of 1,424 people or 80% of the
total population were Jewish). Menucha Sheindl Perelman was the daughter of a
sugar and wool merchant named Solomon Rabinovich, who was so rich that "they
changed houses for Passover" -- which is a custom heretofore unknown to me.
Menucha died in 1908 at age 75 or thereabouts. The family, once wealthy, lost
everything in the 1917 revolution and the disorder and purges that followed.

And how are Yaakov and Menucha related to you, my grandchildren?  Well,
they're your great-great-great grandparents. According to the newly discovered
information, they had eighteen children "mostly twins," of whom only nine
survived to adulthood. Seven daughters were born before your great-great
grandfather Isaiah (also called Buzya or Buzzy) saw the light. Isaiah it is
reported, was born "the year the serfs were freed," which is 1861, but I know
that he was 83 when he died in 1946, so I calculate that he was born in 1863.
But perhaps Isaiah didn't know his own age which wouldn't have been unusual
in an era of bad record keeping. When he was thirty-five, Isaiah emigrated to
America, arriving in 1896 or thereabouts.

Why did he set out for the New World?  Certainly the troubled conditions in Old
Constantine were reason enough. But there's also something of a story. Isaiah
married (I don't know whom) but after one night of marriage he asked for a
divorce. I don't know if the divorce was granted, but I do know that very soon
afterward he left town with Eta (or Yetta) Hessel, also from Old Constantine.
She was 23 or 24, a decade or a dozen years younger than he.

Why the one-day marriage?  No one knows what happened that night, but it
couldn't have been good. A sexual impediment?  An arranged marriage gone bad?
 Prior misdeeds come to light?  The discovery of pregnancy?  We're free to
speculate, but never to know.

However, we do know that Isaiah and his father did not see the world with
the same eyes. Yaakov was religious; his son Isaiah was an atheist. We don't
know Yaakov's politics, but we know that Isaiah was some sort of leftist or
communist. Something of a free-thinker, after the style of Moses Mendelssohn.
And perhaps Karl Marx. And we can also guess that it might have been impossible
to remain in Old Constantine after the marriage contretemps.

In New York City, Isaiah and Yetta had four children: Max, born around 1896,
Solomon, born about 1898; Mollie, born in 1900; and my father Emanuel, the
youngest, born on December 22, 1904.

My grandfather Isaiah also had two younger brothers. There was Chaim, who
followed him to America some years later and from whose daughter Rose spring the
Goldberg and Chodosh lines. And also Isaiah's youngest brother, who was named
Meshulam Zusi Perelman. He did not follow his older brothers, and I don't know
his history, but his family left the Ukraine and it's his Israeli granddaughter
Nechama Sheindl Brukman (born Perlman) through whom these facts were recovered.
Nechama Brukman died in 2008 at age 86.

It is most melancholy to read that in 1939 there were 6,743 Jews living in Old
Constantine, accounting for 31 percent of the total population, and that the
entire Jewish community, some no doubt our cousins, were murdered during the
first years of the war.

Source: 2018/01/new-geological-words

Title: Geological Words New to Me
Date: January 03, 2018

Unlike most sciences, where there are numerous pseudo-Greek or pseudo-Latin
coinages, geology offers all sorts picturesque and lovely words that have
been in the language for years  -- and are novel to me. So "graywacke" --a
muddy sandstone containing particles of quartz"; "fumarole" -- a small vent
emitting jets of steam; "sinter"  -- a crust of calcium carbonate; "molfette"
-- a vent emitting gases such as carbon dioxide; "coquina" -- a cemented mass
of debris of shells; "clint" -- a sharp ridge; "grike" -- a fissure or crack
opened by dissolving limestone; "knickpoint" -- a sharp step, up or down, in
a river; "gour" -- a calcite ridge formed when water rich in carbonate flows
over an irregular surface; "drumlin" -- an isolated mountain; "nunatak" -- a
projecting peak in land otherwise covered by ice;  "firn"-- a mass of ice
pellets compacted by the weight of snow above;  "cwm" -- a steep rock basin;
 "col" -- a narrow pass; "esker" -- a winding ridge formed by retreating
glaciers; "pingo" -- a cone, dome  or hump caused when freezing water expands
beneath the permafrost and pushes up the earth; "yardang" -- parallel ridges of
hard rock.

I'm not convinced that I could recognize any of these phenomena of my own
accord. I'd probably need a professional geologist or guide. But the words
themselves sure are magnificent.  And this is just a small sample of the
wordhoard.

Source: 2018/01/godless

Title: Small Screen Godlessness
Date: January 06, 2018

We binge-watched the seven-hour mini-series Godless in three marathon nights.

Godless is a Western, or more exactly a fantasia on Western-movie themes and
incidents. To the genre-literate, almost every plot element or character will
be familiar, but shootouts and jail breaks and horse-rustling and miraculously
healing bullet wounds were re-combined in ways that kept our attention. I'm
proud to say that I didn't fall asleep once during the three long evenings,
which is quite a compliment to the series, inasmuch as I've recently emerged as
an Olympic-quality narcolept, prone to drift into sleep at the drop of a hat,
even during the second overtime.

The three most interesting features of Godless, were, in my opinion, a) the
landscape, which, although it surrounds us here in Boulder, seemed particularly
crisp on the hi def screen, b) the horses, which are noble beasts of their own
and were respectfully depicted and admired by the cinematographer, and c) the
character of MaryAgnes, played by Merit Wever, who was rather wonderful in the
role and who was rewarded with a lot of the good lines. MaryAgnes is a tough
young rifle-toting crack shot who plays for the other team but who you want on
your side.

I thought that Jeff Daniels who played the ruthless mass-murderer Frank Griffin
overacted like crazy. If overacting were a crime, he'd be looking at a good
twenty years in solitary. Plus I know it's the fashion that your deranged evil
charismatic lunatic villain always has to be a bible thumper yet let's face
it -- that's a cliche that has served its purpose and earned its retirement.
Speaking of religion -- even aside from the title of the series and the
observation that it's a godless country there's a heck of a lot of religion
stuff both good and bad but mostly bad in this series. For example, much of
the backstory evokes the Mountain Meadow Massacre -- one of the most dreadful
acts of domestic terrorism in our nation's history -- which was perpetrated by
Mormons (although Mormon participation is underplayed and instead the atrocity
is attributed to a nonspecific religious fanaticism). There are frequent scenes
of worship and pilgrimage as well as intermittent focus on the new church that
the villagers of LaBelle are constructing and specifically on the fashioning
of a substantial cross that is photographed as though it were brimming with
significance. Moreover, the inhabitants of LaBelle wait six and seven-eighths
episodes for the new preacher to arrive but when he finally appears he has
only the most banal platitudes to deliver. Frankly, I'm not positive whether
the writer of Godless thought the preacher's speech was genuinely profound or
whether he couldn't give him better words, or whether he was trying to assert
that the pieties of faith offered no consolation whatever to the beat-up
townspeople. It would have been better if the preacher had just sung an
appropriate hymn and let the LaBelleians join in so we could at least end with
good music.

Godless offers a number of revisionist moments where tradition is overturned,
sometimes too obviously. An instance: LaBelle is inhabited almost entirely by
women and it is the women who make the decisions and take the active roles; men
are passive bystanders. Quite an inversion of the usual macho practice. And
also: usually in the westerns when there's the threat of intermarriage between
the races, it's the dark skin who gets killed. This time the commonplace was
turned on its head with the gratuitous killing of he white guy -- but I think
it was a bit too pointed to name him "Whitey." And the Indians: now that we
have the word "orientalism" to describe the mythologizing and falsifying of
people of the east, we could apply the word "Indianism" to the romanticizing
of the Paiutes, who are depicted as repositories of supernatural mystery and
tribal wisdom (which is I suppose is a step up from brutal savages, but still
not respectful or true). "Indianism" leads to a grotesque failure in the story
when the sheriff is accompanied by a lone brave on horseback who may or may not
be a ghost and who should have thudded to the cutting-room floor (along with
some faux-spiritual nonsense, totally out of place, about the sheriff losing and
regaining his shadow).

The series centered on the conflict between father and adopted son -- a
borrowing straight out of Red River, but this time around there's not going to
be a reconciliation. The allegorically-named son Roy Goode winds up shooting his
father, up close, pistol to temple. Which I liked a lot, because, first of all,
I was by this time totally inured to violence, and also because the evil addled
father-villain-prophet repeatedly claimed the ability to foresee his own death
and "this isn't it." "You're wrong," says Goode, pulling the trigger. So much
for prophecy. Immediately afterwards, the hero rides alone into the sunset --
not into a metaphorical sunset but a very real and carefully photographed sunset
-- even though if he had his wits about him he would take his more-than-a-match
lady friend with him. It's a unsatisfying conclusion and one that is dictated, I
think, more by the zillion Saturday afternoon Westerns of my childhood than by
the internal logic of the film. She loves him. But Western heroes named Goode
just plain love their horses more than hearth, home and sex and they are all
secretly afraid that if they marry and allow themselves to become domesticated
they'll wind up like poor uxorious powerless Van Heflin in Shane.

Source: 2018/01/englishinitalian

Title: Some English Words Incorporated into Contemporary Italian
Date: January 08, 2018

Italian has the ability to swallow English words whole, not even bothering to
Italianize them. Here are a few examples drawn from a 2016 novel by Stefano
Benni.

"Freezer," as in diventa rigido come un peluche lasciato nel freezer."
("It became stiff like a stuffed animal left in the freezer.")  "I
cornflakes," incorporated as a plural noun. "Ha occhiali rossi da rockstar."
 ("He had the red eyeglasses of a rockstar.") "Un overdose."  "La soap opera,"
entering Italian as a feminine singular noun, no doubt because of the "a" ending
of "opera."  "Un popcorn."  "Compriamo un gadget" ("We are buying a gadget.")
"Sembra un clown in pensione." ("He seemed like a retired clown"). Gli zoom
fotografici." "La mia partner."  "Il controllare piu sexy del mondo." ("The
world's sexiest conductor.")  "Ha iniziato con multi okay". ("He started with
many okays.) "Jukebox d'epoca." "Old-fashioned (classic) jukebox."  "La
famiglia era in relax." ("The family was relaxed)."

Ecc.

Source: 2018/01/menucha-sheindel-perelman-spector

Title: Another Paragraph Written for my Grandchildren
Date: January 11, 2018

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, Asher:

This is a picture of my father's grandmother (that is, my great-grandmother
and therefore your great-great-great grandmother) whom I can now identify as
Menucha Sheindl Perelman (born Rabinovich) who died in 1908 at the age of 75
or thereabouts. She was born in the shtetl of Radomyshyl and married Yaakov
Perelman of Old Constantine in western Ukraine. Menucha is reported to have had
18 children including many twins. Seven daughters and three sons survived to
adulthood. The four daughters whose names are known were Rochel Lerner, Reizel
Shposhnik, Miriam, and Chaya-Beila, who married Schmul Spector (I remember now
that my father had a cousin named Julian Spector). Her sons were Isaiah or Buzya
my grandfather, then Chaim, and Meshulam.

My father told once told me story that seems incredible. He said that he had a
grandmother in the Ukraine who came from a large family. He said that she had
ten children but that all of them died in a week during a cholera epidemic. Then
they had five more children. Or perhaps there were five children who died in the
epidemic and then they had ten more. Both stories are hard to believe.

What would it be like to lose five or ten children in a week? How could anyone
ever recover from the grief?  How could you live?  It's possible that this
story attaches to Menucha Sheindl Perelman, who lost at least eight children.
But it might also be a Hessel story (i.e. my father's mother's side of the
family, not his father's).

Provenance:  I have no idea how this picture came into my possession. It's a
drawing, not a photograph. A copy of a drawing, to be more precise, not the
original. My father told me that it was done by an itinerant Ukrainian artist
(apparently a pre-photography custom). I wish that I could say more about
Menucha's costume, especially the scarf. Is it traditional garb? Or about her
very dark hair, which might be a sheitel, the wig worn by the orthodox.

Is it possible -- is it truly the case that the woman pictured above bore
eighteen children?  And Inasmuch as your direct ancestor Isaiah was child
number sixteen, if she had said to her husband Yaakov, after birthing number
fifteen, "I'm done, Yaakov, no more children" -- which would have been a
perfectly understandable sentiment -- then it's obvious that none of us would
exist.

Other news of your old country ancestors:  here,  here, and here.

Source: 2018/01/ulyssesbytennyson

Title: Old Age, Poetry, Ulysses
Date: January 15, 2018

It wasn't until I reached college that I discovered poetry. My comic-book,
super-hero and baseball-infused brain was until then, poetry-wise, an almost
complete tabula rasa; I say "almost" because at eight or nine eight years old I
had already memorized two great classics of American literature: "Casey at the
Bat" and also the poem by Grantland Rice about Tinkers, Evers, and Chance. In
addition, I knew the ubiquitous stercoraceous distich the first line of which
is "Here I sit, broken-hearted" and a related gnomic verse that begins, "No
matter how much you wiggle and dance." Then in 1956 I left Flatbush for higher
education and enrolled in a course in English Literature. The rest, as they say,
is history. It was love sonnets and rich luscious liquid poems by Marlowe and
Keats and Hopkins that entranced me. The more intellectual poems were too taxing
for my immature head. Lycidas, which I now can acknowledge to be the finest
poem in the language, was utterly impenetrable for at least a decade, although
I immediately responded to its music: "With nectar pure his oozy locks he
laves."

One of my teachers sagely observed that certain poets and certain poems were
for youth, some for maturity, and some for old age. "You may no longer like
then what you like now." Which has come to pass. As an example of poetry for
the latter years, he adduced Tennyson's "Ulysses." "This poem may not mean much
to you now, but it will some day, if you live long enough." I remember that I
was much taken with the touchstone line "Far on the ringing plains of windy
Troy" but I thought that "Ulysses" was too much about a really old guy trying to
cheer himself up and I did not see it holding a place in any future that I could
envision.

Well, folks, I've now arrived at the so-called golden years, or, more properly,
the endgame, or extra innings (which in some sports is called sudden death)
and guess what?  "Ulysses" has returned, front and center, exactly as was
predicted 50+ years ago. It's right on target.

Tennyson's Ulysses is Homer's adventurer a generation older, kinging it in
Ithaca, but bored, unchallenged, and unstimulated. "It little profits that an
idle king,/ By this still hearth, among these barren crags,/ Matched with an
aged wife, I mete and dole/ Unequal laws unto a savage race,/ That hoard and
sleep, and feed,/ And know not me."

To put it vulgarly, Ulysses plans to bust out of the home for old kings. He's
been a warrior, a hero, and a roving explorer. He "cannot rest from travel." He
needs to search "beyond the utmost bound of human thought." He leaves Penelope,
and he resigns the government of Ithaca to his bureaucratically-minded son
Telemachus. The last lines of the poem, the leave-taking, are most stirring:

Come, my friends

"Tis not too late to seek a newer world.

Push off, and sitting well in order smite

The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths

Of all the western stars, until I die.

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Though much is taken, much abides,

And though we are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are;

One equal temper of heroic hearts

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will

To strive to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Yes, I know -- the diction is a little antiquated and artificial, the urge to
get away a trifle too vehement. But nevertheless, I'm moved by the resilience,
the perseverance. Though tear-inducing, the poem is anything but lachrymose. And
it's accepting: "that which we are, we are."

It has lately become the fashion to interpret "Ulysses" as a poem about
capitalism and imperialism. In this reading, Ulysses is just another white male,
off to conquer and colonize The Alien Other. Or to see it as a poem about male
privilege: he's a bad husband, abandoning the family. Or to conceive the poem as
a structure of ironies, in which Ulysses doesn't realize that he undermines his
own suppositions. There's a tad of truth in these arguments, as there always is,
because Tennyson was caught up in a Victorian striving that he didn't fully or
consciously assimilate. But frankly, I feel sorry for readers who can't hear the
verve and excitement in Ulysses's expansive view of things.

Moreover, it turns out that Tennyson was absolutely correct to proclaim that
there is a time in life when "not to yield" is an act of daily heroism.

Source: 2018/01/wyominglumet

Title: "Wyoming"
Date: January 17, 2018

I am totally in love with a bit of dialogue in Dog Day Afternoon (1975), the
great Sidney Lumet social drama/comedy/crime film.

Sonny's plan to finance his wife Leon 's sex change operation by robbing a bank
has run aground. In exchange for freeing his hostages, Sonny wants a plane
to take him to a foreign country. He asks his not-so-brilliant friend/co-
conspirator Sal to what country he would want to travel. Sal cogitates for a
while, then suggests, "Wyoming."  After a pause, Sonny replies, "Sal, Wyoming's
not a country." The exchange (by John Cazale as Sal and Al Pacino as Sonny) is
delivered magnificently -- Cazale with blank-faced understated sincerity, Pacino
with tempered exasperation.

"Wyoming" was not in the script (nor in the essay from which the script was
drawn) but was improvised by Cazale. A moment of pure genius.

If you haven't seen the film, run -- not walk -- to your nearest TV.

Source: 2018/01/my-apology-by-zeus

Title: Zeus: the Apology
Date: January 24, 2018

If I've offended anyone, I'm really sorry. I didn't mean to; I have tremendous
respect for pretty and desirable women. 10s, all of them. So let me just start
by saying that many years ago, decades or centuries I can't remember exactly
when, I had a thunderous crush on Io. She claims that she signaled me that she
wasn't interested, but I did not stop. You know, when you're a god, they let you
do it. You can do anything. It was probably a mistake to have turned her into a
heifer but I think she enjoyed it then -- even if she complains about it now.
Same thing with Leda; it's possible that I misinterpreted her but I honestly
thought that her "no" meant "maybe" or "yes," so I turned myself into a swan
and grabbed her by the pussy. Maybe I should have backed off, especially since
she had already spent that same night with her husband Tyndareus, who had, as
everyone knows, very small hands, if you know what I mean. It's good to be a
god. And then there was Semele. I mean, she was one of my very own priestesses,
and I realize now that your own priestesses ought to be off limits. But she
provoked me by bathing nude in the river Asopus. And I happened to be flying by
in the shape of an eagle. What happened, happened. It was definitely wrong of
her to ask to look at me face to face and I regret that I incinerated her, but
it wasn't my fault. Europa was also an error, but she should have known better
than to come near to me when I'm in the shape of a white bull. And the same with
Taygete who came to me as a doe with golden horns. I couldn't stop myself. I've
always had a thing for golden horns, though I think Pindar made a bit too much
of it. And then there was Dia, who happened by, so she says, when I was in the
shape of a stallion. What can you expect of a stallion? Alcmene, that's another
story. She was tall and beautiful, with eyes that reminded me of Aphrodite.
I definitely wanted her. I had to disguise myself as her husband Amphitryon
to make love to her. Maybe it was wrong to do so, but I don't think she ever
figured out what actually happened, which kind of excuses me. And then there was
my adventure with Antiope, where I disguised myself as a satyr; and once you're
a satyr well, you know, a satyr does what a satyr does. To seduce Callisto, I
had to transform myself into Artemis, which sounds a little like girl-on-girl
action, but it really wasn't because it was me. Come to think of it, I can't
remember exactly how we did it. And also: I blame Acrisius for shutting up his
daughter Danae in a bronze tower. I took it as a deliberate provocation. I had
to sneak through an air vent to impregnate Danae in the form of a shower of
golden rain, which, I have to tell you, wasn't entirely satisfying and just a
little bit kinky.

But what can I say?  I don't want to play the victim, because, after all, I am
a god, but I had a hard childhood, what with my father castrating my grandfather
and then me being suckled by the goat Amalthea. You get off to a bad start when
you're suckled by a goat.

Source: 2018/02/more-family-news-what-my-father-ate

Title: More Family News:  What My Father Ate
Date: February 01, 2018

Sardines, a tin at a time. Herring, canned, either in wine sauce or in tomato
sauce. Whitefish. Lima beans, which came into the house dried but which
were soaked to plump up, then boiled and mashed (but not for me, if I could
possibly avoid them). Potatoes in any form, but usually mashed and buttered.
No chicken or lamb chops, but lots of tongue. (When I left home, I vowed never
to eat tongue again, and, trust me, I've kept the faith.) Chopped chicken
liver mixed with hard-boiled eggs and onions. Steak, when we could afford
it. Roast pork with applesauce. Delicatessen meats -- salami, baloney,
corned beef, frankfurters. Baked beans, courtesy of Heinz. Apples, seeds
and all, right down to the stem. Chocolate in any form, but especially white
chocolate. Halvah, a particular favorite. Dates and figs, dried. Black
radishes and onions, soaked in gribbinis. Tschav, borsht with huge helpings
of sour cream. Corn on the cob. Slimy canned Harvard beets. No alcohol,
nary a drop. On hot days, not beer, but instead iced tea or iced coffee.
Cheese, either Velveeta or Swiss. Good bread -- pumpernickel or rye. Crumb
cake direct from Ebinger's Bakery. Bacon and two eggs, sunnyside up or
soft-boiled. Cream o' Wheat cereal. Swee-Touch-Nee tea. On Sunday morning,
bagels and rolls, warm from the bakery, eaten while reading the the Times (25
cents) and the Eagle (10 cents). Ice cream, the more exotic the flavor the
better.

Source: 2018/02/666

Title: 666
Date: February 05, 2018

Donald Trump has taken credit for the rise in the stock market. "The stock
market hit yet another record high yesterday. There is great confidence in the
moves that my Administration is making.” If he is responsible for the rise,
then surely he is also responsible for the fall. It can be no accident, and can
only be a signal from the other world, that Trump's market fell exactly 666
points last Friday. One trillion of market value was erased with the wave of
the supernatural wand. Six hundred and sixty- six is "the number of the beast"
in Revelation. Inasmuch as everything happens for a reason, we must ask what
the Lord is telling us. The 666 point drop undeniably demonstrates that DT is
"the man of sin" who "opposes and exalts himself above every god or object of
worship" (2 Thessalonians 2:1). He is the false god who has erected his tower
at 666 Fifth Avenue. Heed, O supporters of Trump, the words and acts of the
Lord, for the man of the flaming hair is the egg of the serpent, the false
prophet, the anti-Christ.

No possible probable manner of doubt.

Source: 2018/02/the-afterlife

Title: My Afterlife
Date: February 15, 2018

Source: 2018/02/united-airlines-to-charge-to-use-toilet

Title: United Airlines to Charge to Use Toilet
Date: February 25, 2018

United Airlines has announced that starting March 1, passengers will be charged
for the use of on-board toilet facilities. "Charges will be nominal," according
to United spokesperson Alma Santistevan, "just five dollars for the first
five minutes and two dollars for every subsequent minute, but passengers must
remember to bring their credit cards with them to the facility."

Toilets are now being equipped with card-operated locks but passengers may still
use the facilities for free until the end of the month.

Last year, United carried 95,611,500 passengers. "Even if each passenger uses
the facilities just once a trip, we are looking at half a billion dollars of
additional revenue with very little capital expense," explained Santistevan.
"Stockholders will be very very pleased."

United is considering additional charges for toilet paper and for paper hand
towels. Barf bags will also require a small fee.

Other airlines are expected to follow suit.

United CEO Scott Brandon was asked if he anticipated passenger resistance.
"There will be some grumbling at first," he replied, "but passengers will get
used to it. After all, they've accepted smaller seats, charges for water, rude
service, unpredictable bumping, huge fees for cancellations and plane changes,
luggage surcharges, pets stuffed into overhead bins and suffocated, as well as
the occasional person dragged from his seat screaming. Besides, what choice do
they have? They've got to piss."

Source: 2018/03/wallf

Title: Corporations to Buy "Naming Rights" to Trump Wall
Date: March 16, 2018

The White House announced today that "naming rights" to stretches of the Trump
Wall across the southern U. S. border are up for sale.

Portions have been pre-sold. Among the corporations that will have their names
in neon on the wall are Chick-Fil-A and Hobby Lobby. The largest single stretch
has been claimed by Koch Industries, Inc. Together with its subsidiaries
Invista, Georgia-Pacific, Molex, Flint Hills Resources, Koch Pipeline, Koch
Fertilizer, Koch Minerals, Matador Cattle, and Guardian Industries, Koch will
place signs on almost six hundred miles of wall. It is rumored that the National
Rifle Association has contracted to name a large portion of the Texas barrier.

The White House did not say how much the corporations paid for the naming
rights.  Charles Koch, in a rare interview, asserted that the cost was "a good
buy.  But it's not about money," he added, "it's about patriotism."

Trump Industries has also claimed a few choices miles of the wall but has yet to
make a payment.

Source: 2018/03/status-report

Title: Status Report
Date: March 16, 2018

A few days ago Vivian de St. Vrain aka Dr. Metablog began his last year as a
septuagenarian. His next birthday, 80. Astonishing. Unbelievable. And kind of
miraculous.

When I was boy, I thought that people of such an advanced age were very likely
extra-terrestrials or possibly members of another species. I remember my ancient
ancestors and relations as very small people, odd-smelling (chicken soup and
mothballs), whose faces were covered with knobs, whelks and unsightly dark
spots. As a group, they appeared to my youthful eyes as swollen, distorted,
asymmetrical.

But now, at this present age, I don't feel even the slightest bit extra-
galactic. I feel like me. Except, of course, when I catch sight of my reflection
in a shop window as I stroll the mall. Who is that white-haired guy?

Here's my status report at age 79. I'm healthy. All my organs might work a
little slower, a little grumpier about doing their jobs, but none of them has
crapped out completely. My joints are relatively supple, especially my knees.
I have great knees. I experience muscle pains and muscle spasms occasionally,
and my back is bad, but it's better than it was a decade or two ago, thanks to
the surgery. I tire more easily and recover from fatigue more slowly. My memory
is not as sharp as heretofore, but it's still pretty good, better than most.
I'm learning a new language and I admit that I have to look up new words two or
three times before they stick. Sometimes four or five times, truth be told. My
capacity for abstract thinking, never strong, has definitely diminished, but my
sense of humor is intact.

I'm not taking any medicines, except for an occasional sleeping pill. The
bifocals and the lens implants are working just fine. So are the hearing aids.
And the tooth implant is still firmly in place. The rest of me, I'm proud to
say, is all original equipment.

On the whole, I'd say that I've come through some dark times and that I'm
enjoying a personal renaissance. How long will it last? Impossible to predict.
A day, a year, ten years?  But hey, I have love in my life. Children who are
thriving. Lovely grandchildren.

I must acknowledge that at my age I could be growing something deadly and that
the least little twinge could be an early sign of a fatal disease. And although
nothing of that kind has happened yet, it's inevitable that something will
happen. Life is term-limited and I've lost too many friends and relations to
deny the obvious. I'm acutely aware that each day is precious.

Source: 2018/03/betrothal

Title: Report: Barron Trump Betrothed to Putin's Daughter Katerina Kabaeva
Date: March 21, 2018

Numerous European websites are reporting that Barron Trump, the 12-year-old
son of United States President Donald J. Trump, has been betrothed to Katerina
Kabaeva, the 11-year-old daughter of Vladimir Putin and "first mistress" Alina
Kabaeva.

White House spokesman Sarah Huckabee Sanders refused to comment on the report.
But another member of the Trump administration, who spoke under the condition
that his name not be revealed, said that, "if the story is true, then it's a
significant diplomatic coup for the United States and for the Trumps.  It would
allow two great families, one Russian and one American, to link their fortunes.
It's a significant step forward for Russian-American diplomatic relations. It
could be the making of a dynasty."

It has also been reported that the betrothal agreement, negotiated by Trump
lawyer Michael Cohen and former Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, calls
for the transfer of somewhat more than a billion dollars from the Russian
bank Vnesheconombank, or VEB, also known  as "Putin's bank," to Trump
Industries. VEB has previously been known to be an important investor in Trump
properties.  What the Trump family offered in exchange is as yet unknown.

The rumor that the spelling of "Barron" Trump's name has been changed to "Baron"
Trump has not been confirmed.

A date for the wedding has not been announced.

Source: 2018/03/shaya-venezia-1

Title: Shaya, Venezia
Date: March 22, 2018

Many a restaurant in New Orleans; and many visited by us during our latest stay.

Two divergent experiences.  Shaya, and Venezia.

Shaya:

Slick, elegant, ultra-modern, carefully designed. Waitpersons stylishly costumed
and coiffed. Well-trained. Reservations mandatory. Customers: jacketed and tied,
or on high heels. Price: whole wallet.

The place to go if you're looking for wood roasted Brussels sprouts with black
harissa, tahini and sumac pickled onions. Or ikra made with paddlefish caviar
and shallots. Or if you want your crispy halloumi with strawberries, mint and
pistachio. Perhaps shakshoula made of tomato, Jerusalem artichokes, poached
egg, chilies and chermoula. The roasted chicken is cooked with shawarma spices,
heirloom carrots, and chickpea mujadara. Etc. Very enjoyable experience.

Source: 2018/03/hessels

Title: More Genealogical Information for my Grandchildren
Date: March 22, 2018

Dear Asher, Caleb, Luke, Lola, Ella, Oliver, Talia:

These are pictures of your great-great-great-grandparents, Leib or Louis Hessel
and Tsina Voloshen Hessel. They are the parents of Eta or Yetta Hessel, who
married Isaiah Pearlman, your great-great grandfather, in StaryConstantine,
Ukraine, sometime around 1895. I knew Eta, who died in 1962 when I was in my
early 'twenties, although our conversations were limited because we did not
share a common language.  According to my father, these pictures are copies of
drawings executed by an itinerant Ukrainian artist. Drawn when? Perhaps 1870 or
thereabouts.

I don't know much about these people. I have no idea what they did for a living
or how long they lived. I see some family resemblance in Leib's small black
eyes and abbreviated eyebrows, but otherwise, not much. What sort of hat is he
wearing? Is Tsina wearing the wig of the orthodox or is that her real hair?

He looks mild.  She looks determined.

I know that my grandmother Eta had a number of siblings. In my father's
handwriting, I have a document that hints of two of them: a brother, Morris
Hessel, who married Mary Greenberg and had a son, Paul and a grandson Merel;
 and then a sister Malka, who married one Joseph Cohen and had a son, Saris,
who was a high school principal in New York, and had a son Peter Cohen, a
physician based in Denver. I wonder why my father kept so aloof from his aunts
and uncles and cousins? Was there a story? They were not at all a part of our
life. No visits, no family celebrations, nothing.

I once met my father's "Aunt Mary," who sold tickets at the Kent Theater on
Coney Island Avenue. it must have been the only time I went to a movie with
my father; he said, "This is my Aunt Mary."  I was perhaps 8 years old, and
uncurious. That's the end of the story. I wish I had more to tell you.

Source: 2018/03/nang-yai

Title: Nang Yai
Date: March 28, 2018

Nang yai is an intriguing form of Siamese drama, a shadow play with puppets,
which, unfortunately, I have never seen performed -- in fact, never been to
Thailand, alas, or anywhere else in that part of the world.

The "puppets" are large, almost three-quarters life-size, made of painted
buffalo hide. A story, drawn from the Ramayana, is told by means of songs,
chants, music, and dance. "Nang Yai" simply means "large puppet." People who
have studied Nang Yai have traced performances back to the 1400s. Nang Yai
dramas would be performed before a large white cotton screen illuminated from
behind by fire -- the puppets supported by bamboo poles.

The puppets themselves, one of which is illustrated above, are magnificent
works of art. From what I can learn, the tradition of making Nang Yai puppets
was almost extinct but has now been revived. Nowadays, and I imagine in the
past, the hide of a young ox is bleached and cleaned to get rid of hairs and
tissue. Then it is soaked in the juice of the lamphong tree, whatever the heck
that is, and also in a tincture of lemon grass, pineapple, and orange, and
finally darkened by rubbing with burnt coconut husk. The hide is carved with
chisels, hammers, knives, and then painted. Here's a picture of a particularly
complicated puppet.

Here's a picture of a Nang Yai museum in Thailand.  It's on my list of places
to visit.

Source: 2018/03/worship

Title: Words of my Life: "Worship"
Date: March 28, 2018

There are some words which one might study and parse the dictionary definition
and yet still not understand -- words for which one has no intuitive or even
rational conception. For example, there's the word "heaven." I know that
"heaven" can mean "sky," a definition that poses no problem, but when "heaven"
is presumed to refer to a place beyond the sky in which the souls of dead people
are eternally rewarded, then I'm absolutely baffled. My brain empties out.
"Heaven" in such a sense is to me incomprehensible and meaningless nonsense.

Another such word is "worship," a word which has always puzzled me, right from
the start, when the church bells of St Rose of Lima would ring on a Sunday
morning to call parishioners to mass, leaving me and my brothers to play
stickball or punchball all by ourselves. I recognize that "worship" is a word
to which communities of English speakers give assent, and I observe that people
attend temples, mosques, and tabernacles to perform certain activities, such
as kneeling, genuflecting, singing hymns and uttering hosannas. Nevertheless,
I can't agree that such activities equal "worship" -- because "worship"
presupposes that there is an entity to which these activities are directed. And
that entity, like "heaven" in the religious sense, doesn't exist. Just as heaven
is a non-existent place, so worship posits a non-existent entity. And therefore
the word "worship" has no intelligible meaning, to me.

Perhaps I lack what Charlotte Bronte called an "organ of veneration." Or,
alternatively, worshipers are engaged in mass delusion.

On the other hand, I have an excellent grasp of the word "awe." In fact, I am a
great practitioner of awe. I'm regularly "awed" by both the achievements of my
fellow beings in art, architecture, music, literature, mathematics and science,
and also by the majesty of nature, in the form of grand canyons and in the
triumphs of evolution. Moreover, I've felt "awe," in cathedrals and once, in
the Church of the Rock in Helsinki -- a magnificent building that melds human
ingenuity with natural beauty, -- overwhelming, transcendent awe.  And I can
understand that for some people what I identify as "awe" might translate into
"worship."  But again, not me. Though I'm awed by Rembrandt and Bach, but I
don't worship them or their works. I'll stick with awe.

I may lack an "organ of veneration," but I have a highly developed organ of
wonderment.

Update on "worship."  For the first time in my life, a few weeks ago, I
attended a religious service. I was in New Orleans and friends suggested that
I join them at Vespers at Trinity Episcopal Church on Jackson Avenue. The
attraction was Ellis Marsalis, who was to play a few notes for the attendees.
A priest or whatever he's called, said a few words, read a prayer, and then
elderly, frail Mr. Marsalis sat down at the piano and improvised for a few
minutes. It was beautiful and perhaps transcendent. I suppose it was a form of
worship. And it didn't hurt a bit.

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2018/04/amnesia-on-film-crossroads

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Crossroads
Date: April 17, 2018

What a strange little movie, odd even by amnesia-on-film standards! Film amnesia
is the most malleable and flexible of illnesses, as fact free (and fact-averse)
as the EPA under Trump.

In this modest 1942 adventure, David Talbot, played by William Powell affecting
a slight now-you-hear-it-now-you-don't French accent, is either an amnesia
victim or an amnesia scammer. He either was or wasn't a criminal before the
accident in which he apparently lost his memory.

An extortionist-grifter Henri Sarrou, played by Basil Rathbone, who looks like
"two profiles glued together," is trying to squeeze him for a million francs in
exchange for not turning him over to the police for a murder that he might or
might not have committed in his former life, if he had one.

I don't think I'm giving away any secrets to say that all turns out for the
best. But what is interesting, amnesia-wise, is that there is no recovery of
memory.  Talbot's amnesia never resolves, and he comes to the end of the film
with no knowledge of three-quarter of his life. This should-be painful situation
doesn't seem to compromise or concern him the least little bit. Off he goes, at
the end, blithely, with his luminous bride Hedy Lamarr, at his side.

There are holes within holes in the plot, but what is most striking, I think,
is how casually amnesia is deployed, as if losing one's memory were no more a
challenge to selfhood and identity than a case of sniffles.

Source: 2018/04/contra-tattoos

Title: Contra Tattoos
Date: April 25, 2018

Here are some reasons, young 'uns, why you should steer clear of tattoos.

a) because tattoos are permanent and because taste, your taste, is impermanent
and will inevitably change. There's a poster on the wall of your bedroom that
you love. Five years later, you're indifferent to it, and ten years later,
you've trashed it. "How could I ever have thought that thing was beautiful?"
Same with your taste in all the visual arts. So with the tattoo. You may
think t's beautiful now, perhaps, but ten or twenty years on it has become a
permanent definition of your callow taste. Without remedy or the possibility of
amelioration. You're stuck with it.

b) because ink fades and bodies sag. That crisp tattoo is going to bend,
distort, twist and fade as your body ages. Face facts: that tattoo is going
to become uglier and uglier. Have you caught sight of someone of my age who's
tattooed?  If you have, you know what I'm talking about; if you haven't, don't
look. It ain't pretty.

c)  tattoos are expensive if they're done by someone with talent. The cheap
ones are horrid. What a waste of money! You could donate the same amount to a
useful cause and feel good about yourself.

d)  tattoos hurt in the application; sometimes they become infected.

e)  because tattoos limit your romantic options. For many a potential partner,
that pseudo clever tattoo will be a deal breaker. "You have a tattoo where?
There? Right there? Ugh?" And also, don't tattoo yourself with the name of your
present beloved. Consider the divorce rate.

f)   if the tattoo is in plain sight, it will lower your earning power. No
problem getting a job as a dishwasher, but perhaps that upscale employer is
going to think twice before hiring someone who made such a bad choice. Because
the employer doesn't want to offend potential customers.

g)  because the Bible tells you so. "Do not cut your bodies for the dead or
put tattoo marks on yourselves. I am the LORD” (Leviticus 9:28). Your body
is a temple; do not mutilate or desecrate it. And for god's sake don't tattoo
yourself with religious symbols. To do so is like throwing ashes in the face
of the Almighty. The injunction against tattoos is one of the few biblical
proscriptions that I can sincerely embrace.

h) because tattoos are an expression of vanity, like wearing show-off jewelry or
expensive designer clothes. Let us take pride in our achievements and not in our
shallow foppery.

j ) because you don't want to cause me, ME, to look askance or into the air and
wrinkle up my nose whenever I meet you.

Source: 2018/04/foody-talk-on-the-airplane

Title: "Foody" Talk on the Airplane
Date: April 30, 2018

Stewardess:  "Chicken or pasta?"

Dr. M.:  "Which do you recommend, Madam?"

Stewardess:  "It's airline food.  They both taste exactly the same."

Dr. M.:  "I'll try the chicken."

Source: 2018/05/a-most-peculiar-dream

Title: A Most Peculiar Dream
Date: May 02, 2018

The ol' dreamatorium was working overtime last night. The protagonist, who was
and who was not me was a mature, bearded gentleman, a prosperous landowner in
what seemed like the antebellum South. He, or he/I, was the target of a plot
by a younger cousin in league with a scuzzy lawyer to have him/me declared
insane -- and therefore his/my property to be confiscated and transferred to the
control of the villainous cousin. The heart of the dream was a hearing or trial
in which he/I was cross examined and every of his emotions mischaracterized
by the lawyer and the panel of mental health experts. For example, if he/I
expressed indignation and anger, it was interpreted as paranoia; if he/I
remained impassive it was understood as catatonia. Every emotion became its
parodic extreme. As a result, he/I was placed in an institution; a rather
bucolic one, but still a place of incarceration. However, after some while,
another hearing was held, and he/I was able to convince a judge that there
had been a miscarriage of justice. So he/I was set free to reclaim his
property. But, he/I said to the judge, I have no money, no clothes, no means of
transportation, so no one will believe me. The judge then offered to loan me/him
some money, but was clear that it was a loan, not a gift. In the last scene of
the dream, he/I is mounted on a horse (black and white one, like a Holstein),
wearing a Confederate uniform, and carrying, believe it or not, a shiny sword.
Then I woke up.

I cannot interpret this beaut, this honey of a dream.  It was very cinematic,
very vivid, and very long. But it doesn't apply to my life in any obvious way.
I've never been accused of insanity, never lost any property, don't know any
corrupt lawyers, never been institutionalized, never even been on a horse,
and certainly don't carry a sword.  Moreover, it was an undreamlike dream:
no fantastic elements or objects morphing into other objects. It seemed less
like a dream than like a lost chapter or sub-pot to Gone with the Wind. Mighty
puzzling.

Source: 2018/05/cliche-of-the-decade

Title: Cliche of the Decade
Date: May 02, 2018

There's this woman of a certain age, good looking, usually blonde. Generally,
she's a detective but she could be reporter or a spy -- some sort of
investigator. She has an instinct for her work, an unusual insight or gift.
There's a murderer or villain out there and she's determined to get him; it's
personal with her and often she has to violate procedures in order to bring
this character to justice. She regularly confronts her superior, an older man
who is a stickler for the rules and wants to shut down the investigation.
As a last resort, she'll ask for 24 hours, or more rarely 48 hours, to
bring the villain in. And guess what -- it turns out that her instinct was
right all along and after a brief struggle, in which her life is in danger
(often there's an attempted assassination, usually by speeding vehicle), the
criminal/mastermind/murderer is handcuffed (British version) or shot (American
version).

Source: 2018/06/side-effects

Title: Side Effects
Date: June 24, 2018

LENFERA is generally safe to use, but possible side effects include stuffy
or runny nose, headaches, goosebumps, hiccups, cramps, sensitivity to bright
lights or glare, shingles, gingivitis, numbness of lips or upper palate, dry
scalp, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), acid reflux, dizziness, hair loss,
hearing loss, kidney stones, constipation and/or diarrhea, sudden loss or gain
of weight, inability to swallow, drooling, desiccation, macular degeneration,
bunions, uncontrollable twitching or muscle spasms, rectal itch, toenail fungus,
nausea, abdominal pain, difficulty with breathing, edema, fistula, halitosis,
absence of libido, tachycardia, swelling in knees or other joints, scabiosa,
bots, flatulence, loss of insight, roseola, Osceola, bloat, priapism, Purim,
bowel obstructions, failure to thrive, scoliosis, creeping phlox, aggression,
acne, increased facial or body hair, world-weariness, dyspepsia, rash,
fatigue, agoraphobia, lycanthropy, fever, tremors, blurred vision or sudden
blindness, frostbite, ringworm, procrastination, irritability, hot flashes,
mange, barnacles, pellagra, night sweats, bladderwort, paranoia, clumsiness,
thrush, zeugma, migraine, feelings of humiliation, heart arrest, tuatara,
memory loss, white nose, rapture, paralysis, stage fright, bioluminescence,
scurvy, hallucinations, chancre, catarrh, pink eye, red eye, rabies, insomnia,
nightmares, spontaneous combustion, Coggins, blurring of gender identity,
wasting disease, aphasia, blackouts, suicidal ideation, nosebleeds, woe,
catatonia, gangrene, acute pain, multiple organ failure, death.

If symptoms persist, consult your physician.

LENFERA has been approved by the FDA.

Source: 2018/07/mr-mitchell

Title: Mr. Mitchell
Date: July 12, 2018

I don't know why, but after 66 years I found myself thinking about my first
English teacher at EHHS, Mr. Stephen Mitchell . Here's what I can recall. Mr.
Mitchell was a lazy guy. I remember that on many a day he would give us busy
work assignments, take up his New York Times, rest his feet in the lower drawer
of his desk, and read, while the class occupied itself doing who knows what. 
In retrospect, Mr. Mitchell was probably a classic burnt-out case.  Perhaps he
had been young and enthusiastic at one time, but in 1952, he needed desperately
to retire.

I remember also that in his class we read "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner." 
His instructional technique: he taught us some vocabulary, such as
"onomatopoeia" and "personification." Then one student after another was asked
to take a stanza and search it for examples of onomatopoeia or personification
or perhaps metaphor and also to identify iambic tetrameter or iambic trimeter.

Of the romance of the Rime, we knew nothing and learned nothing.

All the while, Mr. Mitchell's feet never left the drawer.

In retrospect, I wonder whether he might not have been a WW2 veteran, not quite
recovered from the trauma.

Source: 2018/09/year-of-the-rooster

Title: Year of the Rooster
Date: September 10, 2018

The rooster came to our attention about a month ago. We heard him before we saw
him. He was living at the edge of the forest, about one hundred yards from the
house. After a few days he became bolder and we were able to catch a glimpse now
and then. He's a Barred Rock, fully mature, with a bright red comb and superior
wattles, but with woeful tail feathers. We don't know from where he came. We
asked around but none of the neighbors is missing a rooster. We guessed: he's
an escapee, or, perhaps his owner became tired of him and kicked him out of the
truck, or (my favorite theory) he was in a rooster fight, lost his tail feathers
and retired to the woods in shame. But in fact, we have no idea how he came to
settle on our property.

Little by little he started to become more comfortable with us. He would spend
his day in the flower garden, furtively eating insects. He was especially fond
of earwigs. A good occupation, I thought. No harm except to the bugs. Eventually
he came to tolerate our presence. He would sit a few yards away, studying me
while I weeded. He gained our respect, because he managed to survive even though
the forest is filled with foxes and fisher cats and weasels and coyotes and
the air is patrolled by hawks. He liked to visit the donkeys and peck around
their manure piles.  When he started to roost not in the forest but in the
blueberry bushes close to the house I became concerned -- this may be more of a
rooster guest than I need. And then he took up the habit of cock-a-doodle-do-ing
at dawn just outside our bedroom window. And during afternoon nap time. And
familiarizing himself with the vegetable garden, where he snacks on cucumbers.
(He loves cucumbers.) He became ever more bold -- a few days ago he was just
outside the kitchen, pecking on the glass door, hoping, I imagine, to be let
inside. And when I didn't let him in, he left a large retaliatory splash of
rooster dropping right at the doorway.

We looked out of the small north window of our bedroom and there he was perched
on the railing, peering in. A peeping-Tom rooster. (Did he catch an eyeful!!)

One day a near neighbor telephoned: "Your rooster is here."  "He's not my
rooster."

And then he disappeared. For the first time in a month, there was no crowing at
dawn.  OK, we thought, some predator got him. One of these days, we'll stumble
upon a bunch of black and white feathers in the forest.

But then a friend who lives on Ira's Pinnacle told us that he had seen a pair of
chickens on Hackett Hill Road about a half a mile up the road. He couldn't be
sure, but he figured it must be "your" rooster and a hen.

So that's where he's been!! He's a gallinaceous gallant gallivanting with the
local ladies. I thought, good for him; I don't have to concern myself with him
any longer. He'll go feral and start a family. He must not know about Vermont
winters.

But not so. This morning he was back, solitary, crowing vigorously outside my
window. His romance, if it were a romance, didn't work out. I can't imagine why
because he's become quite a handsome bird. He personable, friendly and he's
grown an an impressive new set of tail feathers. He's plump and shiny; his walk,
once furtive, has become a decisive strut. There he is now, cock-a-doodling his
head off in the patch of cucumbers.

Source: 2018/09/choice-euphemism

Title: A Choice Euphemism
Date: September 29, 2018

Victorian novelists had a hard time describing bodies, especially female bodies.
Their usual practice was to sidestep such subjects entirely though the more
daring of them might resort to suggestion or innuendo.

Here's an instance in which Thomas Hardy ties himself into comical  knots
trying to tell his audience that although Tess Derbyfield (in Tess of the
D'Urbervilles, 1891) is very young and almost childish she has already developed
a large bosom: "She had an attribute which amounted to a disadvantage just now;
and it was this that caused Alec d'Urberville's eyes to rivet themselves upon
her. It was a luxuriance of aspect, a fullness of growth, which made her appear
more of a woman than she really was. She had inherited the feature from her
mother without the quality it denoted. It had troubled her mind occasionally,
till her companions had said that it was a fault which time would cure."  So
very elliptical. It's distressing that frank-minded Thomas Hardy had to resort
to such circumlocutions.

A later novelist might simply have noted that she was physically mature and that
her emotions would eventually catch up but for now she was vulnerable.

Back in Brooklyn we might have said, "Though she's only a kid, he has a pair of
gazongas on her like you wouldn't believe and they're going to get her into a
whole lot of trouble"

Source: 2018/10/for-my-grandchildren-anne-goss

Title: For My Grandchildren: Anne Goss
Date: October 09, 2018

Dear T, O, E, L, L, C, A:  This is about your great-grandmother, Anne Goss.
She was born Hannah Sarah Krull in 1912 in New Jersey, but I've forgotten which
city, although I know that as a young person she lived in Bayonne, Hackensack
and Paterson. Her parents, David and Katherine Meltzer Krull, were recent
immigrants from eastern Europe. She was the oldest of five siblings: Anne, Jacob
(Jack), Hyman, Freda, and Max (Mendy). Her father installed metal ceilings,
her mother was what was then called a "practical" (i.e. unlicensed) nurse.
The family was not wealthy. The five children shared two beds, boys in one,
girls in the other, sleeping crosswise. Anne had a bout of polio at sixteen
months which left her with a permanent limp and weakness in the left side of
her body. Because of the effects of the illness, she endured an unusually
difficult childhood -- marked by a series of surgeries on her leg which may or
may not have helped. But she was quick-witted and talented, learning to play
violin and viola and graduating as high school valedictorian. About the Jewish
religion, important to her parents, she told me, "I gave up that stuff when I
was thirteen." She was intent on a college education which her parents opposed
because the few dollars that she made as a dental assistant were crucial to
the family economy. She won a full scholarship to Barnard College but it's sad
to report that when she arrived on the first day of classes she discovered
that she had to pay for room and board, which her family could not afford. She
returned home but was admitted to Montclair State Teacher's College where she
majored in chemistry. In a world with more advantages he would have gone on
to medical school and become a distinguished physician, but such a career was
not in the cards. At Montclair she played string quartets and met your great
grandfather, Daniel Goss. There wasn't enough money to allow them to marry and
no one lived together before marriage in those days. Anne once told me that the
greatest mistake of her life was that she didn't go to bed with Dan until after
they married, which didn't happen until he was 26 and she was 24. I think those
premarital depression years must  have been hard and unsatisfying. And even
after they married, still not so good because Dan and Anne couldn't afford a
place of their own but shared an apartment with his parents (actually shared a
bedroom, with a curtain between the parents'  bed and theirs). Dan's parents
disapproved of Anne: "Why would you want to marry a cripple?" Eventually Dan was
hired as a teacher of mathematics at Paterson High School and then in 1946 moved
to Utica College in Utica, New York. Although Ann had been told that the polio
made it impossible for her to carry a child, she gave birth to three daughters
(Althea -- your grandmother --in 1939; Phyllis in 1942, and Paula in 1951).
She taught mathematics until she retired at the then-mandatory age of 65 but
continued with her tutoring business through her seventies. Meanwhile, she had
mastered the domestic arts: cooking, baking, sewing (she made all her daughters'
 clothes through their childhoods) and knitting. She was a hard-working woman,
often to be found knitting, reading a book, and watching TV at the same time.
Dan died in 1966 and so she spent many more years as widow than as a wife. Her
life was filled with pain (two dozen major surgeries) but she never complained.
She was independent, frugal, and adventurous. She was also strict, cool, not at
all affectionate, and humorless. Not exactly humorless -- she never laughed,
that I can remember, but sometimes she would respond to a joke by saying,
"That's funny."  She played bridge to win and not for fun and she liked a rough
game of Scrabble with her grandsons. She was easy to respect but difficult to
love.

She moved to Boulder at age 87 and lived to be 97, though much impaired. At her
90th birthday party, in 2002,  she was still functioning well but "looping."
 If she had died at 90 she would not have missed much. She was demented and
bedridden for the last few years of her life. The last coherent statement she
made to me, in her last month, was "I'm not afraid of this dying business."

A good memory: Anne spent most of her early life wearing a heavy metal brace on
her bad leg. But when she was in her early 90s, she acquired a brace made of a
light space-age material. I took her walking in the mountains. First time. She
was thrilled.

Here's another: she liked to help grade Althea's math exams and she liked to
talk calculus with her grandsons. I remember saying to them, "You have to
understand something. This is unusual. Your standard run-of-the-mill grandmother
does not understand calculus."

Source: 2018/10/blue-eyes

Title: A Cliffhanger
Date: October 16, 2018

I've been reading the novels of Thomas Hardy. Some of them are familiar old
friends, like Jude the Obscure and Return of the Native; some I've read so long
ago that they're new again (Mayor of Casterbridge, Far from the Madding Crowd);
 and then there are a few that I know I've never looked at before, such as The
Woodlanders, Under the Greenwood Tree, and, the one I just finished a half a
second ago, A Pair of Blue Eyes.

Blue Eyes is an early novel (1873), moderately autobiographical. In it, young
Stephen Smith is an apprentice architect of working class origins (as was Hardy)
who woos Elfrida Swancourt, a maiden of a higher station. He has a rival for
Elfrida's hand in a former teacher, elegant and prudish Henry Knight.

It's safe to say that this is a novel only for confirmed Hardy enthusiasts     .
There's little in it that Hardy doesn't do better later on                     .

On the other hand, Blue Eyes contains one rather wonderful piece of
melodramatic excess. Elfrida and Knight go hiking on a dangerous cliff and
Knight slips and gets himself into an awkward position, hanging on six hundred
and fifty feet above the ocean. His foot "was propped by a bracket of quartz
rock, balanced on the edge of the precipice." She's clinging to him and they're
both stuck. Knight is ever the gentleman. "Clamber up my body till your feet
are on my shoulders: when you are there you will, I think, be able to climb
on to level ground." "What will you do?" asks Elfrida. Knight answers that he
will wait "whilst you run for assistance." But just their bad luck, there's no
one around. And so the chapter comes to a cliffhanging close (the novel was
originally published in serial form in Tinsley's Magazine).

Several minutes and several pages of reflection pass. At last, Elfrida
reappears, her form "singularly attenuated."  She carries a bundle of white
linen.

Jumping jiminy, holy moly, I say, -- the girl has removed her underclothes.

She tears the linen into thin strips, knots them, and forms "a perfect rope,
six or seven yards long." Knight 'clambers' up the rope, and is saved.  But
by surrendering her undergarments,  Elfrida has, as Hardy delicately puts
it, "absolutely nothing between her and the weather but her exterior robe or
costume."  Goodness gracious me, the poor dear is clad only in her "outer
bodice and skirt."  So, of course, to spare everyone further embarrassment, she
runs away as fast as her little legs will carry her.

Poor struggling Thomas Hardy has wrestled Mrs. Grundy to a draw.

Good thing Elfrida was clothed in sufficient unmentionables to construct a rope
seven yards long. Suppose Knight had been down there couple more yards and she
had to remove her "upper bodice."  Would she have done so, or would she have
let Knight plummet?` Hardy arranges it so that Elfrida can defy social norms,
but not to the point of actual nudity. Hardy is bold, but not too bold.

I suspect that if Hardy had his way and wasn't enchained by the humbug prudery
against which he struggled all his life, he would have stripped Elfrida to the
skin. How would Henry Knight have responded? Probably keeled over from the
shock.

What would Elizabeth Bennet have done in the same situation?  Removed her
underclothes to save her suitor?  Probably not. The most likely answer: Jane
Austen would never have let her go out walking near a cliff with a gentleman.

Source: 2018/10/baseball-1958-2018

Title: Baseball 1958-2018
Date: October 29, 2018

1958:  First batter of the game is Smith. He's batting .278. First pitch is a
ball. Smith is 5'9", 155 pounds. Married, two children, makes his winter home in
Fort Smith, Arkansas. Sells tractors in the off-season. Good curve ball hitter.

2018:  First batter is Smith. He's batting .278. His slugging percentage is
.342. His OBP is .335. His OPS is .445. He hits .225 against right-handers and
.303 against left-handers. First pitch is a ball. On first pitches he's batting
.225. With a count of 2 and 0, he's batting .247. Second pitch is a ball. On two
strike pitches he's at .175. On fast balls in the upper right quadrant of the
strike zone, he's batting .345. On fast balls in the lower left quadrant he's
hitting .175. On two strike pitches, he strikes out 25% of the time and hits
fly balls 30% of the time. He bats .283 in his home park, .246 on the road. Day
games, .290, night games .225. His OPS in away night games against a left-handed
pitcher is .341. In this ballpark he's batting .283. He's batting only .125
against this pitcher, just two for sixteen lifetime, and one of the hits was
a double, but that was in a different ballpark and in a previous season. He's
batting .285 against fastballs, .276 against curves, .225 against four seamers,
.215 against split fingers, and .275 against change-ups. He sees an average of
4.3 pitches per at bat against right-handers and 5.1 against left-handers. He
swings and misses 38% of the time. Here's the next pitch; it's a strike. When he
connects against a left-handed split finger fastball in the lower left quadrant
the ball comes of his bat at an average velocity of 85 miles per hour to left
field, 87 to center field, and 76 to right field. His average launch angle
is 18 degrees. With men on base, he's hitting .285. With runners in scoring
position, .290; his launch angle to right field against right-handed split
finger fastballs in the lower left quadrant rises to 25 degrees, but only on
his first at bat in a game. Afterwards, it declines to 17 degrees. But that's
in April and May, on weekends. In August and September, under the lights, his
launch angle is 20 degrees against change-ups from right-handers who throw into
the upper right quadrant when there's a man on second or third and fewer than
two outs. There's ball four.

Here comes the manager out to the mound. That's all for this pitcher. We'll be
back in a moment.

Source: 2018/11/katie-elder

Title: A Truly Awful Western
Date: November 01, 2018

The Sons of Katie Elder (1965) -- another film so awful that it's utterly,
undeniably fascinating. It's packaged as a western, but underneath the arid
mountainous scenery and the garish Technicolor, it's a film noir.  What's it
about?  Well, a gang of crooks have been muscling in on the Elder ranch. Not
an unusual circumstance, but in this case the heart of the matter, it seems, is
that the four sons of frequently praised Katie Elder, proprietor of the ranch,
have neglected their mother. They should have visited more often, or written,
or at least called. The brothers are, in birth order, swaggering John Wayne,
a gunman; sniggering Dean Martin, a gambler; colorless bland Earl Holliman, a
failed businessman, and sophomoric Michael Anderson, whom the older brothers
want to send to college, but whom they should rather send to high school to
fulfill the prerequisites for Acting 101. It's all a mighty predictable -- a
string of cliches -- and, just as expected, after the climactic gunfight the
Elders get their land back from cheating Morgan Hastings and his gang of no-
goodniks. The dialogue throughout is embarrassingly wooden; no, not wooden,
harder than that, ceramic; no, not ceramic, titanium.

I blame it all on Henry Hathaway, the director, who had some good westerns and
also a series of films noirs (The House on 92nd Street, The Dark Corner, Kiss of
Death, Call Northside 777) to his credit. How could he have perpetrated this
film? And someone, I don't know who, has to take responsibility for the ugliest,
unfunniest, uncomic bit of grotesque "comic relief" ever perpetrated, in which
Dean Martin auctions off his make-believe glass eye to a passel of local yokels.
But I also think that some of the blame attaches to the producer, Hal Wallis.
This is a film utterly without a female presence except for Martha Hyer,  who
wanders into a couple of scenes without point or purpose. I couldn't figure out
what the heck she was doing in the film until I read that she was married at the
time to Wallis and that her career was on the fritz. I'm positive that Wallis
told the screen writer, "Put in something  for Martha."  Well, he did, but
it just made the whole mess a little messier, and if possible, a little less
coherent.

The Sons of Katie Elder stoked my indignation. What a waste of resources!

But hey, there's a good three minute scene of a hundred or more horses being
herded by the brothers, and there's George Kennedy as a gunslinger and Dennis
Hopper as a neurotic youngster who gets killed  by his own father. It's
something, but, sorry, not enough to dilute the indignation.

Addendum November 16.  I've just watched another western, Big Jake (1971), in
which John Wayne parodies an earlier John Wayne. Just as awful as Katie Elder.
Maybe less intelligible. You can infer a lot from the poster.

Source: 2018/11/nomenclature

Title: Nomenclature
Date: November 04, 2018

If a widow and a widower form a relationship when they're both in their
seventies, what is the proper and appropriate name for their relationship?

Legally, they're married, because here in the state of Colorado, if you live
together and represent yourself as married, you're married, even if you haven't
sought governmental sanction. Yet "husband" and "wife" don't come easily to
the lips. They seem too doggone official. And they also seem like words out
of an earlier era, especially "wife," which carries irrelevant overtones of a
dominant-submissive relationship. "Just a housewife."

But "companion" is only slightly better. To my ear, it smacks of "faithful
companion Tonto." "Partner" is even worse; are we associates in a law firm?

"Girlfriend" and "boyfriend" are clearly ludicrous and inappropriate to persons
of mature years. Such words lack seriousness and heft; they trivialize a
weighty relationship. So, similarly, does the naked "friend," which in this
context is colorless, neutral. "Ladyfriend" is a bit more serious. "Gentleman
caller" was last said without irony in Peoria sometime in the middle of the
nineteenth century. "Mistress" suggests that the friendship is merely sexual;
its counterpart, "gigolo," is even more specific, and seedy to boot. "Lover" is
also one-dimensional.

"Old lady" and "old man" are outmoded hippieisms. So is "significant other    ."
Other archaisms: "main squeeze," "stud," "pal," "steady lay," "fancy man      ."
 "Love-slave                                                                 ."

"Spouse"? No, too dry, too legalistic. "Consort"?  Disrespectful. "Odalisque"?
"Handmaiden." Sexist. "Concubine?"

It's fascinating that we've had more trouble with nomenclature than with living,
eating, working, and sleeping together.

Source: 2018/11/garum-vs-ketchup

Title: Garum vs. Ketchup
Date: November 11, 2018

The universal condiment in the ancient world, a staple of Roman, Greek and
Byzantine cuisines, was garum. Garum was manufactured in enormous quantities
and shipped in special amphorae all over the civilized, colonized universe. What
is garum? It's a fishy sauce that any sensible modern apple-pie-loving American
would avoid at all costs. Trust me, you would not want to slaver your bacon
cheeseburger with garum.

To make garum, the innards -- the guts -- of fish (whitebait, anchovies,
mackerel, tuna, etc.) were stacked between layers of salt and herbs and left in
the sun for several months. Honest to Pete!! The result, which must have been
malodorous and horrid, was then strained and bottled, or rather, poured into
amphorae for transport.

Don't believe me? Here's a direct quotation from a 10th century Byzantine
manual: "the intestines of fish are thrown into a vessel and are salted; and
small fish especially atherinae, or maenae or lycostomi are seasoned in the sun,
and frequently turned; and when they have been seasoned in the heat, the garum
is thus taken from them. A small basket of close texture is laid in the vessel
filled with the small fish already mentioned, and the garum will flow into the
basket." Sounds dreadful, you must admit. And I don't even know, and I don't
know that anyone knows, exactly what sort of monsters of the deep are designated
by the words atherinae and lycostomi.

Here's a picture of a ruined garum factory in Baelo Claudia in Spain. The
remains of such factories can be found all over the Mediterranean world. I
myself have toured one near Pompeii. Garum factories were set as far as possible
from centers of population because they, er, stunk.

Source: 2018/11/ditmasand18th

Title: East 9 Street Between Ditmas and 18th, 1939 -1955
Date: November 16, 2018

Beginning at the northwest corner and preceding south -- in the first brick
house, a family of notably obese immigrant Syrian women who spoke no English;
there were no children that I know of and no interactions with other neighbors.
The house itself was not unusual but it was fronted by a wrought iron fence and
a row of ancient stubbed catalpas which we called "umbrella trees." Next was
the house belonging to Dr. Jerry Yurkovsky, our M.D. In retrospect, he was a
kind man but a badly-trained, out-of-touch physician. He was also an immigrant
-- from Poland, I believe. My father, who rarely spoke badly of anyone, thought
that he was a decent sort but that Mrs. Yurkovsky was "a real pill." I remember
only her iridescent dyed red hair. Then came the Lampsons, Hubert and Dorothy.
He was never seen in daylight but was rumored to own a "yacht"; she was the
neighborhood grouch, known to slice in half any errant pink "spaldeens" that
that might be punched (kids played "punchball" in the street) over her tall
privet hedge and into her front yard. While I never questioned this neighborhood
orthodoxy, I never saw a sliced spaldeen either. Then came the large Victorian
house belonging until about 1950 to the Heidtmanns and then to another family
whose name I can't remember but who had an impaired daughter who screamed and
screamed at maximum volume at all hours day and night. Next came our immediate
neighbors on the south, Mr. and Mrs. Pynn, who lived in a small old wood-
shingled structure.The Pynns (did they have given names?) were extremely old,
in their 90s I would guess. He was a retired Cornish seaman, believe it or not;
she cultivated colorful gladioli in her small backyard garden. Their upstairs
tenants were the Rhodins, Thor and Pearl. He was a tall gaunt ancient austere
Norwegian whose only known activity was writing letters to local newspapers; she
was almost as tall but Jewish and "went to business." They had three children
but they were out of the house and too old for me to know them: Thor, jr, Yammie
(Hjalmar), and Margeret. Thor was a physicist at Cornell rumored to have worked
on the "bomb." I have written about the Rhodins elsewhere. Then came our house,
a three-story 1912 Victorian of which our family of five occupied the top two
floors. The first floor tenants were the Burnets (formerly Bernsteins), Albert
and Bessie. He was musician who had retreated to accountancy. There were two
sons, the older, Leonard, was troubled, and I now realize, probably gay; he
played the sax; the younger son, Henry, had a cleft palate, later corrected by
surgery, I believe, and banged on his drums incessantly. To our north were the
Carps, who owned a brickyard or building supply business somewhere not in the
neighborhood. They were a gloomy Dickensian family. Both of the daughters were
nuns who came visiting once a year in their long black robes; the son, hang-dog
Eddie, had the demeanor of a jaded funeral attendant. The Carps first act on
moving into the house was to erect a tall forbidding chain link fence around the
perimeter of their property which annoyed my father no end. Proceeding south,
the next house was occupied by the Spollens, an immigrant Irish family who
seemed to produce a new child every year. My memory is hazy about the south end
of the street, under grand old elms until they fell victim to the Dutch blight,
except that in one of the houses dwelt two tired bony sisters, perhaps twins,
who every Sunday, trudged down 9th Street and past 18th Avenue to one of our
neighborhood's numerous under-attended Protestant churches. They had a splendid
garden of hollyhocks. Also at that end of the street lived, Mr. Mennino, who
shared his personal variety of cucumbers with my father. At the very end of the
block lived the dog-faced man..

On the other side of the street was an Italian family named Cocito, pronounced
American'ly, ko-see-to. When Junior Cocito (perhaps he had a name, but everyone
called him Junior) grew up and married, he bought the house next door to his
father's. Then next, coming closer to us, were the Cunninghams. Mr. Cunningham
was a large imposing firefighter; there was at least one daughter and two sons,
Jimmy and Billy. Billy was our only celebrity; he became rich and famous as
the "Kangaroo Kid"; he also played first base on my younger brother's baseball
team. After the Cunninghams was another house of semi-mystery, occupied by
an unfriendly family whose last name was Harris. I believe my mother told me
that Mr. Harris was a school principal. There was a shapely daughter a year or
so older than I whom I admired from a distance. She (Betty) married at 16 or
17 ("shotgun," I was told), and disappeared -- as did the family. Then came
the Burkes, directly across the street from us. There were two sons, Charley,
a genuine dolt and high school dropout who became an armed guard for Wells
Fargo, and lanky John, who was studying for the priesthood. There was also an
uncle or cousin who lived with them and who spent every weekend waxing and
noisily buffing his big new DeSoto. Then came the house occupied by Mr. and Mrs.
Petranto along with their ancient father who spent all day every day watching
the traffic from the oversize glider on the porch. There was an older daughter,
Madeleine, whom I didn't know, and a son, Frankie, a bachelor, a contemporary
of my older brother Eugene, who later found work in the U.S. post office and
who, when I investigated a few years ago, still -- eighty years later -- lived
in his childhood home. Upstairs from the Petrantos dwelt the Meinekes, Charlie
and Tessie. He was a butcher; she was "at home." There was a rather sad ungainly
but harmless daughter just my age, Charlotte, who dropped out of school early.
I hope she a good life but I wonder. Next northward was another mystery house,
probably a rental; for a year it was occupied by the Tebbets family. There was
an attractive mid-twenties daughter whom my older brother and his peers admired
no end, and a son, Lee, whom twenty years later I encountered in Vermont where
he gave me an envelope of blue corn seeds (which I never planted). And then
came the Constantino household. The father was a shoemaker, I believe. There
were three children, Frankie, a terrific athlete; Regina, a beauty, and Carly,
who dyed his hair henna and moved to Greenwich Village. There were two or three
more houses at that end of the street, but I'm vague about them. Sorry, don't
remember; too far away. The name Ortner comes to mind. Mystery houses.

Even though I lived on the street for my entire childhood and until I left for
college, I never entered a single house, nor did any of the neighbors ever enter
ours. It wasn't that kind of neighborhood. Or perhaps we weren't that sort of
people.

Source: 2018/11/amnesiahighwall

Title: Amnesia on Film:  High Wall (1947)
Date: November 20, 2018

In High Wall (1947), an extremely noir-y noir, Stephen Kenet, played by an
unusually glamorless Robert Taylor, suffers from a fully credible traumatic
amnesia. Did he, or did he not kill his wife. He can't remember.

So far so good. Happens all the time in such films.

But he's cured of his affliction in a most unlikely, most unscientific  manner.
He's injected with "truth serum" --  sodium pentathol -- and what was once lost
is found. Such easy recovery of memory could ruin dozens of amnesia movies. 
Good thing the treatment never caught on.

The gimmick spoils an otherwise grainy, hard-edged film.

Here's Kenet (Taylor), and Ann Lorrison, played by Audrey Totter. They're good
as patient and doctor, but unpersuasive when they emerge as lovers in the last
scene.

Source: 2018/11/cousins

Title: Cousins
Date: November 21, 2018

Hey there, internet pilgrims, searchers, wanderers who might be googling their
own name or a relative's.  All of the following people are cousins of each
other, cousins of mine. If  you find yourself here, identify yourself on the
comments page, and I'll tell you how I think you are related. Hint: you're all
descended from Lebe Hessel (d.1910) and Tsina Voloshen (b.1854).

Talia Soglin, Oliver Soglin, Ella Pearlman-Chang, Lola Pearlman-Chang, Luke
Pearlman, Caleb Pearlman, Asher Pearlman, Hannah Kaplan, Josiah Kaplan, Leslie
Pearlman, Matthew Pearlman, Nancy Groce, Nora Groce, Susan Groce, Paul Pearlman,
Ruth Pearlman, Owen Pearlman, Clara Pearlman, Karen Hessel, Dana Hessel,
Alexander McCarthy-Hessel, Jane McCarthy Hessel, Deborah Hessel, Haley Roher,
Jenny Roher,  Michael Hessel, Victoria Hessel, Mark Hessel, Andrea Hessel,
Laurie Pearlstein, Jason Schoolsky, Rebecca Schoolsky, Allyson Schoolsky, Barry
Pearlstein, Mitchell Pearlstein, Hunter Pearlstein, Remi Pearlstein, Holly
Cooper, Alec Cooper, Elizabeth Cohen, Mateo Davis, Connor Davis, Christopher
Cohen, Jonathan Cohen, David Cohen, David Markson, Aubrey Peluso, Samuel
Markson, Zachary Markson, Nicholas Markson, Madeleine Markson, Wendy Markson,
Charlotte Riley, Joelle Riley, Zoe Riley, Samuel Riley, Steven Gross, Ellen
Gross, Edward Cohen, Terry Cohen, Joseph Cohen, Charles Cohen, Mahala Cohen,
Judith Cimochowski, Alexander Cimochowski, Erica Cimochowski, Alexander
Cimochowski, Lawrence Baizer, Judith Baizer, Sarah Baizer, Tessa Baizer, Barbara
Pearlman, Rachel Wells, Andrew Wells, Steven Pearlman, Samuel Pearlman, Maya
Terry, Nathaniel Pearlman, Benjamin Hessel Pearlman, Eve Pearlman, Nicholas
Cohen, Mollie Liliana Sand, Adaline Sand, Jay Sand, Marc Sand, Daniel Cohen,
Jonathan Cohen, Solomon Cohen, Emmanuelle Cohen, Abigail Cohen, Ella Cohen,
Phoebe Cohen, Hannah Cohen, Ayanna Gould, Aiden Gould, Cole Pearlman, Reese
Pearlman.

There will be many errors and many omissions here.  Tell me.

Source: 2018/11/nottinghillhardy

Title: Notting Hill (1990), Two on a Tower (1882)
Date: November 23, 2018

We watched Notting Hill, a cute 1999 "rom-com" or "date movie" with cute couple
Hugh Grant and Julia Roberts. (It's hard to believe that the film is almost
twenty years old. It's so slight and fluffy that I can't remember whether or
not I saw it last millennium, but frankly, it wouldn't make much difference one
way or the other.)  In Notting HIll, Julia Roberts plays a pricey celebrity
actress ($15,000,000 a film) who happens to wander into Hugh Grant's tiny
bookstore and -- a few cute scenes later -- into his tiny Notting Hill bedroom.
It's a slight, unconvincing fairy-tale of a film and I'm giving away no secrets
when I say that the cute apparently- mismatched couple not only overcome all
psychological obstacles and class anxieties in order to marry but that also, in
the cute coda scene, when she's lying in his lap on a bench in the park, she's
well along in her pregnancy. Ah love! Ah romance! Ah idealized domesticity! Ah
cuteness!

Cynic that I am, I'm curious whether she's crammed herself into his narrow
digs (and displaced his second-banana roommate) or whether she's purchased the
biggest finest mansion in the upscale Notting Hill neighborhood and moved the
new husband into it. And closed down the bookstore. The film is wise to sidestep
concerns of such dreary ordinariness.

Notting Hill is a rip-off and inversion of Pretty Woman (1990), in which Julia
Roberts was poor and Hugh Grant was Richard Gere, a mega-billionaire. Notting
Hill might just as easily have been called Pretty Man -- it's that close a
parallel. Only without the shopping.

And Notting Hill, though upscale, is no Rodeo Drive. It's a neighborhood that
has gone through a number of transformations. Once famous for its piggeries, by
the middle of the 19th century, it was on the way up. In 1862, when Thomas Hardy
left Dorchester and his Wessex homeland to apprentice himself as an architect,
he took up residence in Notting HIll's recently constructed Westbourne Park
Villas. And there in Notting Hill he wrote his first novel, never published and
now lost, called with the remarkably appropriate Hugh-and-Julia title of The
Poor Man and the Lady.

Lower class boy and upper class girl was a perennial theme in Hardy's novels. An
obsession, in fact. By coincidence, I'd just finished reading -- on the same day
as I watched Notting Hill -- one of Hardy's most thorough explorations of the
poor-rich theme -- his novel Two on a Tower (1882).

No idyllic pregnancy in the park in the Hardy universe.

In Two on a Tower, Lady Constantine falls in love with Swithin St. Cleeve, an
impoverished amateur astronomer, but Hardy strews their path with one obstacle
after another. For the Lady, a wastrel husband who is missing in deep dark
Africa, and who may or not be dead; an inadvertent pregnancy; a duped second
husband, this time a clergyman; for St. Cleeve, a badly-needed inheritance that
can only be claimed if he remains single, and an extended exile. For both of
them, misunderstandings, accidental damaging eavesdroppings, important letters
gone astray, etc. And finally, when it appears possible that the poor boy and
lady might find solace together, a sudden inexplicable spontaneous death.

Good thing that Thomas Hardy didn't write Notting Hill. Trust me, there would
have been no happy ending. Perhaps Hugh would been disfigured in the fire that
destroyed his bookstore and his livelihood, and Julia, repulsed, would have
returned to her abusive alcoholic boyfriend. But very likely something even more
arbitrary and cruel.

Source: 2018/11/canyonpassage

Title: Canyon Passage (1946)
Date: November 24, 2018

In our tour of classic western movies, we watched Canyon Passage (1946),
directed by Jacques Tourneur, who is famous for the noir masterpiece Out of the
Past (1947). Canyon Passage is a good substantial film and it's got everything a
frontier drama should have: a cabin raising, a saloon in which a poker game is
perpetually in progress, gold mines, muddy streets, Indians (unsympathetically
depicted as mere murderous savages), gun fights, bar brawls, lovely landscapes,
and Andy Devine.

At its emotional heart is a mighty curious three-way relationship between Dana
Andrews as Logan Stuart, an upstanding entrepreneur; Brian Donlevy as George
Camrose, a banker/gambler, and Susan Hayward as Susan Hayward. Hayward is
engaged to George but attracted to Logan. She doesn't seem to know what is made
obvious to us, that George is a compulsive gambler, a wastrel, an embezzler,
a serious flirt, and eventually a murderer. Why Hayward, or Lucy as she's
sometimes called, doesn't see him for what he is puzzles us. It's an even
greater mystery that Logan Stuart, who knows George's faults, remains loyal --
even, at one point, risking his life and imperiling his reputation to break his
friend out of prison.

The oddest scene is one in which George gives his fiancee Lucy a tepid kiss.
He turns to Logan and says, "Can you do better?" Logan takes the challenge
and kisses his friend's fiancee; he wins -- she clearly responds less to her
intended than to his friend. What are we to make of this?  It seems borderline
pervy. Is there a suggestion that the men are closer, more "friendly"  than the
conventions of the western film ordinarily allow?  Or are Logan and George more
than just good ol'  loyal buddies?

After George is killed, Logan and Lucy wind up together, but more for
convenience than passion, or so it seems to suspicious ol' me.

Source: 2018/12/mymitt

Title: My Mitt
Date: December 02, 2018

My most valuable possession, lifetime, was my baseball mitt. A fielder's glove,
not a catcher's or first baseman's. It was, I think, a Rawlings model, and it
was inscribed with the name "Monte Pearson." (Pearson had been a pitcher for the
Cleveland Indians.)  I remember many hours spent oiling it. I guarantee that it
was well cared for.

In the P. S. 217 neighborhood, to possess one's own baseball glove was a marker
of class. When we played, there were never enough gloves to go around, so when
our team came in to bat, those who had gloves would leave theirs on the field
for someone from the other team to use. Although I never articulated it at the
time, it felt downright prosperous to be a lender, not a borrower. I think a
good glove cost about $15.00 in those days, so it was no trivial expense.

When my brother Jonathan, who was three years younger than I, was presented with
his glove, he slept with it every night.  I recently asked him if he continued
to do so after he was married.  He says no, but....

I don't think that anyone who didn't grow up in the 40s and 50s in Brooklyn, in
the Jackie Robinson era, can appreciate the importance of baseball to us.

I've tried to think of another possession that ever meant as much to me -- a
particular book or an automobile, for instance -- but nothing compares. Not even
slightly.

Source: 2018/12/amnesia-on-film-crack-up-1946

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Crack-up (1946)
Date: December 04, 2018

Ho-hum. Another day, another amnesia movie.

Crack-up offers still another variant on this most malleable of diseases:
amnesia that is chemically-induced.

George Steele (played by too-old-for-the-part Pat O'Brien) presents a danger to
a doctor-thief played by reliable Ray Collins. To discredit  him, Steele is
kidnapped and injected with "narcosynthesis" which causes him lose his memory
and act erratically. Too many silly plot complications and a couple of murders
follow, but eventually a second injection brings Steele round.

I'm not aware of another case of chemically-induced amnesia in film, but I know
that there is such a thing in medicine. Propofol and scopolamine are frequently
mentioned and I believe that even the common sleeping pill, Ambien, may have
amnesiac properties. So there's some limited scientific underpinning for Crack-
up's apparently fantastic premise.

In noir, amnesia is as common as the common cold. In the 40s and 50s, a guy
couldn't walk down a louche shadowy city street or take a dame out dancing to
 a night spot without encountering half a dozen cases. It was a regular plague.

Source: 2018/12/billygraham1957

Title: Billy Graham and Me, 1957
Date: December 04, 2018

In 1957 (I was 18 and in my second year in college), the reverend doctor Billy
Graham led the largest revival meeting in history -- an average attendance,
in the old-old Madison Square Garden, of eighteen thousand people a night
for three months. What was his message?  It was half jingo, half Christian
fundamentalism. "Let us tell the world that Americans believe in God, that we
are morally and spiritually strong as well as militarily and economically.
Let us tell the world that we are united and ready to march under the banner
of Almighty God" -- not a sentiment that would have been dear to my heart. No
Almighty God in my upbringing or anywhere in my brain.

Graham was a fervent anti-Communist, but of a sort that left me baffled: "My own
theory about Communism," he proclaimed, "is that it is master-minded by Satan.
I think there is no other explanation for the tremendous gains of Communism
in which they seem to outwit us at every turn, unless they have supernatural
power and wisdom and intelligence given to them."  Let me try two non-Satanic
explanations for apparent Communist success: 1) "They" didn't outwit us;
 in fact, they were dumber than us, overplayed their hand, and collapsed.
2) European and American imperialism had left a mess in the "underdeveloped
countries" that was ripe for exploitation.

How was a secular partially-educated young fellow supposed to understand such a
paranoid, irrational  analysis of world politics?

With mockery, I'm afraid. Sometime in the middle of the summer of 1957, along
with a bunch of wise-ass PS 217 cronies, I took a break from my Sears, Roebuck
warehouse job and took the subway to 49th Street to take a gander and a listen
to the Crusade for Christ (it was free). What do I remember?  A chorus
(probably led by George Beverly Shea but I can't swear to it), bright lights, a
cheering, milling crowd. I remember that Billy spoke, but I have no recollection
of what he said, though the bronze gong of a voice resounded through the hall.
Did he tell us of the five ways that Americans could most effectively combat
Communism? By "old-fashioned Americanism" -- whatever that was, by "conservative
and evangelical Christianity," by prayer, by "spiritual revival," and by
"personal Christian experience." All five of which sound pretty much the same to
me. And remote from my experience or desires.

Needless to say, I wasn't his most sympathetic or susceptible auditor.

I wonder if he touched on another of his favorite topics that night: that "a
woman commits sin when she deliberately dresses in such a way as to entice a
man"; "that a wife "should keep herself attractive and give her husband a big
kiss when he comes home from the office instead of yelling at him from the
kitchen."

Except for the spectacle, it's all vague in my mind. I do remember, though, that
when leaving that Garden I accidentally and momentarily found myself on the line
of people who had made a "decision for Christ" and were heading to the podium.
That was scary. I beat a quick retreat.

I wonder how many other members of the audience were rubberneckers like me.

I'm reminded now of the great old gospel song by the Carter Family, "Something
Got a Hold of Me."  It's a parable that tells the story of a man who goes to a
revival meeting to scoff. "I says I'll go down, take a look at the crowd/  It's
just the weak-minded I feel."  But then there's a revelation: "They sing and
shout and they all clasp their hands/ And they all got down on their knees./
When the fire fell from heaven it fell upon me,/ And then I fell to the floor."
Because

Something's got a hold of me.

Yes, something's got a hold of me.

I have a spirit I'll never forget

That something's got a hold of me.Well, nothing got a hold of me. No fire from
heaven, no road to Damascus revelation. If anything, I was confirmed in my
scoffery and atheism.

What did I learn? Not much. At the most, only that if the people who inhabit
this country, my fellow Americans, are incomprehensible to me, then it is
equally likely that I am incomprehensible to them.

And frankly, the mysteries that I encountered in Madison Square Garden in 1957
are, sixty years later, still mysterious to this day. Perhaps even more so.

Source: 2018/12/539e9

Title: Where I Lived (I)
Date: December 10, 2018

From my birth in 1939 until I left for college in 1956, I lived at 539 East 9
Street in the Flatbush (now gentrified to "Kensington") section of Brooklyn.
539 was a three-story, three-family wood-frame Victorian, which my parents
had acquired in 1937 for $4500 -- a depression-era fire-sale price financed
by my generous "maiden aunt" Mollie. The house was larger and more splendid,
I believe, than my father's modest income would otherwise have justified. At
first we lived on the first floor and rented floors two and three. Much later,
substantially more prosperous, we rented the first floor apartment and lived
on the second and third floors in nine spacious rooms, only a couple of which
mattered to me.

Most mysterious was my parents'  bedroom, which was entirely off limits to me
and to my brothers Eugene and Jonathan. A forbidden zone. Absolutely taboo. I
remember that one time I played some sort of racing or hiding game with one of
my brothers and ventured into the room and -- horror of horrors  -- rumpled my
parents' neat bedspread (the bed was always carefully made). It was as if I had
robbed a bank or bitten Miss Bildersee, our formidable PS 217 principal. I was
severely rebuked and made to swear that I would never commit such an outrageous
transgression again. An overreaction by my parents, I knew even then.

Nevertheless, I used to sneak into the room when the parents were absent. In one
corner hung a picture of my deceased infant sister Susan. Placed on the floor
under the picture, was a child-size chair of wood and rush which was venerated
even more than the connubial bed. A shrine. I'm sure that the taboo against
entering the room was linked to the shrine. Yet to me, the parents' bedroom was
not so much holy as it was weird and strange.

After my mother died in 1978 my father moved downstairs, abandoning shrine, bed
and bedroom. When I visited as an adult, my wife and I would sometimes sleep in
what had formerly been the parents' bed. That was mighty creepy and inhibiting.

Equally important to me but much more pleasant was my father's small but
intensely cultivated backyard garden. He grew roses -- hybrid teas, mostly but
also a floriferous "Blaze" climber. An apple tree, not very prolific, a Bartlett
pear, and a peach tree that was damaged by the hurricane of 1946 and finished
off by borers. There was also a patch of perennial sweet peas, a weigela with
picotee  leaves, and a fragrant mock orange. But the garden was dominated by
Dad's  perfectly tended roses.

In 1948 I was allotted a square foot of space in which I planted a single
pumpkin seed. The plant transgressed its assigned borders --  which amused
me no end -- and the single pumpkin that it produced was prizeworthy huge. In
subsequent years, I was allowed room to plant and study the habits of old-
fashioned annuals: snapdragons, marigolds, zinnias. I saved their seeds over the
winter. I now grow those same plants in their modern, much-improved versions.
But I don't dare to try roses; that will always be Dad's domain.

I think my life would have been very different without the garden.

On the whole, 539 was very good to us. After my father died, it was torn down
and replaced with an undistinguished apartment house rented by families of
Hasids. My very secular father would have been appalled.

Here's a picture of 539 as it appeared in 1940.  The kid's toy in front of the
house probably belonged to my older brother.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-ii

Title: Where I Lived (II)
Date: December 12, 2018

Between 1956 and 1961, I lived in five different places in Ithaca, New York:
four bad, one good.

The first was a cinder-block dormitory room, less a home than a cell, which I
shared with a young guy from Virginia who was a not only a smoker but a classic
Southern bigot of a type that's pretty much extinct nowadays. No doubt he's
changed and matured, but our paths have not crossed these last sixty years.
We were both very young, but I was much too young. Childish, when I'm honest
with myself. The following year -- 1957-58 -- I lived in a basement apartment
in a building that was known locally as the "Indian Embassy" because the upper
three floors were all inhabited by men (no women, not a trace of them) from the
subcontinent. The odor of garam masala and turmeric, much more exotic then than
now, regularly drifted into my apartment. I remember that my kitchen, which I
rarely used, was unheated and that it was not unusual to find in midwinter a pot
or pan of water, left in the sink, frozen into a block of ice. If the city of
Ithaca had any zoning laws, and enforced them, the owner of my apartment, Miss
Emily, would have been exiled to Siberia. In my third year in Ithaca I lived in
still another beaten-down house on College Avenue. It was also unfit for adult
habitation but had a functioning kitchen -- it's there that I learned to cook
my own food. In my senior year, I lived in a real apartment -- four bedrooms,
three roommates, including one who has remained a lifelong friend. I should
have noticed, but I didn't, that the fourth floor of an ancient building made
entirely of wood, with no fire escape, was dangerous. It was a firetrap and
although I survived, the building didn't, and was demolished a few years after I
graduated -- and left the southern tier for good.

My favorite residence during the Ithaca years came during the summer of 1961,
when, fleeing graduate school in Cambridge and still attached to Ithaca, we (my
bride and I) sublet a small (very small house -- essentially a single room that
served as both living room and bedroom) -- at 148 Snyder Hill Road. It was my
first experience of living in "the country." There was a cow next door! When I
returned to Ithaca in 1992 for my daughter's graduation from Cornell, my house
had disappeared and the fields were filled with acres of rich suburban homes --
large lots, big lawns, clean, neat and prosperous.

Our 1961 house, though not more than a tumbledown cabin, gave us a good summer
and a good memory.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-iii

Title: Where I Lived (III)
Date: December 12, 2018

Some childhood summer residences.

1944: my mother had surgery (I was never informed what sort -- such things were
kept secret in those days -- but I suspect a hysterectomy) and I was sent to
live with my grandmother Sonia, who rented or owned a house near Monticello, New
York. It was a plain wood-shingled house and I believe that Sonia used it as
an informal hotel or b&b. I don't remember much at all except that she tied a
long string to a light bulb over my bed and instructed me to pull it if I needed
help during the night. Help? Though only 5, I considered myself quite self-
sufficient.

1945: my parents rented a summer home on Glen Lake in the Catskills. It was a
house without indoor plumbing. I have a vivid memory of the outhouse, which
frightened me because you could look into the hole and see your and your
parents' deposits. I remember with more pleasure the pump in the kitchen through
which we drew our water. Sometimes I was allowed to prime the pump by pouring
a glass of water down its mouth. In August, the war ended and people who owned
motor boats were zooming around the lake, shouting. I asked my father what was
going on and he said, "the war is over."

1947, 1948, 1949: the best part of my childhood. Three long idyllic summers on
Makamah Beach near Northport, N.Y. I have written about this elsewhere.

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-iv

Title: Where I Lived (IV)
Date: December 13, 2018

378 Broadway in Cambridge, Massachusetts from 1960 to early in 1962. It was a two-family frame house in which the second floor had been turned into two apartments. We were in one of them, a bedroom, a living room with a kitchen and a detached bathroom down the hall. Perfectly fine for a newlywed graduate student. The newlywed neighbors, Adi and Rutty, are still friends; their daughter, Zerlina, born in April of 1961, was the first child I held in my arms (as an adult). But there was a conflict with the puritanical small-town Irish Catholic landlady because we had allowed a friend to stay in the apartment while we were away "and he brought a woman in." So we moved to a university-owned apartment house on Irving Street, between Cambridge and Kirkland, despite the fact that it raised our rent from $90 a month to $105. We bought a second or third or fourth hand bed for $25 and a rug for $10. It was a serviceable apartment that seemed like luxury after the decrepit Ithaca digs. We stayed until the summer of 1965 when we lit out for Manhattan.

Source: 2018/12/a

Title: Horrors of Hellenism
Date: December 17, 2018

I've been reading about the death of Alexander at the beginning of the
Hellenistic period. It's all new to me, and much of it is fascinating,
especially about cultural matters, but there's also page after page of
difficult-to-retain accounts of warfare and of particular battles. Here's an
example of the kind of material that takes up three-quarters or perhaps even 80%
of the book.

"The two armies faced each other quite conventionally, with the phalanx composed
mostly of Lysimachus' and Cassander's troops confronting Antigonus'  phalanx.
On their right, Seleucus and Lysimachus stationed a vast mass of Seleucus'
 light infantry; on the left was their heavy cavalry commanded by Seleucus'
son Antiochus.  Confronting Antiochus was Demetrius in command of Antigonus'
 heavy cavalry. As the battle commenced, Demetrius and his cavalry charged
Antiochus and drove the enemy cavalry off. Demetrius proceeded to commit the
worst blunder a cavalry leader can commit: he over-pursued, leaving the main
battle well behind, instead of turning to attack the enemy infantry from behind.
As soon as Demetrius had disappeared in the distance, Seleucus brought forward
four hundred war elephants and placed them as a screen between Demetrius and his
path back to the battle. Meanwhile Lysimachus' phalanx came to grips with that
of Antigonus, and Seleucus led his light cavalry in an outflanking maneuver to
attack Antigonus' infantry from behind...."  Etc.

Exactly what is at stake in this war? The historian (Richard Billows, Before and
After Alexander [New York, 2018]) leaves us rather in doubt. He puts no emphasis
on the usual economic or ideological issues; the struggle seems to be entirely
about personalities. Will the kingdom be ruled by Lysimachus or Demetrius, by
Antiochus or Antigonus?  It doesn't seem to matter, either to me or to the
historian.

But what of the soldiers?  Whether on one side or the other, they're likely to
be impaled by the dreaded Macedonian larissa, trampled by horses, or squished by
elephants. For what purpose?

I think that at one point in my life I might have been intrigued by these
dynastic struggles, but now, what I feel most strongly is sympathy for the
ordinary soldier and sorrow for the stupidity of my species.

Source: 2018/12/written-in-

Title: Written in 2009 and Republished Today, as Relevant Now as Then:  As Time Goes By
Date: December 18, 2018

Two nights ago [this would be October of 2009, of course], I watched the
Phillies trounce the Dodgers, 11-0. What a colossal drubbing! HDTV let me
appreciate Cliff Lee's southpaw masterpiece in exquisite detail. But for me
the most memorable moment of the evening wasn't Lee's artistry or 270-pound
Ryan Howard's mad-dash triple to right. Instead, it was the discovery that
the Phillies'  lanky, awkward-but-effective scraggly-bearded right fielder
Jayson Werth sports a noteworthy baseball pedigree. His grandfather was Ducky
Schofield, a good-field no-hit infielder from the 1950s -- from the days,
that is, of my golden youth. Holy jumping jiminy! I saw this young feller's
grandpappy play!

Youch!  More evidence, as if more were needed, of my long-in-the-toothedness.

Why should I be surprised?  I went to my first baseball game in 1946 (at Ebbets
Field -- Cardinals 3, Dodgers 1).  Before there was TV. I've been attending
to the game for 63 years. Close to three generations.  [Nine more years have
passed since I first wrote this;  so 72 years now.]

I've grown accustomed to father-son combos. Bobby and Barry; the Griffeys (who
once played together in the same outfield); Felipe and Moises; huge Cecil
Fielder and his even more enormous son, Prince; the Hundleys, the Stottlemyres,
and many, many others. Sometimes while I'm watching a game I lose track of time.
Eric Young, Jr. looks and runs so exactly like his father that it's easy to
fall into flashback mode. I remember a game in which Pedro Borbon came in to
relieve. Holy moly, I said to myself -- he's a right-handed pitcher. Why the
heck is he throwing with his left hand?  Then after a few seconds of complete
bafflement it came to me: Pedro Borbon, Jr. I had simply lost twenty-five years
-- a phenomenon to which your "mature" brain is occasionally and increasingly
prone.

Jayson Werth isn't even the sole grandson. Aaron Boone's father was the catcher
(and manager) Bob Boone and his grandfather was the Cleveland infielder Ray
Boone, whom I also saw play, but only on the TV. And then there's the Bell
family: grandsons David and Mike, father Buddy, and grandfather Gus, a big
hitter with Cincinnati during the Ducky Schofield years.

So here's the question. Will I hang around long enough to watch the great-
grandsons play? Is Jayson Werth fertile?  Does he have any kids?  Are there
any budding Boones or baby Bells waiting in the wings?

Source: 2018/12/where-i-lived-v

Title: Where I Lived (V)
Date: December 23, 2018

Source: 2018/12/broken-arrow-1

Title: Debra Paget Then and Now  -- Broken Arrow (1950)
Date: December 25, 2018

In 1951, when Broken Arrow hit the Leader Theater on Coney Island Avenue, I
was just an ungrown twelve-year-old. I wasn't an assiduous movie-goer because
weekends were for basketball and softball, but when I did invest my 14 cents
in a matinee, it was for a Western  -- not for a soppy musical or scary crime
film. Last night, for the first time in 67 years, I watched Broken Arrow again.
I imagined that I would remember it clearly.

Hold on, let me be scrupulously honest here. I didn't pretend that I would
remember the entirety of the film, not even the plot. I knew only that
Sanseearah, the Indian Maiden "Morningstar" as portrayed by Debra Paget, was
incised into the deep fabric of my brain. She, Debra that is, might have been my
greatest crush or first true love. And why shouldn't she have been? Just direct
your admiring gaze to the still above. Miss Paget was young, lovely, exotic as
all get out, and yielding. I admit with chagrin that I didn't fully understand
what got me so het up about her in 1951, but het up I was.

But all is changed, now, almost three generations later. What was "hot" and
romantic then seems more than a little creepy now. Debra Paget (or DebraLee
Griffin, of Denver, Colorado) was only sixteen years old when the film was
shot. Sixteen! Moreover, she plays younger. In fact, the film devotes several
long scenes to Morningstar's  puberty rites -- so perhaps she's imagined to be
thirteen. (The head dress that she wears in the picture below as well as the
rest of the ceremony, was, I am sure, what is now called "fakelore.")

Look at her. The poor dear is barely out of childhood. Mr. Stewart (James
Stewart, her graying white mountain-man suitor) was forty-two years old, and
looks every bit of it. How can we, how did we, not notice the age difference?
Why is he attracted by a child?  I tried hard to suspend disbelief, but my
powers of suspension are not infinite. The film, I'm sorry to say, teeters into
unsavory child-molesting territory.

My pre-adolescent fascination with the film has now been altered, dampened and
dispatched.

It's a shame, too, because Broken Arrow was a self-consciously progressive
film in which the Apaches were figured not as brutal savages but as human
beings. It deserves high praise for its groundbreaking stance. The film was
written by the leftist Albert Maltz, of Brooklyn, New York, who was one of the
Hollywood Ten, and who, on the day I saw Broken Arrow for the first time, was
in jail serving a one-year sentence for refusing to cooperate with the runaway
House Un-American Activities Committee.

I therefore wish that the film hadn't been compromised by the March-October love
affair. And that Albert Maltz hadn't side-stepped the real difficulties of an
interracial marriage in the 1880s by allowing Dear Debra to be murdered.

And while I'm wishing, I wish also that the authorities at Twentieth-Century
Fox hadn't insisted that the two most important Apache roles be played not
by Apaches but by whites. Debra Paget is the one lead, while Cochise, the
Apache chief, was played in redface by Jeff Chandler, formerly Ira Grossel, a
graduate of Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn, New York. It's not as though
more appropriate actors weren't available. In fact, the character of Geronimo,
who has one brief speech, was played by an uncredited Jay Silverheels, an
accomplished actor of Cayuga and Mohawk heritage.

But would we, in 1951, have been able to empathize with real Apaches, genuine
Apaches, rather than with familiar faces in heavy makeup? Or would such Indians
have been, even for liberals, too "other," too foreign?

Source: 2019/01/tomhorn

Title: Our Local Gunslinger:  Tom Horn
Date: January 01, 2019

Although he has been mythologized, he was real. Here he is in the photographic
flesh, perhaps weaving the rope by which he was famously hanged.

And here's the movie version: Steve McQueen, slightly more glamorous.

My earlier self, the Brooklyn 'yoot', would have been happy to know that I now
live only a few feet away from the mythical gunslinger.

Source: 2018/12/the-precious-gift-of-atheism

Title: The Precious Gift of Atheism
Date: January 04, 2019

Although my parents were pure and perfect atheists, they did not advertise their
atheism or disparage the religions of others -- at least not in my hearing.
They were exactly the opposite of what is sometimes called "militant atheists."
To be militant would have been to give religion too much regard, too much
importance -- and they wouldn't have bothered. To the best of my recollection,
they were utterly indifferent. In our house, it was as if theology and worship
had never been invented, practiced, or pondered. While my parents didn't enforce
or evangelize their views upon their children, their unconcern, their lack
of interest, was eloquence enough. Of course my brothers and I grew up to be
atheists, and have remained so. Peaceful and positive atheists.

My parents were both readers. Every Tuesday my mother trundled over to the
McDonald Avenue branch of the Brooklyn Public Library and trucked home a
shopping basket full of books. There were volumes of all kinds -- mostly fiction
and mysteries for my mother and, for my curiosity-driven father, politics, law,
science, history, art, and of course, gardening. But I never saw a book on
religion. Not a one. In their bookshelves at home, I remember only one volume
that might have touched on the subject. It was a collection of essays by the
Freethinker Robert Ingersoll.

I was young boy, perhaps 10 or 11, when I overheard some friend or acquaintance
of my mother say something to her about prayer, or putting faith in the lord,
or some such platitude. She waited politely until the person departed and
then turned to me and murmured, quietly, "Well, I suppose some people need a
crutch."  I think that's the sum of all I ever heard from her on the subject of
religion. One might think that the dismissive term "crutch" hinted at disdain
or superiority (they need crutches but we don't) but it was not so. My mother's
observation was made without prejudice or judgment.

Where other households might have worshiped or wondered or discussed, for us
there was absolutely nothing. Religious education?  None, not a drop. In our
home, there was no attendance at temple, mosque or tabernacle, no religious
ceremonies, and not even a Bible. I can remember my father and me dribbling
our basketball to the schoolyard to shoot some hoops. When we passed the local
orthodox synagogue, my father said, "Bingo.They play bingo in there." But he was
not condemning the religion. It was the gambling. He disapproved of gambling
(even Bingo) and the idea that a religious institution would allow gambling
every Tuesday night offended him deeply.

When I was a questioning adolescent, out of a spirit of curiosity and perhaps
rebellion, I liberated a bible from our local public library and secreted it
under my treasured collection of Mad magazines. While others of my age cohort
were squinting at smuggled Playboys or at The Amboy Dukes under the blankets by
flashlight, I was acquainting myself with the holy scriptures. In my ignorance,
I thought of the bible as a forbidden book, one which my parents would have
disapproved. But I was wrong. They wouldn't have noticed; they wouldn't have
cared. Looking back, I'm sure that they knew about my thirst for forbidden
knowledge and probably enjoyed a giggle at my expense. Many years later, when
my father was a widower, I gave him a copy of an annotated, edited Bible that I
used as a textbook in one of my literature courses. Did he disapprove?  Not at
all. He said, "It's interesting."  But of course he read it not as an inspired
text but as history and as fiction.

To have been raised in such a household was my good fortune. My atheism was an
unearned gift. I got it free, and I'm perpetually grateful. Many of my friends,
growing up in religious families, have struggled to achieve atheism -- often
with painful inner conflicts and anger and resentments. I admire them for the
strength to break free -- especially those that live with irreparable breaches
to the family. I endured no such struggle.

Philosophically speaking, it's been an easy life. There's a clarity about
atheism. It's based in reality, not (dare I say what my parents wouldn't!)
in wish and myth and superstition. Atheists, I think, are afforded a purer
appreciation of human achievement and a clearer, less conflicted understanding
of health, disease, and death. Reason and the evidence of the senses may not
always lead to perfect understanding, but they're the best tools that we have,
and we must cherish them.

Source: 2019/01/whereilived1051-10th

Title: Where I Lived VII
Date: January 09, 2019

From 1973 until 2009, this was the place. My longest stay in one location and
the childhood home of my children. The house had good bones, as they say, when
we arrived and was well worth the $46,500 that we paid for it. But the innards
had been remodeled into oblivion. Green shag carpet covering the lovely oak
floors; slick craftsman woodwork covered with white paint; stained-glass window
replaced and disfigured with a beaded curtain in the style of a New Orleans
whorehouse; flocked wall paper; some sort of plastic substance glued onto the
pine kitchen floor; and a kitchen untouched since 1917 and hopelessly out of
date. It took years to get it into shape, but by the time we left, it was
looking mighty fine. I was sad to leave but the time had come to move on.

I still miss the colorful spring garden, stocked with peonies both herbaceous
and tree, day lilies, irises, a lovely weigela, and a wall of clematis.

Source: 2019/01/akgsibs

Title: For My Grandchildren:  Your Great Grandmother and her Siblings
Date: January 10, 2019

Dear Talia, Oliver, Ella, Lola, Luke, Caleb, and Asher:

Here's a picture of your great grandmother, Anne Krull Goss (1912-2009) with her
siblings.

Anne is the pretty young blonde woman, second from the left. She's the oldest.

The picture was taken during the World War II years, '42 or '43. On great
grandma's right is her brother Jack, whose tank was hit by cannon fire. He
was the only survivor of his crew and spent many months recuperating in an
army hospital. On her left is Hy, who was exempted from service, if I remember
correctly, because his business was declared an essential industry. On Hy's
left is your great-great aunt Frieda. Frieda's fiance (a soldier who was named
Aubrey, but I don't know anything else about him) was killed in Europe. On
Frieda's left is Mendy, the youngest, who was a bombardier on a B-24.

The war disrupted many lives, not only those who served but those who stayed at
home.

I've been lucky -- too young for Korea and too old for Vietnam. I hope you are
similarly lucky.  Better than that --  I hope these endless wars in which
we're engaged (in Afghanistan and Syria right now) come to an end.

Grandma Anne contributed 1/8 of your genetic inheritance. The people depicted
here might seem to come from the remote past, but be aware that they're in you,
part of you.

Source: 2019/01/215w91

Title: Where I Lived (VI)
Date: January 12, 2019

From 1965 to 1969, from my 26th to 30th year, I lived at 215 West 91 Street on
the Upper West Side of Manhattan, first in a 4 room apartment on the 6th floor
and later in a 5 room apartment on the 5th floor. Two babies came home to this
place.

Source: 2019/01/extinctions

Title: Missing Megafauna
Date: January 12, 2019

Many years ago, sometime during the previous millennium, I was taken to an
African game park -- elephants, rhinoceroses, giraffes, and lions (the hippos
were AWOL). It was astonishing to see these huge beasts. I didn't realize at
the time that it was semi-miraculous that these creatures had survived to our
day, even in a de facto zoo, when so many other massive animals had recently
gone extinct. When homo sapiens arrived on the scene, say 50,000 years ago,
there were many animals that would have made a zoo park several orders of
magnitude more remarkable that the one I visited. Why did these beasts go
extinct?  Disease, habitat change, and competition are likely culprits but it's
hard to deny that our predatory ancestors must take some of the blame.

Yes, the game park had lions, but it would have been infinitely more exciting if
it housed not only the African lion, but the European lion which was half again
as large and which survived lately enough to be well known to the Greeks.

Other big cats were also missing: the famous saber tooth, everyone's nightmare,
as well as the American false cheetah, a cheetah-like cougar weighing 190
formidable pounds. I would also have liked to see the thylacine, the so-called
"marsupial lion" or sometimes "Tasmanian tiger" which survived until 1936, late
enough to be photographed.

I would also have liked to see a cackle of European hyenas. Even more, the two-
ton short-faced Bear, with whom our paleolithic ancestors competed, which was
three times the size of a modern polar bear. The equally large ground sloth,
even the bones of which are impressive.

And the sloth lemur, the size of a big male gorilla. The Irish deer, as big as a
moose, with an outsized, out-of-proportion rack. Then there were the elephant-
like animals: the Columbian mammoth of the American southwest, smaller than its
modern African cousin, but with astonishingly curved tusks. The wooly mammoth,
surviving until just 3700 years ago on Wrangel Island off the Siberian coast.
The straight-tusked elephant, two or three times the size of modern African
elephant. The North American mammoths. And also Cuvier's gompothere, which looks
like an elephant but isn't one, but which was seven feet tall at the shoulder
and which lasted until about 14,000 years ago:

And along with them, the morningstar-tailed glyptodon, a five thousand pound
armadillo:

I would have loved to cast my eye on the diprotodont, the largest known
marsupial, which weighed in at three tons and lived until 45,000 years ago

The wooly rhinoceros, as large as a diprotodont. The sivathere, an odd-looking
 giraffid. The tree kangaroo. The short-faced kangaroo, three times the size of
any living kangaroo.

And right there in Vermont, rustling and stomping in the forest, were the stag
moose and Jefferson's ground sloth and the long-nosed peccary and Harlan's musk
ox and the Vero tapir and the giant beaver, all recently gone. (You wouldn't
have wanted to come face-to-face with a giant beaver. Or swim in its pond, if
it made ponds. You'd be better off listening to it slapping its tail in a game
 park.)

And then there were some true avian oddities worth taking a gander at: the
flightless moas of New Zealand, the female at 440 pounds, two-and-half times the
size of the male. The cursorial owl, a three-foot tall flightless owl, which
pursued its prey afoot. Haast's eagle, with a wingspread of seven and a half
feet. The five hundred pound Elephant Bird, which survived in Madagascar until
a thousand years ago.

And then the tarpan, the warrah, the toxodon. Strangest of all, macrauchenia,
a three-toed ungulate not closely related to anything alive today, which looked
something like a humpless camel with a droopy snout and which was around until
about 10,000 years ago.

It would have been quite a show if these animals had survived. Well worth the
price of admission.

Source: 2019/01/where-i-live-now

Title: Where I Live:  Now
Date: January 14, 2019

1655 Walnut Street, Boulder, Colorado. On the second floor, just to the left (as you look from the street) of the main entrance. It's not a handsome building, in my opinion, but the condos are clean and comfortable and new. I've been here since 2009 and plan to stay. Going to go out feet first, as the cliche would have it. There's ample but not too much room and lots of sun (my living room windows are south-facing) and convenience. We're here more than half the year -- the rest of the time in Vermont (almost 5 months) and New Orleans (one month during the winter). We're one block off the semi-famous Boulder Mall, with all sorts of foody restaurants that we don't patronize as well as coffee shops and marijuana outlets. There's also an outdoor gear shop every few feet. Things could be worse.

Source: 2019/01/durocher

Title: Durocher 1947
Date: January 25, 2019

In 1975, Leo Durocher wrote an as-told-to autobiography called Nice Guys Finish
Last. I read every word of it, but I got to tell you, it's not a good book.
It's a piece of self-justifying pro-Durocher propaganda. It's argumentative,
hyperbolic, unreliable. Durocher was an irascible man: he got into fights
with sportswriters, players, umpires, owners, coaches, wives -- everyone he
encountered. In every single case, he was absolutely blameless and they were
absolutely wrong. The gambling that got him suspended for a year? -- why, it
never happened.

Durocher doesn't give it the emphasis it deserves, but he had, by accident, a
place in the story. Durocher was manager of the Dodgers when Branch Rickey hired
Jackie Robinson. It was a watershed moment, a supremely important step in the
civil rights movement, and the beginning of a major transformation of not just
baseball, or sports, but of the nation and the world.

Durocher played his part, and he's proud of it, but I can't help feeling that
he missed his moment. His vision was so narrow, so constricted, so unaware. I
suppose he should be commended for doing the right thing, but as far as I can
tell, he did it for trivial reasons and did not have a glimmer of understanding
of either oppression and injustice on the one hand, or equality and freedom on
the other.

When some Dodgers proposed to petition Rickey not to sign Robinson, Durocher
called a team meeting. Here's what he says that he said to them:

"I hear some of you fellows don't want to play with Robinson and that you have
 a petition drawn up that you are going to sign. Well boys, you know what you
can do with that petition. You can wipe your ass with it. Mr. Rickey is on his
way down here and all you have to do is tell him about it. I'm sure he'll be
happy to make other arrangements for you. I hear Dixie Walker is going to send
Mr. Rickey a letter asking to be traded. Just hand him the letter, Dixie, and
your'e gone. Gone. If this fellow is good enough to play on this ball club --
and from what I've seen and heard, he is -- he is going to play on this ball
club and he is going to play for me. I'm the manager of this ball club and I'm
interested in one thing. Winning. I'll play an elephant if he can do the job,
and to make room for him I'll send my own brother home. So make up your mind to
it. This fellow is a real great ballplayer. He's going to win pennants for us.
He's going to put money in your pockets and money in mine. And here's something
else to think about when you put your head back on the pillow. From everything
I hear, he's only the first. Only the first, boys. There's many more coming
right behind him and they have the talent and they're gonna come to play. These
fellows are hungry. They're good athletes and there's nowhere else they can
make this kind of money. They're going to come, boys, and they're going to come
scratching and diving. Unless you fellows look out and wake up, they're going to
run you right out of the ball park. So I don't want to see your petition and I
don't want to hear anything more about it. The meeting is over. Go back to bed."

To me, his speech, though apparently effective, is trivial -- an opportunity
wasted. He opposed the petition for three reasons: one, it defied authority
(his and Rickey's); two, Robinson is going to help us win and therefore make us
money, and three, there are "others" on the way, who also want to make money, so
get out of the way.

The idea that Jack Roosevelt Robinson and others of his hue should be allowed
to participate out of simple fairness and equity did not occur to him. Slavery,
racism, segregation, justice, equal opportunity -- not part of his thinking.
Durocher's awareness of his place in history -- zero. What a disappointment!

Source: 2019/01/wisdom

Title: Wisdom
Date: January 25, 2019

I've reached the age when, neuroscience claims, the "wisdom centers" of the
brain (the anterior cingulate and ventromedial prefrontal cortices) are supposed
to leap into action. Do they? Tell truth, I don't know. Have I, without
awareness or drama, metamorphosed from a jejune larva, dull as dishwater, into
a butterfly of wisdom? When did it happen? At this moment or writing, I confess
that I feel less wise than tired.

Nevertheless, let me offer, with maximum diffidence, a few homemade aphorisms
and sententiae. Whether they amount to wisdom, and whether they do credit to my
anterior or prefrontal lobes, my loyal readers will have to decide.

A) "Nothing ever happens until it happens." This proverb is slightly gnomic, so
let me gloss. If you assume that just because you've carefully planned your trip
to Tahiti or your visit to the new restaurant or even your outing to the local
barbershop that it's going to happen, you might be in for disappointment. Wait
until you're there before you get excited. There's many a slip twixt the cup and
the lip. Rejoice appropriately -- when it's time. By doing so, you avoid elation
deflation.

B) "No one knows what's going on between two people, even if you're one of
them."  I think this proverb is eminently self-explanatory. It applies mostly
to marriage but equally so to all dyadic relationships. Even between you and
your dog.

C)  "The only people who idealize the past are those that know nothing about
it."  Slavery, plague, torture, injustice, famine, rapine, brutality, poverty,
starvation. Etc.

D) "You're immortal until the day you die." Of course you are and don't let the
nay-sayers and "realists" bother you.

E)  "Religion: my Prince of Peace can beat up your Prince of Peace." Tribalism
sucks.

F)  "Enough is as good as a feast, and often better." Figurative meaning: a
modest sufficiency is all that is needed for a happy life. Literal meaning: one
hamburger (or half a hamburger) lies more easily on the stomach than two or
three. And hold the fries.

G)  "The secret of life is to turn routines into rituals."  Self-explanatory,
I think. Make a fuss about that glass of wine at four o'clock. Savor it.

H)  "The longer something has been believed by mankind, the less likely it is
to be true."  See C above.

Source: 2019/01/a-cortelyou-road-memory

Title: An Unpleasant Cortelyou Road Memory
Date: January 27, 2019

Let's say I was thirteen, so this event would have occurred on or our about
1952. I had brought my Raleigh 3-speed to the Cortelyou Road bicycle repair shop
which was between East 13th and East 14th. The shop was run by a small, fair,
heavily-accented German man who was perhaps 50 years old. He was assisted by his
father, an older and smaller, wizened, bald man who must have been in his 80s.
Mr. Hart and Mr. Hart.The older Mr. Hart, whom in my adolescent wisdom I thought
of as a gnome, was working on my bike -- replacing an inner tube or adjusting
the gears (which were fragile and frequently busted). A group of three middle-
aged women gathered on the sidewalk in front of the shop, chatting. Mr. Hart the
elder, the gnome, didn't like it. He looked up from his work and muttered to me,
"A real hen-party."  A few minutes later, he said, as if he owned the sidewalk,
"they're still there. Hen party."

I had never heard the expression "hen party" but I knew it was a slur. A piece
of anti-woman bigotry. I mean, what was the problem with three women talking on
a public street?

But what disturbed me was that Mr. Hart took it for granted that I was on his
side -- that we were linked by our maleness, our roosterness, against hens.
I knew (in language that did not at that point exist), that I was being "co-
opted."  But although I was uneasy, I was able to offer only silent resistance.
I failed. Later I learned to challenge such mini-bigotries but at this point in
life I was much too young, too unsure.

Of all the events that occurred in 1952, this trivial encounter is one that
clings and needs to be exorcised.

But it is such experiences that shape us. As David Copperfield says, "Trifles
make the sum of life."

Source: 2019/01/street-talk

Title: Street Talk
Date: January 29, 2019

On East 9th Street, and probably in other parts of Brooklyn, a manhole cover
was called a "sewer." I don't know why. Ignorance, perhaps. As far as I know,
manhole covers provided entrance to electrical work and other utilities, not to
watercourses. Openings to the sewers that were located along the channel next
to the curb were also called sewers. A sewer was also a unit of distance. "He
can hit a spaldeen three sewers." It was not a scientifically accurate form of
measurement.

A "gutter" is in most parts of the country a channel for water. On East 9th
Street, the word "gutter" referred to the street's entire asphalted area, not
just the area near the curb. "Hey, kids, keep out of the gutter. You'll get
hurt."

"Stoop" referred to the stairs leading up to the porch. In "stoop ball," you
throw your spaldeen at the stoop and catch it on the rebound.  Five points for
a grounder, ten points for a fly ball, twenty points for a "pointer."

I don't think there was a specific name for what is here called the "park front
area"-- the space between the sidewalk and the curb.  Nor a word for "curb
cut." which was considered, linguistically, as a section of a driveway.

East 9th Street had a wonderful tree canopy. In retrospect, I can identify and
recall a very large sycamore and a series of Norway maples, but the only trees
that had names were a trio of huge old elms which were called "Mickey's trees."
I have no idea why they were so called nor do I know who was this Mickey of
famous memory. The elms were cut down in the late 40s (Dutch elm disease) --  a
tremendous loss to East 9th Street.

Source: 2019/01/man-of-the-west-

Title: Man of the West (1958)
Date: January 30, 2019

Judging by its almost-allegorical title, Man of the West claims, or seems
to claim, that Link Jones, its conflicted protagonist, represents something
fundamental and archetypical about the American western experience. And indeed
it does, if Mr. Jones, played by rugged stalwart Gary Cooper, is to be judged by
his exceedingly laconic manner, his resourcefulness, his fundamental decency,
his initial aversion to gun play and ultimate resort to violence.

But in my opinion the title Man of the West is misleading. Man of the West
is a noir in chaps and ten-gallon hat. Its western-ness is superficial. It's
noirness is essential and real.

Here's what we've got: a reformed criminal trying to go straight who can't
escape his past; a crazed egomaniacal gang leader (played here by Lee J. Cobb
but James Cagney would have been a better choice); a dance hall singer who's
been mistreated by a succession of men even though she's got a good heart; a
bank robbery that goes south and gang members who turn upon each other. No
cowboys, no Indians, no horses, no cavalry. Not even a rattlesnake curling
around the heroine's shoe who is shot by our hero. Scares her temporarily, but
she's grateful.

The film was written by Reginald Rose of Twelve Angry Men fame; it was directed
by Anthony Mann (Side Street). Take away the cowboy hats and substitute fedoras
and you could call it Man of the East.

Source: 2019/02/how-my-mother-did-laundry-for-my-grandchildren

Title: How My Mother Did Laundry (Written For My Grandchildren)
Date: February 01, 2019

Source: 2019/02/two-films-written-by-lenore-j-coffee

Title: Two Films Written by Lenore J. Coffee
Date: February 06, 2019

Lenore Coffee, born in 1897, wrote 50 or more silent films and any number of
studio productions in the 30s, 40s and 50s. Her most notable achievement at
Warner Brothers was the Oscar-nominated screenplay for Four Daughters, co-
written with Julius J. Epstein in 1938. Epstein, with his twin brother Philip
and Howard Koch, wrote Casablanca. Four Daughters is not on Netflix and not
conveniently available, but I'll continue to search.

In 1951, Coffee wrote Lightning Strikes Twice, directed by King Vidor
and starring Ruth Roman and Richard Todd. In 1952, she authored Sudden
Fear, directed by David Miller, which won both Joan Crawford and Jack Palance
Oscar nominations. Both films are well worth watching

Lightning Strikes Twice starts out as though it will center on Richard Trevelyan
(Richard Todd), who has just been released from prison after a jury failed
to convict him for the murder of his then wife, one juror dissenting. But it
rapidly becomes Shelley Carnes' (Ruth Roman) movie. It's refreshing to see a
film in which a strong woman shows "agency" but I have to admit that it is a
little disappointing when she falls under the romantic spell of Richard Todd,
who is supposed to be charismatic and sexual but who to me is an unappealing
block of wood. Trevelyan's guilt or innocence is the nominal subject but
the film focuses on the struggle between two women (Ruth Roman and Mercedes
McCambridge) who seek his affection. It's a noir-y melodrama with a startling
conclusion.

Sudden Fear is the stronger of the two films. Once again, a conflict between
two women: Joan Crawford, a rich successful playwright, and Gloria Grahame, an
on- the-make unscrupulous hoyden. This time the hypotenuse of their triangle
is Jack Palance, who is more expressive than Richard Todd could ever be, and a
heck of a lot scarier. Joan Crawford has some fine moments: when she realizes
that she's been duped by a gold-digging husband who plans to murder her, she
registers terror, thoughtfulness, resistance and finally resolve using only her
eyes. Unfortunately her intricate plan to save herself goes awry. There are some
unanticipated and surprising twists in the complicated plot.

My guess is that the censors intervened between the author's original conception
and the eventual portrayal, in which Palance and Grahame are disposed of in such
a way that Crawford is left without responsibility and without guilt. I would
have been much more satisfied if Coffee had let Crawford kill her antagonists
with that neat little silver revolver. Revenge would have been all the sweeter.

Source: 2019/02/cookie-lavagettos-teeth

Title: Cookie Lavagetto's Teeth
Date: February 10, 2019

But it's not the Montauk Club that's the subject of this paragraph -- it's the
"genial dentist" and lyricist J. T. McAteer who has quite something in store
for us. "Around the Town" continues:  "Dr James McAteer is the dentist for
the Brooklyn  Baseball Club and examines the teeth of each and every player
on the club.  Seems that Business Manager Larry McPhail is fussy about it and
insists on x-rays at least once each year. As far as McAteer is concerned,
infielder Cookie Lavagetto has a perfect set of teeth, while good ones are owned
by pitcher Van Mungo and infielder Johnny Hudson."

So now we know. Cookie Lavagetto had perfect teeth! What a revelation.
Information that has been hidden for 80 years. Everyone knows that Lavagetto
broke up Bill Bevan's 1947 World Series no-hitter with a double off the Ebbets
Field scoreboard. But who knew a damn thing about his choppers?  This is
neglected news of historic proportions.

And it makes a guy wonder about the other players on the team (aside from those
with semi-perfect teeth -- the legendary Van Lingle Mungo and unknown-to-me
Johnny Hudson). Were other Dodger teeth cavity-filled, crooked, misshapen,
stained with tobacco juice, busted, false, even missing. No wonder the '39
Dodgers were so bad. Twenty-five players and only three to write home about,
teeth-wise.

So here they are, the fabulous teeth of Cookie Lavagetto, bright and shiny,
glistening at us over the years (I'm sorry but I couldn't find a picture of
Cookie's molars).

Source: 2019/02/inferior-and-superior-street-names

Title: Inferior and Superior Street Names
Date: February 13, 2019

Among its other attractions. New Orleans (where I happen to be at this moment
of writing) is a city blessed with street and avenue names that are both
unusual, particular to the city, and glorious: Basin, Burgundy (accent on
the gund), Calliope (three syllables), Desire, Dryades, Felicity, Frenchmen,
Poydras, Prytania, Rampart, and of course Tchoupitoulas. Just a few to get the
conversation started.

These names are elegant. No wonder I suffer from a desperate inferiority complex
concerning the names of the streets on which I've lived. East 9th Street, West
91 Street, 9th Street, 10th Street. Designations without character -- gray and
boring. No resonance, no power. Bland.

Of course it hasn't been all bad: I once lived for a transitory summer (1961) on
Snyder Hill Road -- a semi-poetic name that gestures at rurality.

I knew a guy who was raised on Old Oaken Bucket Road. I was initially dazzled
-- until I learned that his neighbors had petitioned the city for a name change
-- his street had formerly been called Third Avenue or Smith Road or something
of that ilk. So it was not a real name -- it was pseudo-historical kitsch. What
suburban pretension! What a comedown! I'd have blushed with embarrassment if
I had to admit that I lived on Old Oaken Bucket Road. It's almost as bad as
Christmas Tree Drive (a real street in Boulder, Colorado, to the everlasting
disgrace, nomenclature-wise, of our city).

But now in this latter end of my life, I've achieved onomastic eminence. For
half the year I live on Walnut Street, a name that is the epitome of small city
authenticity (though it would be slightly better if there were an actual walnut
tree anywhere nearby). And of summers I'm at Hackett Hill Road, which is just
perfectly titled, and even more perfect because there are numerous Hacketts in
our local cemetery and because, fifty years ago, I met aged Edna Hackett, the
last survivor of the family that gave its name to hill and road.

Source: 2019/02/what-i-wore-to-the-oscars-2019

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars (2019)
Date: February 26, 2019

Actually, I didn't go TO the awards ceremony. This is what I wore to watch the
Oscars on TV. Well, that's not entirely true either. I forgot to watch the
Oscars. But I did wear the outfit.

My ensemble: plaid wool shirt by Woolrich; trousers by Lee (regular cut --
"smoky quartz" color); white cotton "Gold Toe" socks by Costco; shoes by Hoka
(with orthopedic inserts by Dr. Scholl); genuine leather belt by SlideBelts;
foundational undergarments by Fruit of the Loom and Carhartt; denim jacket by
American Apparel. Accessories: eyeglasses by Kirkland Signature; hearing aids by
Phonak. Traditional baseball cap by Otto ("one size fits most").

Hair by Joe.

Once again, I'd like to thank all the little people -- my fashion consultants,
suppliers, and supporters -- for their imagination and hard work. I couldn't
have done it without the entire team.

Source: 2019/03/another-film-written-by-lenore-j-coffee

Title: Another Film Written by Lenore J. Coffee
Date: March 06, 2019

It's hard to say how much of The Great Lie (1939) is original to its
screenwriter Lenore J. Coffee. In the first place, the film is adapted from a
novel, and secondly, at least according to the story, its stars Bette Davis
and Mary Astor were unhappy with the screenplay and rewrote much of it. But
how much? Nevertheless, in The Great Lie, as in Sudden Fear  and Lightning
Strikes Twice, two other films written by Coffee, the heart of the matter is a
head-to- head struggle between two strong women. In this film it's Sandra, (Mary
Astor) and Maggie (Bette Davis) who go to the mat about first, a husband, who
is apparently married to both of them (don't ask!) and then, a baby boy. Maggie
(Bette) winds up with both husband and child, but it's touch and go for most of
the film. I wish I could say that Coffee's dialog was brilliant, but not so.
It's a serviceable, competent screenplay. George Brent, playboy and drunkard,
isn't nearly as desirable a husband and father as the film asks us to believe.
Not much of an actor, either.

Mary Astor won an Oscar and well-deserved it; she steals the show. It's ironic,
and it may be significant, that Mary Astor herself had been involved in a child-
custody case several years before this film was made.

The music (by Max Steiner) is noteworthy -- mood-appropriate variations on
themes from Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto.

Hattie McDaniel does as much with the stereotypical "colored" maid as an actress
could be expected to do, but her scenes are still painful and embarrassing to
watch.

Source: 2019/03/amnesia-on-film-dead-again-1995

Title: Amnesia on Film: Dead Again (1991)
Date: March 13, 2019

Usually the amnesia is the hardest bit to swallow. The amnesia in Dead Again is
particularly unpalatable, because Emma Thompson shows up at a Catholic orphanage
without any memory nor with any ability to speak. No explanation is ever offered
for her disease, not a grain. No cracking the skull, no mysterious drugs, no
trauma, nothing. Just a little all-purpose Hollywood-style amnesia to get the
plot rolling.

But spontaneous amnesia slides down the esophagus rather easily compared to
hypnotically-induced past-life regression, huge trenchers of which we're
expected to bolt and guzzle. I couldn't do it and the film became ridiculous
and ridiculously baroque, gimmicky, inhuman. A waste of Kenneth Branagh's
extraordinary talent. And the music --portentous, dictatorial, distracting.

I saw this movie when it first appeared, in 1991, and liked it. What was I
thinking?  My salad days, when I was green in judgment.

Source: 2019/03/the-toaster

Title: The Toaster
Date: March 15, 2019

When I downsized into my present residence in 2009, a few essential items
disappeared, among them a venerable but excellent toaster. I did not replace it
because I was distracted by more pressing matters. I went toasterless for almost
five years.

Later, when I entered into a tentative new relationship, toasterlessness became
a matter of concern. Toast was an essential item in the diet of my new lady
friend. For a while, before she began to spend nights with me, she would daily
transport in bag or backpack -- along with toiletries and toothbrush and changes
of undergarments -- her glamorous red enamel Cuisinart toaster.

That this arrangement was comic became immediately apparent. No one can carry a
toaster from one home to another day after day without feeling the irony.

As our relationship solidified, it became clear that something had to be done,
toasterwise. And so we came to realize that it was time to progress to a stable
two-toaster situation.

The Cuisinart went back to its original home and off we went to McGuckin's
Hardware. There we acquired a Proctor Silex, with which we have lived until a
short while ago.

I don't want to badmouth the Proctor Silex, but let's face it, it's a cheap
lightweight contraption with too much plastic and a tendency to leak crumbs
over the counter. A paucity of knobs and controls. It's an entry-level toaster,
a "starter toaster." A provisional toaster that lacked the dignity that our
maturing connection demanded.

So yesterday, at Peppercorn on the semi-famous Boulder Mall, we purchased a
superior toaster -- a highly-recommended, weighty and substantial Breville two-
slicer equipped with "Lift and Lock" and other bells and whistles (which we
will no doubt some day master), the upper grill of which is inscribed with the
comforting motto, "BAGELS FACE INWARDS." A toaster of heft and permanence. It's
sitting proudly on the counter now.

Moreover, we purchased it with our new joint credit card.

Source: 2019/03/blood-test

Title: Blood Test
Date: March 17, 2019

I cooled my heels for more than an hour waiting for a "blood draw." Why so long?
There was no long line of people ahead of me. Was it simply that the department
was understaffed? That they all went out for ice cream? Or were the blood-
collectors, the vampires, gossiping and lazing about behind the curtain?

I was miffed.

But it wasn't long before I transitioned from passive miff to active glare. Now,
"glaring" is a powerful, if ineffective, way to deal with such inconveniences. I
think that my powerglare was beginning to get the attention of the poor schlub
sitting at the desk pretending to ignore me.

But let me confess that there's a danger inherent in the glare, because if your
lower lip quivers ever so slightly, you're no longer glaring, you're pouting.
Of course I didn't want to be seen as a pouter. So I concentrated all my energy
into my glare. I think I had it under control, but after a while, without making
a conscious decision to do so, I escalated from glaring to seething.

The seethe is more difficult to express than the glare. You can glare with just
your eyes, but you have to put your whole body into the seethe. For proper
seething, you have to cross your arms and hunch over. And once you're in that
posture, you can then begin to move from seething to simmering. But you must be
careful not to be perceived as sulking.

And then on to fuming. Fuming is very like seething and simmering -- the same
hunched body posture -- but accompanied with heavy breathing and an occasional,
intermittent through-the-teeth hiss. You've got to make sure that your hiss is a
true angry hiss and not a pathetic sniffle.

From fuming it was only a short step to boiling, which came at about the 55
minute mark.

Good thing my name was called on the hour, because I was just about to blow my
top.

Source: 2019/03/the-state-of-ornithology-in-the-seventeenth-century

Title: The State of Ornithology in the Seventeenth Century
Date: March 26, 2019

I've just read Tim Birkhead's biography of The Wonderful Mr Willoughby, The
First True Ornithologist (London, 2018). Birkhead's thesis is that Francis
Willoughby was not merely a bird watcher, but an innovative, diligent, and
imaginative scientist, the founder of a new area of knowledge.

Ornithology when Willoughby (1635 –1672) started to look at birds was
astonishingly primitive. For example, students did not even agree that birds
migrated. Perhaps, as Aristotle had suggested, they hid in holes during the
winter. Perhaps they transmuted from a species that departed to a species that
arrived. With no observers in southern lands and no rapid communication, it's
not surprising that it was hard to imagine that birds flew south in the fall and
returned in the spring. Even now, when all is revealed, migration still seems,
at least to me, to be mysterious, miraculous, and wondrously improbable.

Before the "new philosophy put all in doubt," the assumption that governed all
"science" was that the natural world should be studied for evidence of divine
wisdom -- a practice which blinkered understanding and limited speculation.
The questions that people asked about birds were therefore not particularly
challenging. They asked which ones were good to eat, which ones could be kept in
cages, and which ones had medicinal value.

The first task of new ornithology was simply to take a census. What birds live
here, by what names are they called, and how should they be classified?  In the
non-standardized late medieval world, most birds bore regional or demotic names,
and sometimes the same name was attached two or more species of birds. It took
a while before the ars-foot came to be recognized and conventionalized as the
great-crested grebe and to earn the official designation Podiceps cristatus. It
was the same with the such regionally-named birds as the annet, bald buzzard,
the Bohemian chatterer, the copped douker, the coulterneb, the didapper, the
dun-diver, the fern-owl, the flusher, the gid, the glead, the gorcock, the ox-
eye, the pickmire, the puit, the puttock, the pyrag, the rock ouzel, the scarf,
the skout, and the witwall?  It remained to be demonstrated that the "yarwhelp"
"was in fact the East Anglian name for the bar-tailed godwit and was to be
distinguished from the similar black-tailed godwit." That the sea-pie was an
oystercatcher. That the elegug was a guillemot. "The sea-swallows they there (on
Caldey Island) call spurs, and the razor-bills are called elegugus.... This name
elelgug some attribute to the puffin, and some to the guillem[ot];  indeed they
know not what they mean by this name." Nomenclature was a thicket.

Willoughby was an energetic surveyor and classifier. But as he became more
familiar with bird life, he started to ask questions of genuine scientific
interest. What is the function of the tomial tooth? Do all birds of the same
species have the same color iris? How many birds have rictal bristles? Do birds
who lay two eggs produce one male and one female? Do female birds ever have two
ovaries and two oviducts? Can birds hold on to their eggs at will, or are they
laid involuntarily? How do birds survive the cold of winter? Why do birds molt?

While these are not necessarily the questions of a modern ornithologist, they
certainly represent a new beginning. Many thanks to Birkhead for bringing
Willoughby to our attention.

How sad that the first true ornithologist died at age thirty-six.

Source: 2019/03/old-words-new-to-me-

Title: Old Words New to Me
Date: March 29, 2019

A "col" is the lowest point of a ridge between two peaks; a "barmkin" or
"barnekin" is a walled courtyard; a "carr" is a fen or wetland overgrown with
trees;  a "bauchling" (mostly Scots) is a reproaching or taunting in order to
dare an adversary to fight; a "bastle" is a fortified farmhouse; a "cantref"
(plural "cantrefi") was a medieval Welsh division or hundred of land; a "skurr"
is a shed; a "warble" is a lookout mountain; a "garth" is a dike of sand and
pebbles devised to catch fish; a "pele" tower is a small fortified keep or
tower, such as this one:

A "dubb" is a deep hole in a bog; a "pune" is a quasi-legal reprisal short
of revenge; a "terret" is a a metal loop on a harness, guiding the reins and
preventing snags. Here's a 1st century Romano-British enamel terret:

Source: 2019/03/book-report-the-end-of-innocence

Title: Book Report: The End of Innocence
Date: March 31, 2019

I don't read much fiction, but when I do, it's usually one of the 19th-century
classics. However, the "international bestseller" The End of Innocence (2016)
by Benedict Wells came highly recommended, so I gave it a shot. It's pretty
good, not bad, not great, and certainly a novel for today and not for all time
-- not even for the next decade. It's thin, simple.

Egomaniac that I am, I was less interested in the novel itself than I was in
my own reaction to it, which was, in a couple of words, both resistant and
resentful.

Why the hostility,  I ask myself?

In the first place, it's a novel without any sense of style. Perhaps it's the
translator's fault, but gosh, it's written in the prose of a bad TV journalist.
And second, it's ruthlessly manipulative. The the back-cover blurb, boasts "tear
jerker." And so it is, shamelessly. Jules, the first-person narrator, loses his
parents in an auto accident, is sent to a boarding school that is depicted as a
quasi-penitentiary, is abandoned by his two siblings, suffers from paralyzing
guilt, and when he finally marries, has to watch his wife die from cancer (a
sequence which is narrated in extended, unnecessary detail).

I suppose these disasters might have been handled with enough circumspection and
integrity to teach us something about the human condition. But no, only to wring
a couple of tears from our reluctant eyes. And then the too easily won upbeat
ending -- goodness gracious!

Some parts, but not enough of them, rang true. The family dynamics among the
siblings was complicated enough to generate some heft.

Here's a single instance, one of many, to which I objected: a late middle-age
writer suffers from Alzheimer's. Our hero, Jules, puts a gun in the man's hands,
then walks away and hears the report of the weapon. He never confesses that he
assisted in the death, and suffers no psychological ramifications from doing so.
Peculiar, especially since the dead man was his rival for the love of his soon-
to-be wife. I think most people would agree that assisting in a suicide is a
fraught act and that a novelist neglects his duty and cheats his readers when he
fails to acknowledge and explore its effects. A major, compromising misstep by
Mr.Wells.

So there it is, in little: disappointed, exploited and cheated. Not a good
feeling to take away from a novel.

But I wonder at myself. The most manipulative novelist of all times is Charles
Dickens, whose writing  I revere. Dickens is on a level several orders of
magnitude more tearjerkery than Wells could possibly imagine, grasp, or emulate.
How can it be that I embrace Dickens and reject Wells?

Source: 2019/04/the-comancheros-1961

Title: The Comancheros (1961)
Date: April 02, 2019

This reprehensible film aspires to be an "inconsequential romp," as one reviewer
suggests, but fails to meet even that exceedingly low bar.

If a viewer could swallow the buddy-movie plot (Stuart Whitman as a New Orleans
card shark and John Wayne as John Wayne), he'd still have to deal with Nehemiah
Persoff as a brutal Mexican gang-and-cult leader and Ina Balin (the worst
actress Brooklyn has ever produced) as his spitfire daughter. And also embrace
the dubious proposition that the road from New Orleans to Galveston goes through
picturesque southern Utah. And many other improbabilities.

Ok, so the film is one big joke, a comedy masquerading as a western, or vice
versa.

But if the film is a "romp," then how in the world can we justify its treatment
of Indians?

In The Comancheros, Indians have three functions. The first is to be constantly
drunk and constantly in search of whiskey. It offers a truly horrible,
inexcusable scene in which a renowned chief falls drunkenly into his soup.
Amusing? Not to any person with a modicum of fellow feeling. The second purpose
that Indians serve is to be cruel: they torture and scalp. Their third purpose
is to be cannon-fodder. Scores, perhaps a hundred are remorselessly cut down
by our white friends. Not a one of them is awarded a trace of individuality --
though, as is the custom in such films, they get to fall picturesquely from
rocky overlooks or be dragged by the foot in the stirrup when they are shot off
their horses.

Even worse than these atrocities is a scene in which a bedraggled, impoverished
line of hollow-eyed Indians, this time including women and children, trudge
dejectedly across the landscape. A mini Trail of Tears. Not to worry, says
John Wayne, they're "tame Indians." "Tame" means defeated, reduced to poverty,
neglected, dehumanized. Tame as cows or dogs. It's a painful image, hard to
ignore or to forget.

I imagine that we're supposed to say, Oh, this was 1961, we know better now. But
by 1961, John Ford had made a few movies in which Indians were depicted with not
a lot, but a bit of humanity. The Comancheros was reactionary and unenlightened
even it its day, we have to admit, and embodied a transparently racist ideology.
It's treatment of our fellow but slightly different humans is grotesque and
unforgivable.

Criminal, in fact. It is nothing less than a excuse and justification for
genocide. Not inconsequential at all.

According to the story, Michael Curtiz set out to direct the film, but fell ill
and withdrew. The actual direction was under the control of John Wayne himself,
so it is at his feet that this appalling monster must lie.

Source: 2019/04/a-sunday-morning-conversation

Title: A Sunday Morning Conversation
Date: April 14, 2019

He:  "These allergies are getting me down.  Every morning I seem to wake up
with a liter of mucus in my nose. There's so much I should probably save it and
put in the garden. It would be good for the soil."

She:  "Yes, we could save it one of those nice plastic jars that the Talenti
ice cream comes in."

He:  "It might be a problem on the plane. 'What's that in the jar, sir.'
 "It's a pint of my snot. I'm taking it to Vermont to put in the garden.'  '
Er, do you want to step over here, sir.'

She:  "Perhaps we should re-think this."

He:  "It's a good thing that we know each other pretty well. If I had said to
you, five years ago when we first met, 'Hi, my name is...  I'm thinking of
saving my snot and taking it to Vermont,' it would have ended the relationship
right there."

She:  "Yes, you were very wise to have waited five years to mention it. Very
tactful."

Source: 2019/04/little-jimmy

Title: Little Jimmy Hurt his Arm, by Ralph Ganesha Jefferson
Date: April 14, 2019

Today's contribution, Little Jimmy Hurt his Arm, was written by Ralph Ganesha
Jefferson, the author of the best-selling children's book Leonardo, the
Enlightened Lion (2017).

"Little Jimmy hurt his arm.

He said to his mother, my arm hurts. His mother said, let us pray over it. So
they prayed.

But it still hurt.

So his mother took him to the wise women at the end of the street. She
prescribed CBD oil. Jimmy's mother rubbed CBD oil on his arm.

But it still hurt.

So his mother took him to a psychotherapist. He gave Jimmy some anti-anxiety
pills. Jimmy took them.

But his arm still hurt.

So his mother took him to a reflexologist, then to a Kirlian analyst, then to an
aromatherapist. Jimmy did what they advised.

But his arm still hurt.

Then Jimmy said, 'why don't we go to a doctor.'

So they went to a doctor. And the doctor said to Jimmy, "Your arm is broken."
 The doctor set the bone and put it in a cast.

Jimmy's arm stopped hurting.

And then the doctor said, "While you're here, why don't I give you a measles
shot?"  And he did.

Source: 2019/04/other-peoples-lives

Title: Other People's Lives
Date: April 24, 2019

Three times in the last few weeks I've had the opportunity to drop into other
people's lives.

The most recent was a visit to the Mountain Men Rendezvous in Antonito, New
Mexico.

"Rendezvous," you ask?  In the 1830s, fur trappers gathered in various places
in western North America to sell their furs and purchase supplies for the coming
year. According to the story, they drank themselves silly, fornicated as much
as possible, and played at various games and sports to pass the time while they
waited for the wagons to arrive from St. Louis. Modern re-enactors dress in
1820s costumes, and, at least in Antonito, engage in knife and "hawk" (tomahawk)
throwing contests.

It was a world taken very seriously by the mountain men and their ladies. But
strange, even otherworldly to me. I learned about the proper size of a hawk
and how muzzle loading rifles work and I handled an elaborately beaded pouch
made out of a bull's scrotum, owned by our host, whose "mountain name" was Long
Tongue. But no liquor at this gathering. Lemonade only, I'm glad to say. I
wouldn't have been comfortable with all those knives and hawks whizzing around
if the guys and gals had been addled with alcohol.

And also : a few weeks ago, in New Orleans, we shared lunch with the Lords
of Leather. A scary, in-your-face name, but a more welcoming group of men
I've rarely met. Some were costumed, but most of them looked like a bunch of
accountants enjoying a weekend cookout. No doubt their fellowship engaged
private matters that I don't know about and wouldn't understand. Lives very
different from mine.

Also in New Orleans, we attended a "ball."  Not a ball that involves dancing
-- more of a pageant, a display of elaborate costuming. It was sponsored by the
Krewe of Iris, a group of women who roll their pageant wagons (floats) during
Mardi Gras. We costumed ourselves for the ball -- fancy long dress and tuxedo.
The members of the Krewe a) take it all very seriously, and b) know that it's
silly and c) take it seriously nonetheless.

There must be thousands of these cultures and sub-cultures in our rich and
various nation. I'm happy to have participated, a bit, in these worlds.

And I wonder, of course, how strange and exotic my life and culture, bland and
ordinary to me, might seem to some of the mountain men and leather-lords and
Iris ladies.

Source: 2019/04/wisdom-1

Title: Wisdom --  Part 1
Date: April 29, 2019

Now that I'm eighty (80!) years old, it's time to think about what, if anything,
 I've learned. For many years now, I've been waiting for wisdom to kick in, but
so far, no thunderbolts or grand illuminations. Yet I seem to have accumulated
a number of maxims and cliches, which leads to the dispiriting conclusion that
perhaps there's no difference between ordinary commonplaces and sophisticated
wisdom. On the other hand, it is undeniably the case that I am a different
person now than I was twenty or forty or sixty years ago, so perhaps all these
years have produced some changes in attitude and behavior. What follows is the
first installment of either "wisdom" or "commonplaces" -- take your pick.

Although it is true that there are psychopaths and sociopaths, there are very
few of them. Almost all the people I've known over the years have been poor
struggling mortals, like myself, trying to act decently and respectably. The
difficult people with whom I've had to deal are pathetic rather than villainous.
They act badly because of their own inadequacies, anxieties and fear, not
because they are innately vicious. A surprising number of people have endured
dreadful traumas and most of them have recovered to live satisfactory lives.
There are some poor souls who compensate badly. They cause pain to us, but more
to themselves. It's not true that to know everything is to excuse everything,
but knowing people's stories certainly helps you to become more empathetic and
understanding. My younger self was much harsher and less compassionate toward
difficult people than my present self.

Genuine understanding between individuals is difficult and misunderstanding is
rife. It's hard to translate what's in your head to your friend or neighbor,
and just as hard to understand what's in someone else's head by words alone.
If you're going to be surprised because someone misunderstood you, then you're
going to spend half your entire lifetime in a state of dreadful shock. Although
irony and understatement are most useful figures of speech, beware of them.
There's nothing more awkward (and sometimes dangerous) than an ironic remark
that is taken seriously, or a serious remark that is understood ironically. A
meaningful exchange of ideas or insights can't be brief, because it takes time
for a shred or glimmer of understanding to grow and ripen. If you want to have a
real friend, make the time. Understanding someone else's brain is akin to Zeno's
Paradox;  you get halfway there but you never get all the way.

Everyone is engaged in "presentation of self." You meet someone new, and they
tell you about themselves, but they're not really doing so in any profound
way. They're not trying to. They're acting out the "presentation" that they've
devised over the years. They offer you a handful of anecdotes which they think
represent themselves. But the fun and the satisfaction only begins when that
first mask drops away. In order to know someone, you have to ask a question that
is not truly intrusive but manages to take your new friend (or old friend, for
that matter), a hair's breadth apart from their usual style of presentation.
Sometimes it's not worth the effort,  but there are occasions when it can
precipitate a worthwhile friendship. Too many conversations are not exchanges
of information.  A says something from his repertoire of self-presentations;
then B, impatiently waiting his turn to talk about himself, responds with a
nugget from his own store. No genuine communication takes place. This kind of
exchange is disappointing and almost useless. We all generate these forms of
presentation partly as a defense against revealing too much of ourselves and
becoming vulnerable, and because we all have our own follies and weaknesses. So
we act a role. The further the contrived role is from the true self, the more
transparent and even offensive it becomes. It's hard for people to be true to
themselves;  it takes work.

More wisdom (or commonplaces) coming soon. Stay tuned.

Source: 2019/05/dream

Title: Brief Account of Enigmatic Dream
Date: May 13, 2019

I dreamed I was on the phone with my father (who has been dead these 35 years).
 Although his voice was very faint, it was distinctly him. He said, "Don't vote
for Beto." End of conversation, end of dream.

Source: 2019/05/amnesia-on-film-shadow-on-the-wall-

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Shadow on the Wall (1950)
Date: May 29, 2019

Another day, another amnesia movie. This one, Shadow on the Wall, is  different
only because the amnesiac is a child.  The poor dear has witnessed a murder,
and has been traumatized, which we know because her wooden perkiness transforms
into wooden woodenness. In the vulgar reductive Freudianism to which the film
pays full credence, the little girl won't be cured until she remembers what
she has repressed. Which she does, unsurprisingly and predictably, in the last
scene, thereby freeing her father (Zachary Scott) from the threat of execution
for a murder he didn't commit. More turbid amnesia waters flowing under the
Lethean bridge.

I don't now why I have such a dislike for Zachary Scott. True, he's not a good
actor, but it's not that. It might be his mustache, which is far too tidy and
trim and which says (to me), "this person can't be trusted."  Or perhaps it's
his receding chin.  Or his hairpiece. His awkward movements. His pathetic
attempts at comedy.  I can't say for sure.

I think that I must have been mistreated by a Zachary Scott lookalike in my
childhood, events that I've forgotten but have retained in my subconscious.

If I could just remember what happened I might be able to free myself of this
irrational hatred. Meanwhile, I'm sorry the movie turned out the way it did. 
I would have preferred it if Zachary Scott had been executed, mustache and all,
even if it was for a murder he didn't commit.

Source: 2019/06/written-for-my-grandchildren-your-great-grandmother-lillian-green-

Title: Written for My Grandchildren;  Your Great-Grandmother, Lillian Green
Date: June 13, 2019

My mother, your great-grandmother, Lillian Green, was born in New York City,
probably in Harlem, on June 9, 1905.

Her parents, Sonia Chafetz and Joseph Usilewski, were part of the great
migration to America of Eastern European Jews. According to my mother, Sonia and
Joseph were both engaged to other people when they eloped, he deserting from the
Russian army. They arrived at Ellis Island mid-August of 1904 without a kopeck
in their pockets and only one pair of shoes between them. I used to think that
my mother had been conceived aboard the ship from Rotterdam, but the dates don't
bear it out. Moreover, It's a melancholy fact that passengers in steerage were
segregated by sex and kept apart.

My mother was born Lilly Usilewski but when she entered public school, which is
where she acquired English, she was enrolled as Lily Solawisky. When her younger
brother was enrolled as Daniel Oslofsky, my grandfather Joseph realized that it
was time to Americanize his name. The judge before whom he appeared was named
Green, so Green he became. Lilly became Lillian when she married, my father
insisting that "Lilly's not a name." He and everyone called her "Lil" but she
was always "Lilly" to her mother Sonia.

Lil's upbringing, I am afraid, was impoverished and harsh. I was told that her
father raised her and her younger brothers Dan and Ellis (Bub) "with the belt."
Her mother Sonia was chronically ill from goiter and from the consequences
of her five home-made abortions, so against her wishes Lil was taken out of
school six weeks into high school to run the house and to raise her brothers, a
sacrifice for which she received no appreciation either from them or from her
father. For her, it was a disaster and a source of bitterness.. Her life from
age thirteen to age twenty-six, when she married my father, Emanuel, is almost
entirely blank to me. I know that she worked in the printing industry and was
a skilled proofreader. She was not at all athletic or artistic but she was
musical -- she played the piano and sang. At some point in early adulthood she
started to take vacations at one of those camps for young Jewish adults in the
Catskills. She sang in camp musicals and it was there that she met my father, a
law clerk studying for the bar. My grandfather Joseph Green disapproved of her
independence and refused to speak to her for two years -- a wound from which she
was still suffering when I came to know her. Lil and Manny were married on June
19, 1930 and had four children:  Eugene (1935- 2006), Susan (1937-1938), Elihu
(1939 -    ), and Jonathan (1942 -    ).

Her hard early life and the death of her daughter at the age of nine months,
along with a chronic, agonizing stomach ulcer left her a troubled woman. She was
what used to be called "difficult" -- acerbic, rude, insensitive, thoughtless.
She once said to me, "I was a good mother until you boys were six years old;
after that, I couldn't cope." I think it was honest and insightful of her to say
so. Yet my very earliest memories are pleasurable. She kept us warm and fed and
loved; otherwise I don't know how my brothers and I would have been able to have
lived satisfying lives. But I also know that I have no memories of touching her
or being touched by her, although sometimes she would demand a quick peck on the
cheek. She was not at all "supportive" -- "assaultive" would be a better term.
There was no praise, only incomprehension or disdain.

I can't remember any particular words that she said to me, but here's a sample
of her language. I remember that when my two or three month old firstborn
suffered noisily from colic, she proposed to my wife, "Maybe your milk is
poisoning him"  -- which not a sentiment likely to endear her to a struggling
new mother.

It took me into adulthood to recognize that my mother's peculiarities were not
villainy but the product of her emotionally impoverished early years and of her
almost constant pain.

After her children were grown, she resumed her piano playing and turned
herself into a stalwart of the League of Women Voters. In 1960, during JFK's
presidential campaign, she gathered fifty or sixty women and welcomed Eleanor
Roosevelt herself to our home on East 9 Street. A most memorable and important
contribution.

She did not mellow with age. Yet I would have to say, that all things
considered, she did well.

Lil died at age 74 from the consequences of her then-incurable ulcer. In the
hospital, dying, "intubated" and incapable of speech, she scribbled on a scrap
of paper, "I love you all,"  and I know that she meant sincerely what had
always been so difficult for her to express. I retain that piece of paper as a
relic.

Here's a picture of Lil at her best. Me and my mom, c. 1940.

Source: 2019/09/picture-1967

Title: For my Family: West Bradford History (I)
Date: September 29, 2019

This is a photograph of the buildings on the West Bradford property as they
existed when we made the deal in 1967. As you know -- children, grandchildren
and other interested parties -- we are no longer in possession of this part of
the property. It passed to Phyllis and Bruce in 1977 and then to Bruce entirely
when he and Phyllis divorced in 1984 or thereabouts.

But this is how it looked to the photographer, whom I believe to be my brother
Jonathan, when he stood on the near knoll looking westward.  Much remains
superficially constant but everything is different.

Still in place: the house and barn, the Red Duchess apple tree just to the left
of the house and closer to the camera; the big sugar maple on the left, near
South Road.

But to my eye, there's much that has changed. Hanging over the house is a very
large, very dead elm. There's another infected and doomed elm to the right
of the barn. Indeed, the property was sometimes called by us "Dead Elm Farm"
when we spent our first summer there, in 1968. There's a chicken house, barely
visible, to the right of the white clapboard milk house; there is also another
outbuilding once used as a garage and a storeroom for wood visible between the
house and barn; there's a porch of sorts at the street side of the house -- all
these elements have been removed though they remain vivid in my memory.

But what you can't see, grandchildren, is more interesting than what is visible.

The property was owned for forty years by Tom Roberts, who was probably as old
in 1968 as I am now. He knew that he was too tired and probably too resource-
poor to maintain ownership. His wife, eight years older than he, was mortally
ill, and Tom himself had only a couple of years to live. It was time for him to
move on.

The house itself (supposedly built in part in 1856) was out of an earlier era.
It lacked a septic system (it had only a cesspool, which was an open sewer into
which untreated waste flowed and stunk.)  There was a 15-foot deep dug well
(you can see a bit of the topmost well tile and the concrete well cover just to
the right of the apple tree) from which a very old electric pump pushed water
up to an open copper-lined tank on the second floor of the house. There was no
water pressure (because there was no pressure tank) but only a "gravity feed"
to the faucets and toilet. The plumbing was rusted iron (in) and lead (out).
There was no heating system -- the wood stoves that had heated the place were
sold at auction before we took up residence. No insulation either, except (we
later discovered) the piles of hazelnut shells that generations of squirrels and
chipmunks had deposited in the spaces between the split lathe-and-plaster inner
walls and the outer sheathing. The sills were rotten and the house was sagging
in places -- although, as you can see, the roof line was still deceptively
sound.

The barn was in even worse condition than the house. Its partial collapse was
the reason -- the last straw -- that Tom Roberts sold out. During the previous
winter, the rotted-out floor on the east side of the barn had given way,
strangling three of Tom's eight cows in their stanchions. Tom was heartbroken --
he dropped more than one tear when he told us about the disaster. "I hooked them
one by one to the tractor and dragged them out into the field, over there, and
buried them."  He pointed to a spot that would be just about the lower right
hand corner of the photograph.

The barn, at first, was a scary place.  It took us (Bruce and me) a couple of
weeks to get up the courage to enter. It was a disaster area: giant spider webs,
peeling whitewash, jumbled and distorted structures for dairy use, piles of
twisted lumber. It's now been repaired and remodeled -- completely transformed.
But I still treasure the memory of the way it was, at least after it wasn't in
danger of further collapse. I miss the majestic 16' by 16' hemlock beams, the
spacious haylofts, the hand hewn tree that served for a ridgepole.

Despite the fact that the buildings were way past their prime, barely
functioning, I didn't think for a second that we had made a mistake in buying
the place. I never thought of reversing course and selling out. I was totally at
home from the first breath. I fell in love with the buildings, and even more so
with the land.

When Althea took her very first walk on the property, just as we passed what
we call the "meander" and crossed over the spill (now enclosed in a culvert)
through which water from the swamp (now a pond) courses into the Baldwin Brook,
she said, "This is too beautiful to be in private hands."

It's even more beautiful now.

[Addendum October 24, 2019.  I suppose I should mention that the decision to buy
the property was controversial. My father in particular, ever cautious, was
adamant: you don't buy a second home until you've bought your first home. You
have no idea what you're buying. The land has never been surveyed;  you don't
know the boundaries."  His reasoning was perfectly correct, but all wrong.
Buying the property was the best financial decision of my life.]

Source: 2019/10/more-on-west-bradford-in-1968

Title: More on West Bradford in June, 1968
Date: October 02, 2019

The famished waif with the tousled hair is NGP; the naked one-year-old with the
swollen belly is Ben. There's a rain barrel -- why?  There's a gas-powered lawn
mower, so brand new that it still bears its sales tag.  There's some black
plastic pipe  and what might be a horseshoe on the floor. A couple of white
plastic containers. Miscellaneous wooden furniture. There are many cubic yards
of hay -- not baled, just loose.

The potter, oblivious to the chaos and hard at work, is Phyllis.

It's all happening just inside the big barn door -- an improvised pottery
studio.

Source: 2019/10/real-ice-cream-a-personal-history

Title: Ice Cream -- a Personal History
Date: October 02, 2019

In the 1940s of ancient memory, it was a rare treat when my father would bring
home, on a summer evening, a pint of ice cream to be shared among the five
of us. This was in the days of "ice boxes" and before the refrigerators that
replaced them had freezer compartments -- so the ice cream had to be consumed
immediately. Which it was.

There was also the Good Humor truck:

Source: 2019/10/the-new-building-on-hackett-hill-road-1978

Title: A New Building on Hackett Hill Road, 1978
Date: October 05, 2019

It shouldn't take more than a moment, dear grandchildren, to figure out exactly
what building is under construction. It's the early spring of 1978 and the house
that we've lived in these last forty or so years is rising out of the ground.
It may be a little difficult, but if you scrutinize closely, you'll notice the
space that has been left for the familiar sliding door (with its prominent
header), and also the spaces for the front door and the kitchen windows. The
workmen (is that Jimmy Perry up there?) are just starting on the second floor.
There's also a large boulder which came out of the basement on the lower right,
sitting where it remained for 30 years or so until it was replaced by a much
more handsome piece of granite. (The boulder in the picture can now be found,
part buried, at the entrance to the new waterfall garden.)

It's a very small house (the footprint is 20' x 28') not because we were in
love with small houses, but because we were working with an extremely limited
budget.  Believe it or not, the house (including foundation, roof, well,
electricity, and septic) cost just $33,000 --very little even in 1970s dollars.
That's because we cut every corner that could conceivably be cut: unfinished
lumber for framing, second-hand doors, used plumbing fixtures and appliances,
plywood flooring in some rooms, etc. etc.  (Almost all these elements have been
replaced and upgraded over the years as the family has become more prosperous.)

Also important: the house site. It might seem natural and inevitable to you,
grandchildren, that the house is where it is. But in fact, there was a long
serious debate about where to put it. And here you must remind yourself that in
1977 the area that now contains a house and a garage/barn and three cabins and
an orchard of sorts and three or four different gardens was a blank space, a
tabula rasa -- just a meadow behind the old West Bradford cemetery.

Four sites were under consideration and three were rejected : the first where
Cabin #3 is located, the second, where the barn sits, the third in the back
field (but that would have involved a prohibitive investment in a road and the
undergrounding of many feet of electrical wire). I made the decision to put the
house up on the knoll, with a good view of pond, forest and field, accessible
to the road, and with the hope and possibility of a dry basement. The right
decision, I still think.

There was only one road in at the time -- the one to the south of the cemetery .
Thedriveway we now use came the next year                                      .

There were many adventures and many anxieties in the building of the house, most
of them a consequence of the limited budget. It was not an enjoyable experience,
but it didn't sour me on the land or the property. I learned a lot.

Source: 2019/10/estelle-fendricks-chicken-soup

Title: Estelle Fendrick's Chicken Soup
Date: October 08, 2019

Here's a marvelously instructive tale about culinary practice, custom,
superstition, religion and how knowledge passes from generation to generation.

We're in the 1940s.

My mother was sitting with her childhood friend, Estelle Fendrick, who was
preparing a chicken soup. My mother (this is exactly how she told me the story)
noticed that Estelle broke the long bones (the "drumstick") of the chicken
before putting them into the cooking vessel. She asked Estelle, why she broke
the bones. And Estelle replied, well, it's what my mother did. I don't know why
but I'm going to see her next week and I'll ask her why she broke the bones. So
the next week, Estelle asked her own mother why she broke the bones, and her
mother answered in the same way as Estelle: I do it because my mother did it.
But look, tomorrow I'm going to visit my mother in the Hebrew Home for the Aged
in Riverdale and I'll ask her. So, and here my mother's narrative comes to its
climax, Estelle's mother went to visit her own mother and asked her, why did
you use to break the bones of the chicken before you put them into the cooking
vessel, and Estelle's grandmother thought for a while and then said (and here
you have to imagine a very strong old country accent), We had a very small pot.

Source: 2019/10/silo

Title: Silo (1968)
Date: October 11, 2019

When we arrived at Dead Elm Farm in 1968, we were confronted with a derelict
silo. It had not been used for many years and displayed a Pisa-like lean. We
thought it was a hazard and decided to take it down, which we did by the simple
expedient of tying one end of a rope to one of the metal rings and attaching
the other end to a car bumper. The silo offered little resistance. But once it
was removed, we discovered that decades of leaking at the junction of silo and
barn had engendered massive rot in the uprights and sill and that the side of
the barn was hanging by a thread and would need even more reconstruction than we
could possibly have imagined.

The picture makes it all very clear, but there's a small structure visible at
the top and to the right of the silo which I don't remember. What was it? 
Perhaps it was part of the primitive venting system that was used to keep hot
air from building up in the hayloft. Or a cricket to keep the rain off?

And when did that vent or cricket disappear? What became of it?  I have no
recollection.

It was not a functional or useful silo, but it was beautiful in its own way    .
Though doomed                                                                  .

Source: 2019/10/-brothers-rico

Title: Another Film Noir:  The Brothers Rico (1957)
Date: October 21, 2019

It's not the most artistic poster (way too crowded a field) but it's a heck of
a movie. It's a familiar film noir subject: guy (in this case), Eddie Rico, a
former mobster, tries to go straight, but his past catches up with him. The
first couple of scenes establish him as legitimate businessman and husband. In
fact, the director, the ever-reliable Phil Karlson, pushes the Code envelope
when Eddie and Alice (Dianne Foster) wake in separate beds (as required by the
Legion of Decency) and he reaches over and lays his hand just an inch  or so
from her benightgowned right breast. (Makes me wonder how much negotiation was
required with the censors: "Can he put his hand here? How about here? Above?
Below?") And then when Eddie playfully asks Alice why  she married him, she
answers rather forthrightly, "I was a girl. I wanted to be a woman." Whoa, how
did Karlson slip that one through?  Did the censors not understand?

Discussion of prudery is relevant, because censorship spoils the ending of the
film. It's grim gangland world into which Eddie is reluctantly thrust. Everyone
lies, no one can be trusted, every conversation reeks of menace, and violence
is ubiquitous and casual. In the showdown, Eddie is wounded and survives, but
every element in the logic of film requires that he die. The tacked-on happy
ending, in which a headline proclaims that the gang has been destroyed and Eddie
and Alice enjoy connubial bliss, is false, and, I think, even insulting to the
intelligence of the viewer. Better to ignore it, or, better still, turn off the
tv just three minutes before the end, because the first 87 minutes are just
terrific.

Source: 2019/10/something-about-my-father

Title: A Few Words About My Father
Date: October 21, 2019

Here's a memory from my youth. Let's say it's the early '50s. I'm a thoughtless,
self-absorbed adolescent, nominally studying at Erasmus Hall but in fact not
paying much mind to schoolwork. It's a Sunday dinner, so I've probably just come
home from playing several hours of schoolyard basketball or softball. We're at
the dining room table. Roast beef, possibly. There's a desultory conversation,
but then my father, Emanuel, savoring the loaded table, observes, right out of
left field I thought then, "I don't think we could eat better food." He paused.
"Perhaps fancier, but not better."

I didn't know what has prompted his observation but it made enough impact on
me that I retained it in memory for now these seventy years. I doubt that any
of the five of us dissented and I suspect that we continued to stuff ourselves
with meat and roasted potatoes and (inasmuch as it was the 50s), some sort of
soggy canned vegetable. But now, almost seven decades later, I think that I
have a better understanding of Dad's spontaneous celebration of the roast. I
also think that I know why that particular moment has stayed in my mind when so
much else has long since evaporated. After all, Dad was not given to gratuitous
compliments, certainly not to the food on the table. My father was neither a
gourmet nor a food critic (I've written about his eating habits elsewhere). I
now know that he wasn't commenting on the preparation or the presentation of the
food. He was savoring its inherent quality -- its grade A choiceness -- wait,
not just its quality so much as its abundance. But even more specifically, when
I think back, he was enjoying the knowledge that he was able to provide such a
bountiful dinner for his family.

To understand Dad's spontaneous overflow of emotion, it's necessary to recall
the facts of his own childhood. From what I've gleaned, the family in which he
grew up must have been among the poorest in America, the very bottom of the
economic ladder. His father worked in a factory -- which was just a large room
behind a storefront -- as a roller of cigars. It's well documented that in the
first part of the 20th century, cigar-rollers were one of the most exploited and
most underpaid of American workers. Grandpa's wage when Dad was growing up, he
told me, was $9 per week. The family, the six of them (the parents Isaiah and
Eta, the children Max, Sol, Mollie, and Manny) lived in a sixth floor cold water
walk-up flat -- that is, in an apartment in a tenement up six flights of stairs
(no elevators), water but no hot water. I don't know how many rooms in this
apartment but it didn't matter much, because, Dad said, they all spent their
time in the kitchen, which was the only room they could afford to heat.

Dad's mother, my grandmother Eta (she's Yetta in her naturalization papers)
didn't speak much English and I can only remember one conversation with her --
just a short while before she died in 1962 at age 89. It was a struggle for her
to speak my language but she managed to say two memorable sentences about her
early years in America. She said, with pride, "we was poor but we was clean,"
and (very relevant here) "we always had what to eat."  That sentence of hers
--"we always had what to eat"-- was said with almost exactly the same valence
as my father's "I don't think we could eat better food." For grandma, putting
food on the table for six individuals was achievement enough. It was a triumph.
Grandma didn't speak of her diet in the old country, but from her height (4'10")
and that of her husband Isaiah's (5'1"), I can guess that food was an issue and
that dearth was common. I also suspect that the sixth floor walk-up might have
been luxurious compared to the standard of living in StaryConstantin in Ukraine.

But to my father. He had no difficulty acknowledging the poverty of his early
years. I think, looking back, that he had some pleasure in knowing that he had
overcome the hardships of his youth. If he didn't have a jacket in the coldest
of winters, well, he had a sweater, and that was enough. I only remember one
complaint, and it wasn't about his family. During World War I, students in P.
S. 122 were lined up on the side of the room and were instructed to offer their
donations for the purchase of War Bonds. When they surrendered their dimes
or quarters, they were allowed to sit down.  But Dad was required to remain
standing because he didn't have even a nickel to donate. "Wasn't that a cruel
thing to do to a child," he said to me.

But poverty did not distort my father's personality. He was the precise opposite
of the stereotype of the upwardly mobile overachiever, grasping for more and
more.  He was actually rather contemptuous of such people. He said to me once,
"Anyone can make money if he makes it the whole business of his life to do
so." And I also remember an instance when I overheard a conversation among his
friends about how much their stocks had gained. After they left, my father
said, "When the stock market is going up, everyone's a genius." He himself
never had an extra dollar to invest in stocks. But enough is as good as a feast.

He was the person least interested in material goods that I have met in my
entire lifetime. He had no possessions and craved none. He was a real estate
lawyer in a world where clients squabbled over inches, but his opinion was
"Nobody owns anything. Maybe you can say you have a lifetime lease, but that's
all."

Here's another piece of wisdom that offered, and one from which I've profited. I
think I can quote this verbatim. "Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a
friend. And never be embarrassed to accept a favor from a friend. People like to
help each other."

Source: 2019/10/jot-and-tittle

Title: Jot and Tittle
Date: October 28, 2019

First of all, let us dismiss the notion that Charles Dickens invented a pair of
persnickety punctilious accountants and named them Jot and Tittle. Sorry, it
could or should have been the case, but it's not so. Nevertheless, both "jot"
and "tittle," often found in each other's cozy company, have stories to tell.

Take jot, for example. In the masterful "seduction scene" in Shakespeare's
Othello, Iago first torments the Venetian general and then pretends sympathy: "I
see this (i.e. his nasty sly hints that Desdemona has been a-bed with Cassio)
hath a little dashed your spirits." Othello responds defensively, perhaps a tad
dishonestly: "Not a jot, not a jot."

Professor Google tells me it's none of those things and that I am entirely off
track. "Jot" is alphabetic; it translates the Greek "iota," the smallest letter
-- no more than a single straight line, a minimal minim. And therefore Othello
might just as well have said (the words are cognates), "Not an iota, not an
iota." He might have said it, that is, if he hadn't spent his dearest action in
the tented field engaging exclusively in broils and battles, but instead had
studied at some North African classical academy.

In fact, Shakespeare either didn't know or didn't use the word "iota," which
seems not to have entered English until a generation after he ceased putting
quill to paper. On the other hand, Shakespeare was mighty fond of the word
jot, which he employed at least twenty times (though never so notably as in
Othello), always to denote a small quantity and frequently to appear as
a partitive: "jot of promise," "jot of ceremony," "jot of color," "jot of
pleasure," "jot of blood.'" Shakespeare's "jot" can even signify a moment in
time: "No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer." (His "jot" is always a noun,
never the converted verb meaning "to write a few words quickly.")

Shakespeare undoubtedly knew the word "jot" from its famous and mysterious
appearance in Matthew 5:18. Here's the familiar King James Version (1611): "For
verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." The phrasing is almost the
same in the Geneva Bible of 1576 -- the translation that Shakespeare himself
knew and used. "For truly I say unto you, Till heaven and earth perish, one jot
or one tittle of the Law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled."

I don't know what "all things" are and I certainly don't know what is meant by
"fulfilled." But why should I, since Jesus's prophesy has long baffled trained
professional theologians. But I do know that the pairing of "jot and tittle" has
become proverbial.

What, then, is a "tittle." No, it's not a very small female breast. Nor is it a
diminutive seabird, though it's not difficult to imagine a rocky south Atlantic
island frequented by the "Lesser, or Little Tittle." In actual fact, it's a
stroke of a pen -- and one that's even smaller than an iota. Specifically, it's
the dot over the lower case "i" or lower case "j." Or, in an extended sense, any
simple diacritical mark.

Shakespeare used "tittle" just twice. The first was in Love's Labor's Lost in
a passage in which Shakespeare makes game of affected language. Pompous Don
Armado de Adriano compares little things (the woman he woos) to greater things
(himself) "Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou exchange for rags?
robes; for tittles? titles; for thyself? me." What a difference a "t" makes!
"Tittle" makes its second, almost inadvertent, appearance in The Winter's
Tale as an element in the dismissive reduplicative "tittle-tattling." Both of
Shakespeare's tittles acknowledge that the word is an inherently silly one.
Is it accidental that a number of words that resemble tittle are frivolous or
infantile: babble, toddle, tattle, prattle?

"Tittle" smacks of triviality. It lacks heft. It would have been a literary
disaster, a catastrophe of the first order, if Othello had responded to Iago not
with "Not a jot, not a jot," but with "not a tittle, not a tittle."

[October 29]  Otis Brown responds: "Dr. M.: you've forgotten the most famous
Tittle of all: Yelberton Abraham. How could you?

[November 2]  Vivian de St. Vrain responds:

Source: 2019/10/more-about-my-father

Title: More About My Father
Date: October 28, 2019

My father had many admirable traits. He was absolutely honest -- "honest to a
fault" even. He had a fine sense of humor. He was compassionate and though he
affected stoicism, he was deeply romantic and emotional -- tears came easy to
him. He was a self-effacing but diligent worker. He was a fine, graceful athlete
-- basketball, tennis, baseball (a catcher!) His social views were progressive.
I never detected a jot or tittle of bigotry in his conversation (in fact, words
that denigrated racial or religious groups were unknown in our home. When I
heard words like "goy" on the street, I had to do some research to find out what
was meant.) He was a thoughtful man, a wise man, a realist and not an ideologue.
He was an affectionate father and husband. He never provoked a soul and had no
enemies. He enjoyed his life.

I profited immensely from observing these excellent traits in action.

But perhaps because of his impoverished first-generation beginnings, he
was never at ease in the world. Yes, he was comfortable at home and in his
backyard garden and among his circle of friends, many of whom he had known from
childhood. He was comfortable walking to the BMT at Newkirk Plaza, taking the
subway to Court Street in downtown Brooklyn, and practicing his profession,
where he was much respected. But he did not like to step out of his milieu.
He couldn't fend for himself. Here's an extreme but telling example: one day,
when I was ten or so years old, as we were walking home, probably from the
schoolyard, he stopped in front of the local A & P and said to me, "Your mother
wants a quart of milk; you go in and buy the milk. I'll wait outside." Which I
did, of course; I was used to running such errands. My father couldn't go into
a market without stress. He could buy a newspaper at a candy store or kiosk,
and he could bring home a loaf of rye bread from Ebinger's bakery, but I never
once saw him in a vegetable market or a fish store or a butcher shop. When my
mother died in 1978, he had to hire people to shop for him. And someone to cook,
because, as the saying goes, he couldn't boil water. Because of his discomfort
when out of his routine, he was a classic stick-in-the-mud. He couldn't travel.
He never learned to drive a car. In his relations with others, he was totally
passive. He allowed my mother to organize his social life and after she died,
he became completely isolated. He hated change. Once when I visited him late in
his life, when he was in serious arthritic pain, he complained about the station
to which his radio was tuned. It was one of those "twenty-four hours of news"
stations that repeated itself every few minutes. I said, "Why not change the
station?" He said, "Aw, it's already set there."

I tried very hard not to imitate these less-than-admirable habits.

Source: 2019/11/amnesia-on-film-hangover-square-1945

Title: Amnesia on Film: Hangover Square (1945)
Date: November 01, 2019

It's a play on Hanover Square in London, where, apparently, there were many
drinking establishments. It's also still another variety of amnesia. This time
the victim knows he's lost his memory, but his friends and relatives don't
notice.

George Harvey Bone, a composer played by the immense (300 lb) and immensely
talented Laird Cregar, experiences what he calls "moods" where he can't remember
what he did or where he did it. It being a film noir, what he does is kill
people. An elderly Scottish antique dealer for one, and Netta Longdon, a wicked
exploitative chantoosie  (Linda Darnell at her best), who's been playing Bone
for a sucker. But he doesn't remember, so it's not his responsibility, say some.
In the event, he carries Netta's newly-strangled body to the top of a Guy Fawkes
bonfire and then returns to his own house where, melodramatically seated at his
piano and playing his concerto while fire blazes around him, he's burned to
death. As far as I can tell, he never does discover that he's a murderer when
he's "in the mood." Nor must he be punished by the law; the fire does the job.
"It's better this way" says George Sanders, Bone's ineffectual psychologist.

Fascinating addendum: Linda Darnell, consumed by fire in this movie, died twenty
years later in a house fire in Glenview, Illinois. (Laird Cregar, 31, died of a
heart attack after Hangover Square was completed but before it was released.)

Is it a good film?  It's fascinating for sure and there are many good scary
scenes, but the plot is so compromised by the inexplicable designer amnesia that
it's hard to embrace, hard to recommend.

Source: 2019/11/vaulting-variable-ramps

Title: "Vaulting Variable Ramps"
Date: November 22, 2019

Let me guess that a modern reader coming upon Shakespeare's euphonious phrase
"vaulting variable ramps" would be baffled as to its sense. Just WS being
willfully obscure, one might complain. But it's not so; it's just that the
language keeps on changing, making things difficult for audiences and readers.

The most obvious meaning  of "vaulting various ramps" -- hurdling a
miscellaneous series of inclined planes, as in a steeplechase -- won't fly.
"Ramps" takes us down a wrong path, because its modern meaning (a wood or
concrete construction leading from one level to another) was unknown in 1611.
It didn't enter the English language until 1778 -- as a borrowing from French
rampe. (The entrance to a highway, as in "take the ramp on the right" is an
Americanism dating only to the 1950s.)

A "ramp" is also a vegetable. It's an uncultivated, wild member of the onion
family lately celebrated by fad foodies (or food faddies) as a great delicacy.
But why Shakespeare would want someone to hurdle an individual ramp or even a
field of ramps is less than obvious. Another false start.

Let us therefore examine the context of the phrase "vaulting variable ramps."

It occurs in Cymbeline, the most magical of Shakespeare's last plays. Nasty
Iachimo ("little Iago") tries to persuade Innogen that her virtuous husband
Postumus has been unfaithful -- that he has, in another splendid Shakespearean
phrase, "partner'd with tomboys." The situation excites Shakespeare's exuberant
pen. Iachimo embroiders "tomboys" and claims that Postumus has consorted
with "with diseased ventures/ That play with all infirmities for gold/ Which
rottenness can lend nature; such boil'd stuff/ As well might poison poison."
Should she, that is, Innogen (and here Iachimo's rhetoric soars)

Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets,

While he [Postumus] is vaulting variable ramps,

In your despite.

"Ramps," therefore, are the opposite of Diana's priestesses, who live chastely;
they are in fact loose women. Ramps who are neither architectural nor vegetable,
but sexual and promiscuous. At least, they are so in this instance, because
otherwise "ramp" carried a meaning closer to "virago" -- in 1611 an overbearing
woman but not necessarily an unchaste one. The word "ramp" in this signification
has disappeared but has bequeathed us "rapscallion" (which was earlier spelled
both "ramscallion" or "rampscallion.") There is no evidence to support the easy
inference that rapscallion combines "ramp" and "scallion."

"Vaulting variable ramps" means "to engage in a series of athletic sexual
encounters."

To vault into a lover's bed might seem to border on the comic but I don't think
that it does so in this case. Shakespeare elsewhere seems to imagine intercourse
as a vigorous event. A brothel is in his language a "leaping house." And surely
it's not comic when Juliet hopes that Romeo will "leap to [her] arms."

The conception behind "vault" and "leap" reappears in the contemporary demotic
phrase "jump his/her bones."

Ramps:

Source: 2019/11/wisdom-proverbs

Title: Wisdom II: Proverbs, Anvils, Hammers.
Date: November 23, 2019

In the back of our fourth-grade "reader" at P. S. 217, there was an appendix
containing proverbs and other jots of wisdom. Most of these were commonplaces:
"look before you leap"; "a stitch in time saves nine"; "empty barrels make the
most noise."  Many of these gnomic bits mystified me. For example:

For all your days prepare,

And meet them ever alike.

When you are the anvil, bear.

When you are the hammer, strike.

I had no idea what an anvil was (now I own a beauty!!) but I understood that it
was something to beat with a hammer. For what purpose? I had no clue?  But I
was a moderately progressive youth and I couldn't grasp why we anvils were being
urged to "bear." It seemed like a reactionary idea then and still seems so now.
Way too passive, I thought. Why shouldn't the anvils join together and form a
united front against the hammers, or whatever capitalist oligarch controlled the
hammers? Why did my grandparents come to America if not to free themselves from
the perpetual anvilhood of sorry Ukraine?

Moreover, I completely missed the mark on "strike," which I interpreted to mean
"go on strike." An easy mistake, because the only other meaning I knew of strike
was the "three strikes and you're out" of basebalI. Even naif me knew that
baseball had nothing to do with anvils and hammers or fourth-grade readers.

The poem was therefore incoherent. Endure and suffer when you're an anvil, but
get on the picket line when you're a hammer.

Why couldn't anvil and hammer unite and resist their oppressors together?

I should also confess that anvil and hammer fused and mingled in my youthful
brain with a Phillies shortstop of the period named Granville Hamner.

Source: 2019/11/another-trump-fantasy

Title: Putin Envy
Date: November 27, 2019

Close

And here's an image that appeared today on Trump's twitter account.  The obese
flabby inhabitant of the White House hits a new low, imagining himself as a
Putinesqe warrior.  This is madness, nothing more or less.

Source: 2019/12/prairiedogs

Title: Wisdom from Cynomys ludovicianus
Date: December 08, 2019

For twenty-two of a day's twenty-four hours, I'm a contented kind of guy. Not
self-satisfied by a long shot, but by and large reconciled to both my modest
achievements and to my inadequacies. Yet between 2AM and 4AM, in the dark
insomniac gloom, I'm a different person. I struggle with "what ifs," with
"should have's," with alternative life choices of every ilk, however trivial.
Although I am well aware that (in 80's pop psychology) one shouldn't "should" on
oneself, I "should" relentlessly. I become a classic second-guesser, a merciless
self-critic, a shrill Monday morning quarterback of my own life.

So because "dark is the dawn when day is nigh," with sleep or the coming of the
sun, I revert to my normal, equable self.

A parable: yesterday we went for a walk on one of our town's many lovely open-
space trails. This walk took us right through an extensive prairie dog village.
It was a sunny day and the little plague-bearing rodents were outside -- cute,
furry, squeaky, sitting or standing, each one asserting possession of his or her
own burrow.

I said to my companion, "If I were a prairie dog, I'd probably be saying, 'I
should have chosen a different spot for my burrow. If I had just dug it a yard
or two north, or fifty feet away next to that tree, or even over the hill, I
would have led a much more productive life. Who knows, I might have had a better
burrow. I might have eaten more forbs and fescue. I might have had more mates,
I might have achieved more. My kits would have been more advantaged. I could
have made better use of my brief time on earth. I could have been better prairie
dog.'"

Don't laugh, please! This is serious stuff.

I don't need to underline the lesson of this tale. It's plenty obvious.

But will its wisdom and perspective console me tonight?

Source: 2019/12/vagaries-of-memory

Title: Vagaries of Memory; Fear
Date: December 10, 2019

We watched the last ten minutes of an early 30s James Cagney crime film. I don't
know its title because we came in very late and didn't catch the name. The
concluding bit of the film was very good: a chase scene (rather tame by modern
standards) and then unrepentant Cagney in the hoosegow, facing a long stretch.
A gloomy prison cell. Cagney's girlfriend (a familiar face but not one I can
identify) comes for a visit. She promises, as is the custom in such films, to
wait patiently for him until he's released. An empty promise?  I don't know.
But Cagney perks up and delivers the film's last line: "If I had the wings of an
angel over these prison wall I would fly." Followed by a fade. The End.

I immediately said to my companion, "I know what he's quoting;  it's "The
Prisoner's Song" by Vernon Dalhart." I looked it up and I was correct: the lines
are right there in stanza 5.

Now if I had wings like an angelOver these prison walls I would flyAnd I'd fly
to the arms of my poor darlin'And there I'd be willin' to die.

"The Prisoner's Song" (1924) was a big hit;  in fact, according to Wik, the
first "country" song to sell a million copies. I imagine that Cagney's 1930s
audience would be expected to recognize the allusion. But ninety years have
passed and the lyric is pretty much forgotten today. Except, of course, by me.
An amazing recall. What a guy!

I have to tell you, I wallowed in self-congratulation. Preened. Demanded
extravagant praise. For twenty-four hours I was the cock of the memory dunghill.
But how quickly glory transits.

The next afternoon, I watched, with my 6-year-old grandson Luke, the re-play of
an NBA basketball game. Houston versus Toronto. I had seen the game a couple of
days before, so I knew it was a good one. But (and here comes the memory horror)
I couldn't remember who won. True that I remembered various plays and players,
but true also that I thought the game went into overtime and Toronto won. Not
so; James Harden, one of my least favorite players, "took over" the last couple
of minutes and Houston won decisively. I had simply forgotten. Blanked.

I was deflated, memory-wise. And scared. One day you can remember Vernon Dalhart
and the wings of the angel, and the next day you can't recall James Harden and
who won and who lost.

Here's the fear: it's obvious that the moments of memory-triumph are going to
be fewer and fewer and the moments of memory-failure are going to increase. And
continue to increase. Burgeon. Yikes. Double yikes.

This is Vernon Dalhart.

But who the heck is this?

By the way, has anyone  seen my keys?  I left them right there on the desk.
Didn't I?

Source: 2019/12/senior-decathlon

Title: Senior Pentathlon, or Octogenarian Olympics
Date: December 19, 2019

In the Senior Decathlon also known as the Octogenarian Olympics, there are five
events requiring different levels of agility and skill.  Events are scored both
on speed (as in track) and grace (as in gymnastics).

Source: 2019/12/me-and-critters

Title: Me and Critters
Date: December 19, 2019

An old friend reminds me that I once kept a cat as a pet. I had forgotten.

Here's the story. There was a cat and I was overfond of her. We left the cat
with a friend when we went on a three-week vacation. She refused to eat and
starved to death before we returned. I've never owned another animal since. Too
much responsibility.

Besides, I was a city boy who had lived a concrete and chain-link-fence
childhood. No room for animals except maybe squirrels and pigeons. But because
I've owned some rural land in Vermont since the 1960s, a surprising number of
critters have passed through my life, though I've never owned a single one of
them. Some have made an impression.

There was the pair of geese, Brady and Lady, who liked to peck at the backs of
my knees and also liked to frighten the children. I once watched my older son
(when he was a small boy) mount a chair and in revenge leak all over Brady, who
was sunbathing. A primitive assertion of dominance. There were chickens, many of
them. I enjoyed the eggs but I was repelled by chicken sexual mores. And then
the ducks. I remember once saying "Those ducks (there was mother and a dozen or
so ducklings) are so loud they could be right in the kitchen." And they were.
The heifers, July and September; I was very fond of September. I loved the way
she cleaned her nostrils with her long tongue. Jackson the runaway horse. A
nameless piglet, whom we boarded one summer, and whom the kids tried to teach to
play soccer with his nose. Despite being assiduously tutored, he never improved.
Rabbits, many of them; pets, not food. The next-door-neighbor's horses, all
noble Morgans, both chestnuts and bays, all pastured on our fields: Gillian,
the lead mare, Liz a wayward rule-bender; Gabe, an ex-boy, very friendly;
Harmony, beautiful as a foal, who liked to look in my pockets for apples.
Also in the back pasture: sheep, Scottish Blackfaces, many of them but no
more than twenty at a time, with none of whom I ever established a proper
one-on-one relationship. Occasionally I helped to track down a stray, but that's
the extent of it. Goats, my favorites, with personality to spare -- dwarf
Nigerians mostly. Excellent pets, excellent playmates for the grandchildren. The
glamorous mysterious rooster who came out of the woods, adopted us, and liked
to  tom-peep into our bedroom. And then these last few years, the miniature
donkeys, Big Joe and Little Joe, who winter in Connecticut and whom members of
the family love for their beauty and the music of their braying.

Source: 2013/01/birthday

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."

Source: 2010/04/horsedrawn-vehicle.html

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."

Source: 2010/11/antres-vast

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."

Source: 2019/01/the-precious-gift-of-atheism

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: April 22, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."