

================================================================================Source: 2020/01/i-could-have-been-a-better-prairie-dog

Title: "I could have been a better prairie dog"
Date: January 03, 2020

In a lifetime with pen in hand  or with fingers at the typewriter (or,
latterly, at the word processor), I've written a lot of bad sentences and a
handful of good ones. But last week, I composed my absolute best sentence ever.
It's pure Olympic gold; a bottom-of-the-ninth walk-off bases-loaded HR; a
sensational buzzer-beater. Deathless prose.

Let us pause to savor this extraordinary sentence. "I could have been a better
prairie dog."

Aficionados of Vivian de St. Vrain (fit audience, though few) will remember that
this mellifluous sentence appeared just a few days ago, right here. You can
appreciate it in context, if you will, but heck, the sentence stands alone.

It is beautiful in itself but one can only marvel at its delicate but meaningful
irony. Moreover, (bonus) it's near-perfect iambic pentameter.

It's become, for me, a mantra of sorts. Whenever I start to bemoan my fate, or
deplore my state, or bother myself over some missed opportunity or long-ago
failure, I mumble, "I could have been a better prairie dog."  And I immediately
regain perspective. So it's a sentence that's utile as well as dulce -- as
useful as it is sweet. Classic.

I'm absolutely confident that "I could have been a better prairie dog" will
help me through episodes of middle-of-the-night self-laceration. In fact, it's
working just as I write this.

Source: 2020/01/slavery-in-brooklyn

Title: Slavery in Brooklyn, Oh No!
Date: January 05, 2020

Of all human institutions, slavery must be the most loathsome and soul-
distorting (although wars, genocides, massacres, pogroms, and wrongful
executions are certainly contenders for worst of worst).

It's easy to think that slavery is something ancient and foreign. Not something
to concern ourselves about -- not part our life, nor my life. And yet American
slavery was only eighty years into the past -- the blink of an eye -- when I was
growing up in the 1940s in Flatbush. At P.S 217 or at Erasmus Hall, neither our
textbooks nor our teachers made much of its recency. Slavery was not our past;
not here, not in Flatbush. It was a crime of the distant South -- of Mississippi
and Alabama, long ago. In the land of cotton, not the land of Coney Island and
Jackie Robinson. Slavery was distant chronologically and geographically.

What an unpleasant revelation, then, to encounter the story of Flatbush slavery
in Thomas J. Campanella's painstaking and eloquent history, Brooklyn, The Once
and Future City (Princeton, 2019).

The facts: "slavery was an essential element of New York life in the 17th and
18th centuries." "Only Charleston, South Carolina surpassed New York (i.e.
Manhattan) in the number of enslaved residents." Campanella reports that there
was "no place in New York that had more slaves per capita than Kings county,
where one in three residents was in bonded servitude." One in three? In my
neighborhood?  How could we not have known this?  How have we remained
oblivious?

Slavery, I now learn, was especially established in "Dutch towns like New
Utrecht, where 75 percent of white households owned slaves." And also "in
Midwout [our Midwood] where African-Americans constituted 41 percent of the
population in 1790."

In 1790, the population of the town of Flatbush -- my Flatbush -- included 378
enslaved people, 12 free black people, and 551 white people – 75% of whom
were slaveholders.The farmers of Brooklyn "formed a Southern planter class in
miniature."

And it was the farmlands of Brooklyn -- Flatbush, Flatlands, Gravesend, and New
Utrecht -- that supplied Manhattan with grain and fruits and vegetables raised
with slave labor. No slaves, no Brooklyn; no Brooklyn, no Big Apple.

In 1799, the New York state legislature passed the Gradual Manumission Act:
all children born of slave women after July 4 were to be free though they must
remain indentured to their masters until the age of twenty-five for women and 28
for men. Though it seems a weak and toothless compromise, the new laws led to
the rapid decline of slavery. In 1827, one hundred and ninety-three years ago,
slavery was declared illegal in New York. (Vermont, to its credit, had abolished
slavery two generations before, in 1777).

Here's a Brooklyn bill of sale for "one certain neger girl called Anna" to Jan
Lefferts for thirty-eight pounds. Her owner, Gilleyam Cornel, was illiterate. He
signed with "his mark."

From what I've learned in the past about the history of Brooklyn, and with these
revelations, it's undeniable that the haunts of my childhood (East 9 Street, P.
S. 217, St. Rose of Lima, Newkirk Station), were not very long ago farmed with
slave labor. It's horrible and disillusioning, but it must be acknowledged.

Source: 2020/01/sleep

Title: Sleep, difficulty with
Date: January 09, 2020

The hardest part of my day is the night. Sleep does not come easy -- has never
come easy. I regularly wake at 2:00 am, and stay awake for two or three hours.
I use this time to fret about the state of the Earth (precarious), the state of
the nation (doomed), and whether that new black spot on my left ankle will lead
to agonizing death, or perhaps (best case scenario) merely to amputation at the
hip. I then sleep fitfully until dawn, the last hours of the night crowded with
grotesque, humiliating nightmares, worse by a long shot than anything Gregor
Samsa could possibly imagine.

Last night, up again, I experienced a moment of clarity -- a revelation, an
epiphany. Here it comes:

My mattress is just the right degree of firmness -- I sleep neither on the hard
earth nor on a gunny sack of corn husks. My blankets are soft Egyptian cotton
-- not leaves or newspapers. I rest my head on an authentic goose-down pillow.
There are no rats scrabbling under my bed, no poisonous spiders descending
from the ceiling, no lions roaring outside the door. No bedbugs or parasites
or mosquitoes or scorpions. I'm dry and warm. The temperature of my bedroom
is well-regulated: forced air heat in the winter, cooling breezes or air
conditioning in the summer. I'm well fed, not kept awake by gnawing hunger. No
noxious smells or hideous shrieks. No pains, cramps, headaches, or wounds.

I know that my situation is luxurious and is certainly superior to all of my
ancestors and to 99% of the human beings on the planet,

I am thankful that I have nothing whatever to grumble at, but I feel that I'm
unappreciative. To lie awake as I do, not sleeping, is to scorn society's gifts.
How my forebears would have reveled in my taken-for-granted comforts!

No question but that I should be much more grateful.

"Lack of gratitude" will be the principal worry during tonight's insomnia.

Source: 2020/01/amnesia-on-film-unknown-2011

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Unknown (2011)
Date: January 10, 2020

Just when you think that the movie industry has run the amnesia well bone dry,
along comes still another wild riff on the subject of forgetfulness. What a
great disease for screenwriters! a disease that keeps on giving -- and with no
end in sight.

This time, Dr. Martin Harris, ostensibly a biotechnologist but in reality a
professional assassin, is involved in an automobile accident. Harris wakes up
in the hospital but of course without memory. He comes to believe that he's
actually the scientist he's pretending to be -- and so do the amnesia-naive
among the audience. (I'm giving away the gimmick, but it doesn't matter because
no one is going to see this movie ever again. No audience, therefore no spoiler.

Implausible, derivative, threadbare. No cliche left unborrowed: two separate car
chases, a coma, a mysterious new girlfriend, double agents, an international
assassination syndicate, a sadistic hit man, doctored photos, phony passports,
suspenseful countdown to the explosion of the terrorist bomb, etc. The usual
stuff.

On the other hand: Unknown is slick, expensive, well acted, well paced; well
photographed,

It's a quick fix for those who enjoy "thrillers." Bad medicine for those who
prefer psychological credibility. Candy for connoisseurs of the infinite variety
of movie amnesia.

By the way, what's happened to Liam Neeson's nose?  It's become Durante-esque.
Cyranoid,

Source: 2020/01/frequentatives

Title: Frequentatives Perplex Me
Date: January 24, 2020

Frequentatives perplex me. Even on good days, I can't tell a frequentative from
an iterative or what used to be called a present progressive or even from a
simple present that expresses a continuing action, such as "he walks to work" --
in the sense that he walks every day or many days, not just once. So instead of
struggling with definition and nomenclature, I'll confine these paragraphs to
old-fashioned frequentatives formed in the traditional way -- by the addition of
an "-er" or "-le" suffix.

"Wrestle" is a gold star, certified frequentative. The verb "wrest" means "to
grab" or "to snatch." The verb "wrestle" implies that the grabbing or snatching
does not occur in one unique instance, but continues over a stretch of time.
Wrestle is therefore the frequentative of wrest. In the English language, such
frequentatives were once upon a time regularly produced. No longer, apparently;
more's the pity. Frequentative productivity has hit rock bottom.

Frequentatives in "-er" are not always obvious, inasmuch as the "-er-" suffix is
also used for agency and for comparison. But frequentatives do follow a pattern:
blab yields blabber; gleam yields glimmer; climb, clamber; float, flutter; put,
putter; slide, slither.

"-le" frequentatives are more common and more varied. Consider the relation
between "fond" and "fondle". '"Fond" meant something like "to be in love, to
dote." Somewhere before its first appearance in print in 1796, fond acquired an
-le to become "fondle" = caress.  (Fondle in its turn generated "fondlesome" --
a word which went from neologism to obsolete in an 18th century flash, and whose
extinction is much to be regretted. Let's revive "fondlesome".)

Here's a short list of intriguing -le frequentatives: crumb, crumble; drip,
dribble; nose, nuzzle; prick, prickle; daze, dazzle; joust, jostle; prate,
prattle; spark, sparkle; spit, spatter; stride, straddle; suck, suckle. Not all
of these frequentatives are as obvious as wrest-wrestle and some cases must be
confirmed with the help of a good etymological dictionary.

Frequentatives have a long history. Why can't they make a comeback? Take a verb
such as "jump." Doesn't English need "jumple," a word that would accurately
describe the deportment of my twin 4-year-old grandsons. They don't just jump
-- they jumple. Sometimes they leaple. Other useful suggestions: hit, hittle;
throw, throwel; run, runnle; hop, hopple. Scream, scrimmle. The possibilities,
obviously, are endless.

The time has come for a Frequentative Renaissance.

Source: 2020/01/dallf

Title: 'Hang there like fruit"
Date: January 26, 2020

Source: 2020/02/public-library-reisner-etc

Title: McDonald Avenue Branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, 1953-1956
Date: February 07, 2020

For all its fabled color, life in 40s and 50s Flatbush was extraordinarily
provincial. In terms of sophistication, it might just has well been central
Nebraska or U. P. Michigan. First generation working-class Brooklynites were
simply too busy making ends meet to acknowledge that there was a great world
outside. Although "The City" -- i.e. flush upscale Manhattan -- was just a 30
minute subway ride away, trust me, no tourists ever made it to our isolated
grimy neighborhood.

In the middle 50s, when I was a pupil at Flatbush's semi-famous Erasmus Hall
High School, I worked after school shelving books in the McDonald Avenue branch
of the Brooklyn Public Library. I worked two or three days a week from 3 pm to
6 pm and earned seventy-five cents large an hour. A frugal young fellow (cheap
as dirt, some say), I saved every penny, and I was proud to be able to pay
my first year's Cornell tuition ($900). It was a good job for me; I handled
a lot of books and because I was an omnivorous reader and an autodidact by
nature, I borrowed and chewed over many a volume that I wouldn't otherwise
have encountered. Plus I was able to sneak peeks at the contents of the 612.6
shelves.

It was at the McDonald library, which was barely more than a storefront, that I
experienced the first glimmer of an idea that there might be a world elsewhere.

The library staff was organized hierarchically. At the very bottom were the
part-time shelvers like myself. Masters of the Dewey Decimal System, we had no
greater qualification than the ability to remember the order of the letters
in the alphabet. A long step up were the clerks, who checked books out and
in, issued library cards, and collected fines. Clerks, like shelvers, were
native to the neighborhood. But then there was the "professional staff" -- five
people with degrees in "library science" who answered inquiries at the reference
desk, advised borrowers, and purchased books. The "pros" were not from the
neighborhood; they lived across the river In Manhattan and took the elevated
Culver Line to the stop at Ditmas, and they intrigued me.

Miss Owen -- Alice Owen -- head librarian, imbued with gloom, was an extremely
small, thin, clipped, austere woman with an unBrooklynish Maine or northern New
England accent. Archetype of the proper maiden lady -- sexless in my view, but
then, as I learned later, who can ever tell?  Miss Owen was, how shall I say
this respectfully, detail-oriented. There was Miss Warren, from South Dakota, a
fan of Senator McCarthy, who explained to me that the world's brown and black
people had benefited enormously from colonialism. Exotic Mr. O'Shea, obviously
gay (but of course I didn't recognized it at the time) from North Carolina,
a young man with more hip sway than Miss America and who actually -- hard to
believe -- referred to our borrowers of color as "jungle bunnies." I was stunned
and horrified. Miss Kyvelos, whose parents were Greek fishermen and who was as
round and warm as Miss Owen wasn't.

And then, another kettle of fish entirely, Bob Reisner, a 30ish bearded
Greenwich Village writer (not an entirely successful one, or he wouldn't have
been working at the library) who hung with jazz musicians and who was writing
a biography of Charlie Parker. He was a type entirely new to me -- skeptical,
disrespectful, "anti-establishment." Borderline hipster. In strong contrast to
the McDonald convention, his demeanor and language were lecherous, and he was
more frank about his desires than anyone I knew, though whether his lusts and
triumphs were real or imaginary I don't know. He was compiling a book called
"Show me the Good Parts" -- a catalog of the sex scenes in contemporary novels.
Pornographically speaking, he was way in advance of his time.

On the whole, the McDonald library was quite an eye-opener for provincial me.
I stayed on through the summer of 1956, then headed for Ithaca, where more
surprises awaited.

February 10. Thinking over what I've written, I can now correct my initial
memory. Miss Owen wasn't the head of the library. That position was held by
Miss Boies. Miss Owen was a figure of authority because she was in charge of
the part-time shelvers like myself. Miss Boies was also a librarian who came to
us directly from central casting by way of Ohio. At some point, she retired and
was replaced by much younger Mrs. Gerstner, who contracted cancer and died only
a few months after her arrival. I clearly remember her valedictory words to me,
"Get the most out of life."

And also, I wonder why Mrs. Gerstner and Bob Reisner took the time to talk to
me. I had nothing to offer them. Is it possible that they saw me as a youth of
promise. If so, they were over-optimistic.

Source: 2020/02/a-noir-dream

Title: Dreaming Noirly
Date: February 11, 2020

I must be watching too many 1940-50s film noirs. They're infiltrating my dreams.

Last night, in my very own bedroom, I hosted a noir festival. Fragments of a
more intricate dream are all I can remember now, but the bits my memory retained
were mighty vivid. The dream featured an attractive young couple. He's handsome
in a Barry Sullivan way but unidentifiable; she's delicate, like Coleen Gray in
Kiss of Death (1947) or possibly like fragile young Janet Leigh in Touch of Evil
(1957). Some "mugs" want these young folks iced (the dream didn't say why) and
they want it done in the most painful possible manner. The scene then cut to a
rickety wood-framed house which replicated the building in the dude ranch run
by Mercedes McCambridge in Lightning Strikes Twice (1951).The goons break in
and sadistically slash the guy's throat and handcuff the girl to a post, then
set the house on fire (which copied the ending of Kiss Me, Deadly [1955]). Next
thing I knew, the young lady was alive (the dream didn't say how she escaped
the flames) and was being recruited and disguised by a trio of FBI or police
officers. Not plastic surgery, just makeup and a change of costume. The plan was
for her to go underground to identify and expose the hoodlums (a plot device
common to numberless noirs).

When I awoke, I was impressed by the imaginative work of my dreamatorium. "Not
a bad plot," I said to myself. "Not brilliant, but original enough to serve.
Add a car chase, a blonde songstress, a natty but corrupt district attorney, a
crusading newspaperman, some heavies (Moroni Olsen and Mike Mazurki, perhaps),
a heist gone bad, a skinny stoolie with a toothpick in his mouth, and a little
amnesia, and you've got yourself a movie."

I should add that this dream came to me in high contrast black-and-white.
Excellent camera work. Well-directed. Think Phil Karlson or Ida Lupino. With
gowns by Orry-Kelly.

Source: 2020/02/portlandconversation

Title: Brief But Revealing Real Life Conversation
Date: February 12, 2020

Dr. M.:  "I grew a mustache but shaved it off. It made me look like my own
elderly uncle."

Old Friend:  "I keep my mustache because when I shave it off I look like my
grandmother."

Source: 2020/02/even-more-wisdom-stars

Title: Even More Wisdom
Date: February 19, 2020

I have the hardest time remembering the number of stars in our home galaxy,
the Milky Way. Is it 300 million or 300 billion?  Either number is so far
out of my ken, so far beyond my ability to grasp, that it won't stick in my
head. Moreover, it doesn't seem to make much of a difference. But now I've
checked once again -- and it's 300 billion stars (ballpark --  not an exact
door-to-door census). That's three thousand millions of stars. Also, it's
130,000 light years from one side of the galaxy across to the center (the
radius). The mass of our galaxy is 1.5 trillion solar masses. Does that figure
include or exclude Dark Matter? I don't know.

That's just the start. The full story is even more astonishing still. In
addition to the Milky Way, there are approximately 34 billion galaxies such as
ours in the universe. Or there used to be until a few years ago; the most recent
estimate is 100 billion galaxies. From my standpoint, here on what Shakespeare
naively called "the sure and firm-set Earth" -- a smallish planet revolving
around the lucky old sun in one of the spiral arms of the Milky Way -- whether
there are 34 billion or 100 billion galaxies out there doesn't much change the
situation. In a nutshell: it's big; we're little.

Even seventy years ago, when I was a boy just starting to learn about the stars,
the universe was smaller and simpler. No one told me, because no one knew, about
the Big Bang, about star formation, about black holes and supermassive black
holes, standard candles, quasars, exoplanets, etc. Knowledge is expanding as
rapidly as the universe; it's only a few centuries ago that Galileo was sent to
his room for proving that Earth wasn't a still point at the center of the world.
"Eppure, si muove."

Actually, I'm glad that Copernicus and Galileo and Newton de-centered the
universe. I rather prefer being insignificant. Standing at the center of the
universe -- well, it was too much responsibility, too much pressure. It's mighty
consoling to be trivial. It helps to put our daily woes in perspective.

Is it more staggering that the universe is so ridiculously immense or that
members of our species have had the smarts to figure it out. Not only the
engineering skills to devise telescopes and spacecrafts to gather the data, but
the brains to think abstractly and mathematically. And the courage to do so.
We're an accomplished and admirable species when we're not torturing and killing
each other for no particular reason. I'm proud of us, some of the time.

When my father was the age I am now, he said to me, "As far as I can figure, I'm
just a link in a long chain going from nowhere to nowhere." He was exactly on
target. But we should also remember that the chain of which he spoke includes
Bach and Rembrandt and Einstein. And you and me  And as long as I remain a link
in that chain, I intend to make the most of my insignificant existence -- the
only one I have.

"That which we are, we are."

Source: 2020/02/endoftheworld

Title: Big Bangs
Date: February 24, 2020

Even though the universe is only 13.8 billion years old, more or less, the era
of star formation is nearly complete. Because our universe expands so rapidly,
the effects of gravity continue to lessen and therefore matter will soon cease
to clump. Existing stars and galaxies will become more and more isolated. In
a hundred billion years, the universe will be a thousand times larger than it
is now. After a trillion years, all the stars will have burnt themselves out,
except for slow-burning, feeble red dwarfs. In a hundred trillion years the
Degenerate Era arrives and the universe will be populated only by white dwarfs
and brown dwarfs, along with neutron stars and black holes, all fainter and
fainter with time. It will all be dark, except when a rare supernova erupts.
After 1034 years, atoms themselves will decay into protons and neutrons. In 1040
years, all of what we think of as matter will have become photons and leptons.
Later, black holes themselves will leak photons and disappear. It's the Dark
Era: just random electrons and positrons that rarely encounter each other -- 
an inactive universe that suffers from Heat Death. It's all dark, dead, and
cold. This sorry state will continue for all eternity.

it's a gloomy scenario, but I don't believe it. It doesn't make sense. And it
doesn't account for Dark Matter and Dark Energy, which no one knows anything
about except that they must exist perhaps in the form of neutrinos. Most
physicists seem to believe that the visible, palpable universe, which contains
the galaxies and the stars and the planets and you and me, is only about 6% of
the whole kit and kaboodle.

My own theory, unsupported by observation, evidence,  or calculation, is that
the universe will continue to expand for billions of years, and then Dark Matter
will kick in, gravity will plump up and spring to new life, and the universe
will start to contract. A few thousand billion years further on and here comes
the Big Crunch, when all matter will contract to a point and then, mirabile
dictu, another Big Bang and it's off to the races. Expand. Wait a few thousand
trillion years. Contract. More years -- expand. Contract. Expand. Again and
again. My universe pulses, for all eternity. Et saecula saeculorum; in aeternum
et ultra. No beginning, no end.

The scientific consensus universe is this: start with the Big Bang, end with
the eternal Dark Era. It's one-way ticket. My universe is round-trip. Multiple,
infinite round-trips. The astronomers have the data and the numbers and theory
on their side, but they can't explain how it all happened, or why? Why the Big
Bang? What was going on before all the Banging began? They don't have a glimmer
of an idea, not a clue; in fact, they punt and claim that it's impossible to
know what happened in the first few fractions of seconds. But my universe has no
start and no stop. It just is.

Neither their theory nor mine answers the implicit question, which some might
call philosophical or theological: "why is there something rather than nothing?"
But my idea has the advantage in that it defers that question indefinitely.
"What happened at the Big Bang? "Well, what happened is what always happens at
Big Bangs."

(Information about the end of the universe is adapted from David J. Eicher, The
New Cosmos (Cambridge University Press, 2015), an excellent introduction that
is written so lucidly that I understood maybe 60% to 70% of the whole. Well,
perhaps a little less. It's not Eicher's fault if I've gotten anything wrong.)

Source: 2020/02/pomonatape

Title: Written for my Grandchildren
Date: February 25, 2020

Dear T, O, E, L, L, C, and A:

A friend told us that when she entered Pomona College in 1961, it was the custom
that all the newly arriving women ("co-eds" they were called in those dark days)
were "measured" by the sophomore men. She said that the women were lined up
and their measurements (height, weight, bust, waist, hips) taken and announced
to the assembled spectators. This shameful blast from the past shocked and
embarrassed me.

I'm five years older than our friend, but I'm glad to say that I never heard of
any remotely similar goings-on at the college I attended. (Maybe such things
happened in the backward, benighted frat clubs, but surely, I hope hope hope,
not in my part of the campus). In fact, I was a bit skeptical of our friend's
story -- it being so grotesque -- so I searched a Pomona alumni website for
confirmation and found this picture. I'm sorry to say that the evidence is
incontrovertible.

Tale of the tape, 1961.

Crew-cut boy is smiling, and I think I understand why. He's almost touching
shirtwaist girl's breasts. In those pre-Vietnam years, female virginity was
still a mystical virtue, mechanical contraception (there were no pills) was
near-impossible to obtain and prone to failure, pregnancy before marriage was a
life-shattering disgrace, and abortion was illegal and sometimes fatal. It might
be that taking the measure of the young lady's bosom was the sexual pinnacle of
crew-cut boy's four years in college. Nevertheless, I'm puzzled that shirtwaist
girl is so amenable to the taping. Is she actually smiling? Doesn't she realize
that she's participating in an absurd demeaning dehumanizing rite?

I asked our Pomona friend how she dealt with the ritual. "Well," she said,
"here's what I did. I went downtown and bought a large size inflatable bra.
I put it on and blew it up to monumental proportions. I brought a pin to the
ceremony. I planned to pop the bra just as I was being measured, but the thing
was so tough it didn't deflate as planned. I wish it had. That was my protest.
I should have done more. It was difficult to buck tradition. When things are
customary, taken for granted, it takes a lot of strength to go against the
system even when you know it's wrong."

Here's another story, young 'uns, from the same era. In 1960, your grandmother,
AGP, began teaching mathematics in Newton, Massachusetts. Her salary was $4200
a year, but if she had been a man, it would have been $4300. The district had
two salary scales, one for men and one for women. I remember studying a printed
schedule that had one column labelled M and one labeled F. The difference
between M and F was small, but it increased with every year of experience.
However small or large the discrepancy, it was still an insult and an injustice,
designed as much to assert superiority and inferiority as to make an economic
difference.

Both AGP and I knew it was wrong, but I'm embarrassed to say that we did not
protest. Before "equal pay for equal work," it was taken for granted that Fs
would be paid less than Ms. Why didn't we argue, agitate, organize?  Because we
were paralyzed, I think, by the powerful forces of custom and convention.

I wonder about crew-cut boy. Was he forever locked into 1960 attitudes or did he
eventually come to enlightenment? What sort of relations did he establish with
mature women? And did he, perhaps, have a daughter? Would he have advised her to
attend Pomona College, and if he did so, did he try to ascertain whether first-
year female students were still being measured?

I wonder also about the abuses in our society that we notice but tolerate
because they are so embedded in the culture. And even more so, by the abuses
we don't notice but will be clearly apparent in a generation or two. Which of
today's events will look as antiquated and rearward in fifty years as that
Pomona ritual?

Source: 2020/03/what-wondrous-life-is-this-i-lead

Title: "What Wondrous Life is This I Lead"
Date: March 04, 2020

"Now for my life," the doctor* boasted, "it is a miracle of [eighty] years,
which to relate, were not a history but a piece of poetry." Sir Thomas didn't
know the half of it; if his life was a miracle, then mine is a hundred times
more so. Yesterday the miracles started first thing in the morning when I drove
(I own a horseless carriage -- a circumstance Sir T. couldn't possibly have
imagined) to our spanking new hospital to have my innards inspected. The MRI
doughnut deployed a couple of teslas worth of magnetism to spin my protons into
images, a process which, though incomprehensible to me, is a heck of a lot less
agonizing than extracting the information from my personal body with scalpel
and stand-by sponge, and is significantly more informative than inspecting
my urine, which is what a seventeenth-century doctor like Browne would have
done. Later, I took a short walk to the local bank to take care of business
and moved some, well, not exactly money but virtual or magic money from one
account to another. Back home, I conversed by cell to NGP who was on the road
to Virginia in a horseless carriage of his own. Inasmuch as he was behind the
wheel, we skipped the face time feature. Nevertheless the long-distance mobile
communication experience was plenty miraculous. The climax of my day was a walk
to a neighborhood theater where Angela Hewitt blessed us with an exquisitely
rendered performance of Bach's Goldberg Variations. She was in a zone; I was
riveted. Is it more wondrous that Bach composed the Variations, that Ms. Hewitt
performed them with such delicate power, or that the concert took place right
around the corner, almost at my doorstep?  After the Bach, the day being
now almost over, along came still another miraculous moment when I watched,
supine in my own bed, in real time, the last minutes of an NBA game beamed in
from Boston, Massachusetts, two thousand miles to the east, and almost at the
Atlantic Ocean. It was an excellent game -- a stunning win for the Brooklyn
Nets, and an equally remarkable triumph for my pixel-rich widescreen TV. It was
a long day and a varied one, and I was beat, so while snuggling a-bed with the
lady friend (an intimacy that is not only a miracle but a piece of poetry to
boot), I instructed Alexa to give us a little opera. Alexa complied and chose
WQXR in NYC, and for a drowsy hour we were grateful operavores.

No question but that my day was comprised of a series of miracles, each one more
incredible than the other.

Nor do I even bother to tally daily miracles so commonplace that we cease to
notice them: water in (both cold and hot) and waste out, electricity, central
heating and A/C, refrigeration, natural gas to cook by, big bright cheerful
windows, etc.

"What wondrous life is this I lead."

*Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici, first published 1644.

Source: 2020/03/first-days-at-cornell-september-1956

Title: First Days at Cornell, September 1956.
Date: March 07, 2020

Early in September of 1956, I found my way from Flatbush to Hoboken and there
boarded the old Lehigh Valley Railroad (the 'Leaky V') for the eight-hour ride
to Ithaca. Surely I was the most naive and callow lad ever to set foot on the
grounds of Cornell University. I was ignorant and provincial and I had never so
much as visited a college campus. Although I lived a bicycle ride's distance
from Brooklyn College, I had never been either enterprising or curious enough
to ride by and take a gander. What I knew of higher education was what I had
gleaned from 1940s black-and-white movies in which mature-looking but prankish
fellows in raccoon coats smoked pipes and harmonized and made fun of the 'prexy'
and of the bespectacled 'profs' and who were unworthy of the attractive coeds
they pursued until just before the final fadeout when they reformed themselves
enough to earn a kiss and a wink. Nor did I have the slightest idea what was
signified by the wink.

I arrived at Cornell a few days before classes began. During those first days I
had three separate mind-shattering experiences.

The first: one morning, I took my newly-purchased map and set out on a long
walk (probably to avoid one of those atavistic rah-rah events which Cornell
favored and to which I was constitutionally averse). Sometime during the day's
wandering I came across a road sign that read "CITY LIMITS." It was as if I had
been struck by lightning. Until the moment that I encountered that sign, I had
no idea that a city could have limits. Regular readers of this blague know that
I spent my first seventeen years in the interior regions of darkest Brooklyn, a
large borough in an even larger city from which there was no exit and certainly
no "limit" -- especially not while on foot. My family, my family of origin, was
automobile-free and I myself had left the neighborhood precincts only a handful
of times. Although unworldly, I was nevertheless capable of extrapolation.
If it was possible to pass beyond the city limits, then perhaps it was also
possible to re-negotiate other limitations that I had assumed were eternal
or unalterable. I walked past the sign and transcended the city of Ithaca. I
couldn't go very far because my map went blank, so after a hundred or so feet I
hustled back -- but for the first time in my life I had stepped over the line.

The next day: terra incognita of an entirely different order. I wandered into
the McGraw Library and found myself in the periodical room. Until the moment
that I entered that space, I was acquainted only with magazines that would be
found in a barbershop or in a dentist's office -- Life and Look and Collier's
and The Saturday Evening Post and, for profound intellectual stimulation, the
National Geographic. And yet here was a room with an apparently limitless number
of periodicals: Journal of Physical Chemistry, Journal of Theology, Journal of
Metaphysics, Journal of Medieval Studies, Journal of Biblical Archeology. I had
no idea that there were such periodicals nor did I know that there were such
areas of knowledge. Was there in truth a subject called anthropology?  and
various shades of anthropology -- cultural, physical, linguistic? To say that
I was wide-eyed does not do justice to width of my eyes. I spent hours leafing
through these publications. I didn't understand much of what I read, but I did
realize that there were things going on in the world for which P. S. 217 and
EHHS and Flatbush had not prepared me.

A third and most miraculous occurrence. My assigned roommate arrived. His
name was Harry Wallace Blair II. He was delivered to campus by his parents
and his grandparents. I was introduced to his family, and, wonder of wonders,
his grandparents spoke English. Coming from immigrant Brooklyn, I had never
encountered grandparents who spoke English. Or imagined that there could be any
such. Italian, yes. Polish, certainly. Yiddish, of course. But English, never.
I was totally flabbergasted. I wonder whether Harry's grandparents noticed my
repeated gasps.

Oh, yes, I forgot one other event of the first Cornell week. Classes began.
I enrolled for introductory chemistry -- a big mistake. Chem, I quickly
discovered, was not where my talents lay. It was a large lecture class --
possibly 300 or 400 students. We all sat for a math screening test. Quite
in error, I was assigned to a special advanced section of twenty students
supposedly talented in mathematics. In the class were nineteen men and one
woman. Can you guess, grandchildren and regular readers, who was that woman?

Source: 2020/03/amnesia-on-film-the-vow-2012

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Vow (2012)
Date: March 17, 2020

Amnesia movies are not absolutely fettered to reality, nor should they be.
Hollywood amnesia, as has been frequently noted, is the most flexible and
variable of illnesses. Nevertheless, The Vow (2012) breaks new ground in want
of integrity. One reviewer called it a "heartless, soulless jumble," but that's
letting it off easy.

A young woman, played by perky Rachel McAdams, suffers an automobile accident
and forgets the five years of her marriage to a young man, played by wooden
mumbling Channing Tatum. The couple stumbles around for ninety bumbling minutes
but eventually he wins her back in cliche date-movie, rom-com tearjerk fashion.
Loss of memory, which in any close-to-reality situation would be psychologically
troublesome if not utterly disabling, proves to be of no more consequence than
the loss of a pair of shoes or eyeglasses. Simplistic, superficial, offensive.

The film advertises itself as based on real events. Loosely based, I'd say,
because in actual fact, there was an accident and she suffered loss of memory,
but he had an affair, the marriage crumbled, and they divorced. But that was in
another country, one in which real human beings might dwell.

"No redeeming characteristics" says another reviewer. The film is especially
not redeemed by expressionless Channing Tatum, who fumbles and garbles a higher
percentage of his dialog than any actor in the history of Hollywood.

Source: 2020/03/deerdream

Title: Deer Dream
Date: March 25, 2020

In this one, I see two deer (it's not clear whether they're mule or white tail)
lolling on the ridge line. They're semi-anthropomorphic -- they look like deer,
but they're sprawled on the ground as if in a reading position, each supporting
his head with one hand (or hoof). I climb to where they are lying and join
them, but the terrain is very steep and I tumble backward  head over heel a
hundred or so feet into a swampy thicket. The deer follow me gingerly. There's
a fadeout. Next thing I know, I'm lying on the back of one of the deer just
like in the westerns when a dead man is carried back to town  horseback.  The
deer take me home -- to a log cabin, unfamiliar to me, in the woods. My friends
unload me, and one of them says, "We should do something for the deer." I say,
"OK, let's not shoot them."  End of dream.

Once again, my nighttime life is orders of magnitude more imaginative that my
daytime existence.

Source: 2020/04/replacement-child-up-to-date-post

Title: Susan P. (1937-38)
Date: April 04, 2020

This entry is written at the specific instruction of my daughter, who says,
"your grandchildren will want to know about your birth. It's their history too."
The following paragraphs are for them and for their descendants.

My older sister, Susan, died of pneumonia at the age of nine months on March 15,
1938. If she had lived, I wouldn't exist, nor would my ten descendants, and no
one would notice.

I was born on March 11, 1939, just one year minus four days after Susan died. It
seems obvious that I was purposely conceived as a substitute for the dead child
-- and it therefore follows that I was delivered into a disrupted, stressed
family. Was I to be treasured as a compensation for past grief or to be resented
as an imperfect interloper? Or both, simultaneously? To raise the ante, it is
also a fact that during that fatal March of 1938 when Susan lay dying, my older
brother Eugene, then just shy of three years of age, was gravely ill of the same
disease that killed his younger sister, and that although he was at death's
door, he managed to pull through.

So let us consider the situation of my parents, Manny and Lil, in June of
1938, the month of my conception. Poor Susan lay a-mouldering in her tiny
grave for just three months. The Great Depression was still going strong
and Hitler's Nuremberg Laws had been in force since 1935. Father Coughlin,
celebrity Jew- hater, was agitating thirty million American radio listeners a
week. Kristallnacht was just five months away and most everyone knew that war
was imminent. Residing on East 9th Street in Flatbush were my grief-stricken
young parents, who had helplessly watched one child die and had come within a
hairbreadth of losing another. We must imagine them reeling, tearful, clinging
to one another, dealing as best they might with heartbreaking anxiety and pain.
Yet despite public and personal disasters, they made the courageous choice to
throw the dice again, and out of their anguish to bring forth another child
-- and to run the real risk, in those pre-antibiotic days, of offering still
another sacrifice to pneumonia or some other dread incurable illness.

If my parents were still alive, I'd congratulate them, celebrate them, not
because their resilience produced me, but because to beget a substitute child in
chaotic, dangerous 1938 seems to me, now, looking back from the perspective of
2020, to be an act of unfathomable courage.

Or so I would like to think. It's also possible that I'm here not because of
their heroism but because of a failure of contraception. I'll never know.
I didn't ask; they never said, and the facts are unrecoverable. Lil and
Manny wouldn't dream of speaking aloud about anything so intimate as sex or
reproduction, certainly not with their children and, who knows, perhaps not
even with one another. In that regard, they were typical of their generation.
Personal matters were kept close to the vest.

When Lil was five months pregnant, Hitler annexed the Sudetenland. Exactly three
weeks before I landed on this planet, 20,000 Nazi supporters rallied, complete
with Fascist salutes, at the old Madison Square Garden on 49th Street. Four days
after I arrived, on the anniversary --the yahrzeit -- of the death of little
Susan, while my mother was regaining her strength in Manhattan's Park East
hospital on East 83rd Street, German tanks rolled into Czechoslovakia. For Lil,
for Manny, personal and public crises intersected. Nazis foreign and domestic
were at the gates, and inside the hospital, my mother was still mourning the
loss of the little girl whom my Uncle Dan, my mother's brother, remembered as
an "exceptionally beautiful child." And lying beside Lil in her bed was the
newborn, who was welcomed with joy, I'm sure, but with ambivalence also. Not
an eternally glowing-in-memory girl child but me --an undistinguished chap, to
put it in the most favorable light. Not "trailing clouds of glory" but instead
enveloped in a fog of danger and possibly regret.

My parents, as I have said, kept their emotions tightly buttoned, so while Susan
was not mourned or even mentioned within the family, she was never forgotten. In
fact, throughout my childhood she remained a mysterious ghostly presence. In my
parents' bedroom was a simple display -- a child-size wood-and-wicker chair and
above it, on the wall, a gold-framed picture of a very pretty infant. The shrine
fascinated me, and I would sneak into my parent's bedroom to study it. Sneak?
Yes, because their bedroom was a consecrated place not to be defiled by Eugene
or Jonathan or me. Off limits. It was the sin of all childhood sins to violate
the taboo and cross into the forbidden zone. My mother made an unholy fuss about
this rule. "You are not to go into our bedroom. Ever." Which I did, regularly,
when no one was looking --- but it felt like a midnight intrusion into a deep
dark country graveyard. Very creepy. Who is that infant in the picture? And why
is she not allowed to rest in peace? I knew better than to ask.

I never thought, then, to wonder how Manny and Lil, contemplating the gilded
idol morn and eve, could fail to compare their frozen-in-time lost infant to her
scruffy successor? Of course I was aware that my "difficult" mother was a deeply
troubled woman. But never, trust me, did I have the least glimmer that the shade
of the dead infant haunted our family -- and myself in particular. No child,
certainly not me, would have been so insightful. It's transparent now, but it
was anything but obvious then. Nor could anyone possibly have predicted that
there was to be an area of study within the discipline of psychology called "The
Replacement Child Syndrome" (RCS). And that I was unequivocally a textbook case
of such.

RCS lay dormant. Forty years later, and forty years ago, when I was in midlife,
not having thought for decades about my dead sister or her shrine or my long-
departed parents, I experienced something of a revelation. It came about
indirectly, but dramatically.

I was teaching classes on Shakespeare's plays. and I found myself paying much
more heed to Romeo and Juliet than that immature early tragedy warrants. I
was especially intrigued by Shakespeare's invention of the character of young
Juliet -- which is far more subtle than is necessary for the plot. With Juliet,
Shakespeare attempted something utterly unprecedented in any previous work of
literature. He cleverly situated his young heroine in a complicated family
in which Juliet had, in effect, two mothers -- a birth mother, Capulet wife,
who is cold, distant and aloof, and a metaphorical and therefore real mother,
Nurse Angelica, who is undisciplined but sensual and sexual. The two mothers,
carefully differentiated, precipitate or echo or explain the conflict within
Juliet between propriety and passion. One mother embraces and promulgates
Verona's rigid mores, while the other is impulsive, emotional, and anarchic. In
addition -- and now it all was starting to become extremely personal for me --
Shakespeare provided Juliet with a backstory (unusual because his characters
rarely have prior histories). It comes to light that the Nurse's own natural
daughter had died in infancy, that the bereaved mother was engaged to suckle
Juliet -- and that Angelica has been Juliet's surrogate mother and companion
for almost fourteen years. So Juliet is, for the Nurse, clearly and obviously a
replacement child. How curiously relevant! How provocative!

I then remembered that William Shakespeare himself was such a child. According
to the Trinity Church records, John and Mary Shakespeare had suffered two
tragedies before April 23, 1564 when William was born. Their first child, a
daughter named Joan, had been baptized four years earlier, in 1560, but lived
only for two months. A second daughter, Margaret, was baptized in 1562 and lived
for just under one year. A full year! and then the grave! How horrible for all
concerned! Young Will therefore entered the world as the boy child who replaced
not one but two older sisters. Even in an age of staggering infant mortality,
two such premature deaths must surely have weighed on both John and Mary and on
William himself. Is it an accident that Juliet is the only certified replacement
child in early modern English literature (at least, the only one that I can
recall at this moment)?

Mulling these matters, I soon discovered that I had failed to register some
additional facts about the Capulet family that by rights ought to have set
my heart all aflutter. Listen to the Nurse nattering on about her surrogate
daughter Juliet.

Even or odd, of all days in the year,

Come Lamass Eve at night shall she be fourteen,.

Susan and she -- God rest all Christian souls--

Were of an age.  Well, Susan is with God.

She was too good for me.

How could I have missed it?  Right at the heart of the Capulet family dynamics,
and therefore at the heart of the play, is not just a dead infant and a dead
daughter, but a dead Susan.

I have to say that this discovery put my brain into quite an epiphanic tizzy.
How could I not have recognized the parallels between the Capulet family and my
own?  And also, given my near-compulsive interest in the bonds and affiliations
among Capulet wife and Nurse Angelica and Juliet -- how could my conscious mind
have ignored information that had so vexed my unconscious?

Alerted by this 1595 play to my own personal being, I set out to learn about the
Replacement Child Syndrome (RCS) in what is charitably called the "literature"
of psychoanalysis. While almost everything I read was either obtuse or so
encrusted with obscurantist jargon as to be indecipherable, it was not hard to
distill the gist. According to the experts, a replacement is always vulnerable
and at hazard, especially so if the deceased infant has not been properly
mourned, or-- as they say -- if there has not been "closure." Such a lad or lass
goes through childhood constantly judged to be inferior to the idealized dead
child. At worst, the love that is owed to the living child may be withdrawn
and the replacement resented --  less loved, or even unloved; tolerated but
undervalued.

Had she lived, the dead girl, let us call her Susan, of infinite and golden
potential, would certainly have grown up to be an exceedingly dutiful daughter
as well as a concert cellist and a world-class figure-skater who when just two
years out of Yale would have created a state-of-the-art gynecological clinic in
an underserved village in Moldova. The other, the replacement -- me -- bawls
and pukes, bites a neighbor child on the cheek, throws a colossal shitfit over
a missing puzzle piece, shatters an heirloom lamp, steals comic books from the
local candy store, wastes weeks moping in his bedroom, totals the DeSoto, and
fails trigonometry. No wonder he's a disappointment.

Well, maybe I'm laying it on with a trowel, but that's the general idea.

Now (this is still forty years ago) reconstituted as a Syndrome, I entered
into my "poor poor pitiful me" period. I wasted kilowatts of energy and eons
of precious time conceptualizing myself as a case of "wrongful birth." I
shifted the blame for all my emotional foibles onto my parents, especially,
to be honest, onto my mother. Right at her doorstep I laid low self-esteem,
intermittent depression, fear of success, disabling shyness and even (this was
a bit of stretch) procrastination. But it didn't wash and it didn't last. I'm
ashamed and embarrassed that I allowed myself to attribute my personal problems
to my willing but helpless mother. Not that there wasn't a smidgeon of truth
to the RCS analysis. Freud says that "a man who has won the love of his mother
is always a hero in his own eyes"; well, that kind of heroism wasn't going to
be my lot. Of course I would have preferred to have enjoyed intimacy with a
smiling supportive mother. Not what happened. But it was selfish and wrong of me
to dwell on slights which were trivial compared to the traumas undergone by my
parents.They, not me, were and are the heroes of this story.

The bedrock is that the RCS, though real, was only of middling significance
to me. It was devastating for Juliet, because it led directly to her suicide,
and it may have served as a spur to Shakespeare, who became Shakespeare and,
incidentally, fathered a daughter named Susannah. For me -- well, it was it only
important for the moment. I was a wounded child -- no, not wounded, scratched
--but not a disabled one. I was healthy enough to pursue if not a distinguished,
certainly a respectable career, to become a reliable father, to meet my
obligations to my extended family and community and to form a long-lasting
marriage -- and when that first marriage was cut short by disease and death,
to achieve in old age a second mature and satisfying relationship. My parents
must have done a great deal right, for I became what my father used to praise,
without a shred of irony, as a "proper, tax-paying citizen." At this point in
my octogenarian life, there's no room for that old self-pitying me; instead,
there's great admiration and regard for both Lil and Manny, who endured. And
who, in the successes of their grandchildren and great-grandchildren, continue
to thrive and prosper.

An addendum: in the psychological "literature", I found no mention, neither jot
nor tittle, of the family configuration in which a male child replaces a female.
No doubt such situations have by now been thoroughly researched by trained
analysts, but not back then, when such a discussion might have been useful to
me. The case of Juliet, where one girl replaces another, has been explored,
but not Shakespeare's situation, or mine. I wonder sometimes whether the case
of a boy succeeding a girl might lead to gender confusion, or as they now say,
"fluidity" (if, for example, the parents unconsciously favor female traits in
their son). I don't mean sexual practice, because I myself have never been (or
wanted to be) anything other than a vanilla heterosexual. But I'm not even
slightly macho; I am strongly domestic, comfortable with roles that have been
traditionally reserved for women. I'm a gatherer, not a hunter; not the kind
of person who goes to the fights with the guys or plays rugby and eventually,
shunning the entrapment of wife or family, rides off on his horse into the
sunset. I am much more likely to clean the bathroom, weed the garden, make some
bad rhymes, play casino with the grandkids, and whip up a beef stew for dinner.

Another addendum: I always wondered why Lil and Manny decided to give me an
awkward obscure Biblical name. They had no interest in anything remotely
smacking of religion. So why choose the name of one of Job's false comforters? 
What were they thinking?  During my pitiful period, I imagined that they chose
the name because they were disappointed with me. We can't name him Susan, said
their joint unconscious, so let's give him an ugly name the diminutive of which
is female. That was my theory, but now I have another idea. Perhaps, in March
of 1939, to resurrect an obscure biblical name was to give the middle finger to
Hitler. If so, it was an act of defiance. I hope I'm right.

And finally: my younger brother Jonathan, who was as equally improbable a
replacement as I, was born in July of 1942, seven month after the Day of
Infamy. He too entered in troubling times. Jon was an extremely handsome youth,
regularly gushed over by friends and family -- and slightly envied by me. One of
his shaping childhood experiences is of my mother holding his head in her hands
and saying, "You would have made a very beautiful girl."

Jon too is a gatherer rather than a hunter, and when I'm in the kitchen slicing
the potatoes and carrots for a big pot of beef stew, it's his excellent recipe
that I follow.

Source: 2020/04/odds

Title: What Are the Odds?
Date: April 07, 2020

It's a commonplace that every one of us is improbable and accidental -- a fluke
of all flukes. The odds against you or me or any particular person being born,
of coming into life, are infinitesimal -- a positron's dimension (if positrons
have dimension) shy of nothing, of zero.

Why is any birth so unlikely?  To begin, while every sperm is sacred (as we're
told on good authority), every sperm is also unique. There are 200 million or
more of the little whipper-snappers in the normal ounce or so of human male
ejaculate -- each one a quirky unique assemblage of genes. Both your and my
individual existence depends on one particular sperm lashing itself into a
lather to be the first to break the tape. If the sperm with your name on it had
foundered, and the dark horse sperm in the next lane had penetrated the egg, you
yourself wouldn't have been conceived, wouldn't have existed. An entirely other
human being would have suckled at the breast, cried in the crib, perched in
the high chair. If you're a boy, your "other" might have been a girl, and vice
versa.

So we are all many-millions-to-one long shots. But multiply the odds against
you yourself being welcomed to the world by the even more remote odds against
the conceptions of your four grandparents. Your grandmas and grandpapas exist
only because in each case two people out of all the potential great-grandparent-
generation cohort on earth chanced to meet and find a particular opportunity
on a particular day and particular spot of time to copulate so that those
remote grandsires could launch their own flotilla of swimmers upriver. How many
accidents had to occur to compile the particular DNA which comprises your own
identity and individuality?

Then we must add factors such as the strife and wars and migrations and diseases
that united or separated our great-grandfolks and their great-great grandfolks
and yea, even unto our Olduvai forebears and to the pliopithecoids who preceded
them, and then back through the early mammals and to the dark backward and abysm
of time. Gosh, it makes you wonder how anything at all ever happens to happen in
this random chancy aleatory world -- and yet remarkable things (such as you and
I being born) continue to occur. And a good thing, too.

Source: 2020/04/innogen

Title: Innogen
Date: April 10, 2020

In Cymbeline (1611?), Shakespeare, still innovating even at the end of his
career, deepens the character of Innogen by supplying her with an unusual
psychological trait. He presents her to us as an escapist or fantasist who leaps
to imagine herself a different person in a different world. Here's Innogen
early in the play, when she realizes that her cross-class marriage to Postumus
(she's a princess, he's a poor but worthy gentleman) is at risk: "Would I were/
A neatherd's daughter, and my Leonatus/ Our neighbor shepherd's son." She
fantasizes herself surrendering her nobility to become a peasant. A few moments
later, she learns that her lover Leonatus and his rival the clotpoll Cloten have
been in a sword fight and that Cloten has retreated. Innogen's reaction: "I
would they were in Afric both together/ Myself by with a needle, that I might
prick/ The goer-back". Why Africa? Because, among other reasons, it is far from
the British court where Innogen's activities are heavily restricted. So in two
short speeches Innogen has expressed willingness to being transformed in both
class and geography. Shortly afterward, Innogen describes (in another "would
that" imagining) how she would have stared at the retreating ship which takes
Postumus into exile: "I would have broke mine eye-strings, cracked them,/ To
look upon him till the dimunition/ Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle."
Indifferent to physical pain, she now imagines herself transcending not only
class and space, but also the limitations of her own body.

It was no accident that Shakespeare gave Innogen such freedom to re-invent
herself, because in the scenes that follow, she will undergo a series of radical
transformations -- from princess to a "franklin's wife," into a boy cooking
fancy food for three cave-dwelling mountain-men, and then a dutiful page to
the general of the invading Roman army, all the while avoiding betrayal,
attempted rape and apparent poisoning. It's a lot for Innogen to deal with,
but Shakespeare knew exactly what he was doing when he started her off with an
imagination equal to the task.

Source: 2020/04/amnesia-on-film-the-unsuspected

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Unsuspected  (1947)
Date: April 11, 2020

This time, amnesia minus the amnesia. Heiress Matilda Frazier, presumed to have
perished in a shipboard fire, returns home where she's met by Steven Howard who
claims to be her recently-wedded husband. She fails to remember him for the
good reason that she's never met him and hasn't lost her memory. It's a case
of "attributed amnesia." Not a disease at all -- merely a handy plot device,
credible in black-and-white 40s murder mysteries where amnesia is as common
as a slight cold. Matilda is temporarily deceived by Mr.Howard. So are the
spectators.

Terrific direction by Michael Curtiz, fine performance by luminous Joan
Caulfield, reliable work by steady Fred Clark, effortful ventriloquism by
Constance Bennett in a part originally written for Eve Arden.

The Unsuspected borrows much too much from Laura (1944). In addition to the
prominently-displayed portrait, there's Claude Rains channeling Clifton Webb.
Plus the heroine's return from presumed death, the curious sexless relationship
between an older man (the murderer) and a much younger woman. A smitten
investigator. Good thing there's a dollop of fake amnesia to help differentiate
the two films.

Source: 2020/04/some-things-i-dislike-about-films

Title: Ten Things I Dislike about Films
Date: April 17, 2020

I'm a movie lover, but I'm not indiscriminate. Here follows a list of common
movie occurrences that compel me either to seek out nineteenth-century novels or
force me to bury my head under the blankets.

1. Cute puppies, especially when the boy and the girl kiss for the first time, and the director, unfazed by cliche or rank sentimentality, cuts to the pooch's just darling head-tilt. Even worse when the doggie covers his cute eyes with his cute paw. Aaargh.

2. Child actors, with rare exceptions. Some few gifted children know how to be natural, but most just make me cringe.

3. Gratuitous killing of "redskins," especially when aestheticized. How gracefully, when shot by the cavalry marksmen, do the Comanches plummet from the face of the cliff or tumble down the scree. In Western after Western, they take huge losses -- presenting themselves as targets while they ride crazily around the circled wagons -- a strategy that is cinematic but nonsensical. And also: all the retrogressive, antediluvian blackface and yellowface and brownface stereotypes that make us gasp with horror at our racist forebears.

4. Those far too frequent scenes, where the guy, pursued either by the police or the husband, goes out the 16th story window of his hotel and works his way across a narrow ledge to another window (always unlocked). Such scenes give me the willies.

5. Car chases. Boring, boring, boring. I've discussed this in the past.

6. Montage dating scenes: boy and girl meet cute. After the mandatory misunderstanding, they reconcile, and then we see five seconds of them sitting in a restaurant, smiling; next they're rowing in a boat in the park; then they're on a ferry, or at a picnic etc. etc. From this we are supposed to deduce that they're in love. Predictable cut to the predictable soft-focus bedroom. Romance, which ought to be thrilling, becomes, through repetition and want of originality, almost as boring as a car chase.

7. Funny drunks. They're not funny. Alcoholism is a destructive disease.

8. The scene in which the stoic hero has taken a bullet in the shoulder and it's going to be extracted by an amateur. No anesthetics. "Here, bite on this." Even worse, if possible, when it's not a bullet but an arrow.

9. Background music that dictates the emotions we are supposed to feel. Worse still, the background noise that is currently so fashionable. Not music, just a loud drone, which sometimes drowns the dialogue.

10. Zachary Scott

Also, movies adapted from cartoons: Batman, Superman, etc. Horror films,
designed to scare the pants off you. I can't bear to watch them (I've never
recovered from Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein [1948]). Action films,
especially ones in which a retired CIA agent or detective or whatever is called
back to duty for one last assignment. And finally, anything with zombies,
cyborgs, extraterrestrials, robots, demonic children who vomit blood, or
tentacles.

Source: 2020/04/twotwos

Title: Amnesias on Films:  Two in the Dark (1936) and Two O-Clock Courage (1945)
Date: April 19, 2020

I've now reported on thirty-two separate amnesia movies and there are surely
many more out there to which I am unacquainted. Why so many? How come
Shakespeare didn't write an amnesia play? Why are there no classic novels about
amnesia? Didn't unsuspecting folks get themselves bopped on the head in previous
centuries? Didn't knights ever fall off their stallions and thwack their helms
and beavers?

Here's an obvious answer to the gimmick's popularity: amnesia provides three of
the major elements of all story-telling: Mystery, Quest, and Identity (or as
Lear puts it, "Who is it that can tell me who I am?") But why is it repeated so
obsessively in film?

Today a twofer, bringing the grand total to thirty-four. In Two in the
Dark (1936), an amnesiac (Walter Abel) comes to awareness on a street corner
and suspects that he has committed a murder. Rest easy; he didn't do any such
thing. But he needs the help of a good-looking out-of-work actress (Margot
Grahame) to establish his innocence. His amnesia is garden variety, "bang-bang".
One blow to the old bean and he forgets who he is; later a second whomp and it
all comes back in a flash (in the form of a flashback). Very convenient, very
tidy, but not very imaginative. The film is languidly paced, almost slow-motion.

Curiously, Two in the Dark was remade nine years afterward as Two O-Clock
Courage with the director of the earlier film serving as the producer of the
later. It was a good idea to try again, because the later film was directed by
Anthony Mann, who keeps things brisk. Although the plot and a great deal of
the dialog was copied wholesale, it's a much better and different film, mostly
because the amnesiac's fellow investigator is now a wise-cracking female taxi-
driver -- a character straight out of the screwball comedies. When she's on
screen, the film becomes a feast of badinage. Tom Conway as the amnesiac is
dignified and expressionless, but Ann Rutherford steals the show as the fast-
talking cabbie.

"Bang-bang" or "thwack-thwack" amnesia arrives and departs easily. It comes
with an on-off switch. Contrary to human psychological experience, it leaves no
residue except for a couple of neat Band-Aids -- one on each side of the head.

Source: 2020/04/amnesia-on-film-hysteria-1965

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Hysteria (1965)
Date: April 25, 2020

Another automobile accident and another hospitalized amnesiac. Once again, the
poor guy might have committed a murder, but he's not sure. And once again,
there's a loyal young woman (Gina McConnell, played by Jennifer Jayne) to help
him reconstruct his past. As well as a beguiling dangerous femme fatale and a
double-dealing psychiatrist. Knockout drops, hallucinations, an escape through
a window, a clever detective, a disappearing corpse, multiple flashbacks. The
usual stuff, another day at the noir office.

The gimmick this time: Chris Smith (Robert Webber) has recovered his memory but
keeps up the pretense so he can solve the murder. Everyone is kept in the dark,
including the befuddled audience. It's a tricky move and highly unpersuasive.
The last line of the Wiki plot summary tells you all you need to know in the way
of cliche: "Chris is reunited with Gina."

Source: 2020/04/macbr3bloodlust

Title: Blood and Lust
Date: April 26, 2020

There are so many overlaps between Richard III (1593) and Macbeth (1606) that
it sometimes seems as though Shakespeare pillaged and reformed the earlier
play when he composed the later. Both plays feature cynical upward strivers
("hellhounds," the playwright calls them both) who risk damnation to murder
their way to the throne, and then lose their kingdoms in battle and are
succeeded by spotless young heirs. Both Richard of Gloucester and Macbeth
kill innocent children and both are haunted by the ghosts of those they have
murdered.

Yet the two plays are very different. Macbeth is a tidy economical play
(Shakespeare's second shortest), while Richard III (his second longest) is
sprawling and repetitious, sometimes even bewildering, stuffed to the gills with
incident and declamation. Moreover, Richard III lacks witches, moving forests,
young Malcolm, Macduff's mysterious birth, and above all, ambitious Lady
Macbeth. While Richard is famously amusing, Macbeth hasn't the slightest sense
of humor even though he can be unconsciously ironic.

When similar circumstances arise, as they must, it becomes obvious that the
rhetorical strategies of Richard III are rudimentary compared to the richer and
more satisfying language of Macbeth.

Here is one passage in the earlier play that has an echo or correspondence in
the later. Richard instructs a follower to slander King Edward ("luxury" means
"lust")"

urge his (i.e. Edward's) hateful luxury,And bestial appetite in change of
lust;Which stretch'd unto their servants, daughters, wives,Even where his raging
eye or savage heart,Without control, listed to make a prey.

In Macbeth, Malcolm slanders himself.

There's no bottom, none,In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,Your
matrons and your maids, could not fill upThe cistern of my lust, and my
desireAll continent impediments would o'erbearThat did oppose my will.

Unbounded lust is the subject of both speeches - "servants, daughters, wives,"
expands into the even more inclusive wives, daughters, matrons, and maids.
Richard's statement is strong, its power strengthened by the litany of allusions
to the uncivil wild: "bestial," "raging," "savage," "prey." Macbeth's is
considerably more powerful, primarily because of the extended metaphor in which
lust is conceived as some sort of fluid. Many an acre foot of lust could be
contained in a "cistern" without a "bottom."  Yet in fact a bottomless cistern
would impound only a portion of Malcolm's sexual gusher which, it seems, is many
times more abundant than a single cisternfull; it's a deluge that "continent
impediments" such as embankments or dikes or dams cannot restrain. It's a
tsunami.

A second correspondence occurs when Richard engages in a moment of self-
evaluation. "But I am in/ So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin;/ Tear-
falling pity dwells not in this eye." Macbeth's improvement: "I am in blood/
Stepped in so far, that should I wade no more/ Returning were as tedious as go
o'er." Blood in both, to be sure, but there are improvements. In the earlier
passage, the key terms are sin and pity, abstractions which are rooted in the
antecedent allegorical drama. "Sin" becomes a personage: "sin will pluck on
sin." And pity or perhaps Pity, is also vivified through the use of the modifier
"tear-falling." But these harkings back to allegory hint at the less abstract
and more imaginative figure adumbrated in the phrase "so far in blood." It would
be more ordinary and idiomatic to say not "stepped in so far" but "stepped in so
deep." Unless, of course, the playwright had an idea lurking in the recesses of
his brain which he didn't quite articulate. Ten years later, Richard's puddle
became Macbeth's river or lake or even ocean, deep enough that it required
the usurper king to "wade" in it. Shakespeare pursues the metaphor to its
completion: "should I wade no more/ Returning were as tedious as go o'er" -- a
figure which makes it clear that Macbeth is overshoes, knee deep -- or even hip
deep --  in a nightmare swamp of his own making, There's no side channel, no
bridge, no way out.

So apprentice "sin" and "pity" are superseded by masterly "cistern" and "blood "
and "wade.                                                                     "

It's not by accident that Macbeth is so deeply unsettling.

Source: 2020/04/amnesia-on-film-the-third-day-1965

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Third Day (1965)
Date: April 28, 2020

I don't know why, but It's surprisingly common, in movieworld, that if a man
stumbles away from an automobile accident, he must cotract amnesia and he must
suspect that he's murdered someone. On top of that, it's required that he will
take full ninety minutes to prove that he is innocent of killing anyone. The
Third Day hits these notes right down the middle. But The Third Day is not just
an amnesia/murder mystery/police procedural. It's also a soap opera/marriage-on-
the-rocks movie; it's a save-the-small-town-factory from corporate raiders
story. And it's a maniac-on-the-loose horror film. The Third Day is a crowded
conflation of genres which doesn't quite succeed in finding a concord to its
redundant discord.

The first ten minutes are the best. Steve Mallory, played by George Peppard,
returns to pre-amnesia life only to discover, and be dismayed, that he's a lout,
barroom brawler, a drunk, and a womanizer. Peppard is perfectly cast because
"baffled" is his default expression. It's his gift.

Sally Kellerman, later Hot Lips Houlihan, is the vamp. Arte Johnson, later
Laugh-In's Wolfgang is the maniac. Herbert Marshall has the worst role of his
career, but if there were a lifetime achievement award for finger-acting, he
would win it. Robert Webber is the detective hot to prove that Steve Mallory is
guilty, but he should have been more empathetic because earlier that same year
he had himself suffered a full ninety minutes of amnesia in Hysteria (1965).

I could almost bring myself to admire this picture. It's well-paced, well-
directed, beautifully photographed, mysterious in parts; a couple of luminous
supporting roles. It flagged somewhere half way through. So did I.

Source: 2020/05/sarcasm

Title: Sarcasm in the News
Date: May 01, 2020

Source: 2020/05/who-remembers

Title: Who Knows, Who Remembers?
Date: May 07, 2020

I don't know what is signified by DBMs or EIDE. I am boggled by hard tokens.
Defragments leaves me all a-quiver. Shortcuts generally take me the long way
around. Does a firewall keep them out or me in? Kibibytes are things you would
feed to a pooch. A logic gate is beyond my capacity of reasoning. My netiquette
is primitive and when I have nodes I take them to the surgeon. Do I have a KVM
switch?  Dunno. My firmware, frankly, is not what it used to be. My warmboot is
frayed; my virtualization illusory.

I may not speak or understand the language of the present generation, but like
most members of my age cohort I can identify the skate key, "the cheese stands
alone," the alligator pear, a mustard plaster, "you owe your crowning glory
to,/ your something something shampoo," "L-A-V-A," "and away-y-y we go," House
Jameson, cod liver oil, Adrien Baillargeon the Canadian strongman, J. Scott
Smart, "close but no cigar," "the call letters of the stars," Mrs. Calabash, a
"rhubarb," bluing, "Well, King, this case is closed," Spider Jorgenson, Horn and
Hardart, "Pow, right in the kisser."

Alas for a youthful population who imagines that the Pontiac 13 was a group
of anti-government demonstrators or that Apples Kudelka was a middle European
dessert. And doesn't know the difference between Sparkle Plenty and Good 'n
Plenty.

Source: 2020/05/a-serious-trump-lie

Title: A Serious Presidential Lie
Date: May 09, 2020

No question but that he's a serial liar: just think of the birther thing, the
attendance at the inaugural, Sharpiegate, "the best economy in the history of
the world," that Hilary Clinton received 3 to 5 million illegal votes, "total
exoneration," the 16,000+ lies and misstatements since 2016 that the Washington
Post has catalogued. Enough falsehoods to circle the earth several times, or
more likely, stretch from here to Alpha Centauri.

Nevertheless, all these falsehoods pale in comparison to the latest revelation.

He repeatedly boasted that he was such a baseball star at the New York Military
Academy that he could have gone to the majors. Someone finally investigated. Box
scores from the 1950s show that he batted .138, with 3 rbi's and scored one run.
Said one baseball guy, “You don’t hit .138 for some podunk, cold-weather
high school playing the worst competition you could possibly imagine" and go
pro. “It’s absolutely laughable. He hit .138—he couldn’t fucking hit."

OK, he lies about everything. But about baseball? Some things should be sacred .
Off limits                                                                     .

Source: 2020/05/shtisel

Title: Shtisel
Date: May 14, 2020

The Israeli TV program Shtisel, about an ultra-orthodox, Haredi family, is soap
opera, but with a hair fetish.  It's all about beards, peyot, and sheitals; one
female character cries the whole night through because her wig slipped and an
inch of her own natural hair was visible -- to men. Sometimes it's taxing to be
empathetic to the Shtisel clan.

But even fanatics are people, and the business of the program is the same as the
business of all soap operas -- getting married, staying married, and healing
frayed marriages.

Shitsel sustained our interest through 24 episodes because the characters are
recognizable human beings and their problems were familiar and real. What is
different and foreign about the Shtisels and their Haredi compatriots is their
triumphalism -- they are correct and everyone else is wrong -- and the many ways
in the silly rules of doctrinaire religion constrict the characters' choices
and inflict upon them unnecessary misery. Shulem, the family patriarch, enjoys
funny radio shows, but he stops doing so because it's wrong. Zvi Arye is a
splendid singer, but he can't join a musical group because joy in music might
lead him in a secular direction. Uncle Nuchem loves classical music, especially
Mahler, but he destroys his tape of the Tragic Symphony because it is worldly
and therefore endangers his piety. The lead character, attractive young Akiva,
is a gifted painter, but his father and his uncle and his fiancee pressure him
to chuck his talents and become respectable, and pious, and a travel agent. Will
he give up on his genius?  Perhaps Season 3, if it ever gets made, will tell
us. I have nothing against travel agents, but Akiva's painting touches his soul.
The writers of Shtisel are right to see art as a danger to orthodoxy. It's a
solvent. Put religion up against art, and religion might dissolve. Which would
be a very proper outcome, in my opinion.

Here's my favorite line from a week of watching:  "When you see a Jew with a
dog, either he's not a Jew or the dog is not a dog."

Source: 2020/05/a-dream-of-agency

Title: A Dream of "Agency"
Date: May 21, 2020

I think it was Oscar Wilde who said that the most terrifying words in the
English language were, "I want to tell you about my dream."

Nevertheless, I persist.

Last night, I came out of a train station in Berlin (a city I've never visited
in my daytime life) but instead of a valise or luggage I had only a banjo case,
with a banjo inside and room for a couple of pair of socks at most. But I
thought, I have cash and I can buy clothes. Then I looked in my wallet and found
only a couple of one-dollar bills. I thought, now I'm in trouble. Nevertheless,
I persisted, and set out for my hotel. Then it started to rain, pour actually,
and I realized that I wasn't wearing proper shoes, just flimsy slippers. Next I
came to understand that I had no idea where to find my hotel.

So there I am with a banjo on my knee but nowhere to go, no cash, no proper
clothes, no hotel, in an unfamiliar strange city.

But now comes the "agency" part. I announce, to no one in particular, "I don't
want to be in this dream." And I woke up.

I'm very proud of myself for taking charge. A good precedent for tomorrow's
nightmare.

Source: 2020/05/petruchio-and-othello-1

Title: Petruchio and Othello?
Date: May 26, 2020

It's an unlikely pairing -- what possible connection could there be between
Petruchio, a creature of farce, and Othello, distinguished general and tragic
victim of the green monster. Yet there is a surprising point of contact -- two
similar (but very different) reminiscences. It's not usual for Shakespeare's
characters to have a "backstory," but both P and O attempt one.

Petruchio brags that a shrew can't scare him, because he's been there before.
"Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?"

He riffs on the word "din." He's inured to noise, he claims -- and how he came
to be so adds a new and improbable dimension to his character.

Have I not in my time heard lions roar?Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with
windsRage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?Have I not heard great ordnance
in the field,And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?Have I not in a pitched
battle heardLoud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?

I, for one, don't believe a word that Petruchio utters and I doubt whether
Shakespeare expects us to do so. It's all bluster, the words of an accomplished
bullshitter. Petruchio is a youthful fortune-hunter, full of bravado and
effrontery to be sure, but except in this passage, he lacks an adventurous past
or a military history. When did he hear lions roar?  While on a Roads Scholar
tour of Scythia or central Africa? And where was the sea like an "angry boar?"
Where was the "great ordnance" and "loud alarum?" More likely at Saturday
afternoon serials than in the tented field.

Othello's story, on the other hand, though more extravagant and fantastic, is
grandly persuasive. Here's a piece of it:

I spake of most disastrous chances,Of moving accidents by flood and fieldOf
hair-breadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,Of being taken by the
insolent foeAnd sold to slavery, of my redemption thenceAnd portance in my
travels' history:Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,Rough quarries, rocks
and hills whose heads touch heavenIt was my hint to speak,—such was the
process;And of the Cannibals that each other eat,The Anthropophagi and men whose
headsDo grow beneath their shoulders.

Othello veers into the mythological yet his story comports with what we
otherwise know of him.

Petruchio's tale is an instance of "just-in-time" characterization. Shakespeare
needs to display Petruchio's bravery in the face of a scolding woman -- so he
produces a soldiership story. It doesn't accord with Petruchio's history, but
it doesn't need to, because it serves an immediate necessary dramatic function.
Othello's speech is part and parcel; Petruchio's is a loose end.

And the language! The first passage, in early The Taming of the Shrew, is
perfunctory; the second, in the mature tragedy, is simply magnificent. Anyone
looking for evidence of Shakespeare's progress of a poet could do worse than
compare these two passages.

Source: 2020/05/baddest-girl-of-all

Title: Baddest Girl of All
Date: May 30, 2020

Everyone has their favorite 1940s "bad girl." Some of mine: Ann Savage in Detour
(1945), Jane Greer in Out of the Past (1947), Joan Bennett in Scarlet Street
(1948), Yvonne de Carlo in Criss Cross (1949), Rita Hayworth in The Lady from
Shanghai (1947, and Lana Turner in The Postman Always Rings Twice (1946) but for
my money the baddest of them all, the baddest of the bad, is sultry homicidal
Lizabeth Scott as Jane Palmer in Too Late for Tears (1948). It's not just that
she murders her first husband, shoots her second, and poisons her accomplice. Or
that she sleeps with blackmailer Danny Fuller (Dan Duryea) to enlist him to her
cause. Or that she betrays friend, foe and family.Or that she's manipulative,
vengeful, hedonistic ("I want money") and depraved. It's that she's utterly
soulless, conscienceless, and heartless. Not a tinge of fellow-feeling. She
could out-Goneril Goneril, bad girl of the canonical classics.

The ending of the film is a disappointment. Instead of Jane Palmer sent to the
electric chair or locked in the hoosegow for life, she's allowed to fall out of
a window and die. Not fair -- I wanted retribution.

On second thought, if she had been arrested, she would have corrupted the
police, compromised the judicial system, and caused the death of a handful of
fellow prisoners and prison guards. Maybe it's just as well to kill her off and
be done with it.

Here's Lizabeth Scott holding a gun on her nemesis (Don DeFore). Is she bad or
what?

Source: 2020/05/sir-smile

Title: Sir Smile
Date: May 31, 2020

Source: 2020/06/my-two-alter-egos

Title: My Two Alter Egos
Date: June 02, 2020

Famous literary doppelgangers include Mr. Hyde, William Wilson, the picture in
Dorian Grey's attic, Leggatt, and Golyadkin Jr. In film, there are the sisters,
or twins, Kate and Patricia Bosworth, both played by Bette Davis and no doubt
many more that I don't know or remember that professional movie historians could
add. Doubles abound in the world of make-believe, but also occur in "real life."
I've had two doppelgangers of my very own. They are not official or clinical
doubles but they definitely manifest or "outer" fears that are embedded in the
less accessible parts of my brain -- they're my own personal Sir Smiles. They
have haunted me because they embodied the terror of what I might have been or
what might have happened to me if I dropped my guard. I never spoke to either of
these individuals -- only observed them at a fearful distance.

Many decades ago, when I was a graduate student, there was a rumor in
circulation among my peers that 50% of the students who finished their classwork
and comprehensive exams never completed their dissertations. Naturally, I was
afraid that I that I might fall into that ABD black hole. In those days, I
haunted Widener Library's vast reading room and there it was that I encountered
my first dreaded doppelganger. He was a bespectacled gloomy fellow, not unlike
me, but taller, ganglier, and, I think, homelier. The story was that he had been
working on his dissertation for 17 years. After I would sit I down to work in
a morning, he'd wander in, choose a place, open his briefcase, spread out his
books and papers on the table, sharpen his pencils and then, after a quarter of
an hour, get up and walk out and come back a few minutes later with a copy of
The New York Times. He'd read the paper in a leisurely manner, then put it aside
and turn to his dissertation. After a while, he would check his watch and then
go out for a cup of coffee. Shortly afterward, it was lunchtime; then it was
time for tea, and then came the hour to pack up and go home. Did he do an hour's
work during the day; not much more, maybe less.

Of course I feared that I could turn into this fellow. I suspect that it was
good for me to be presented with such a scary doppelganger. His negative example
forced me to keep my nose to the grindstone. Without Sir Procrastination, who
knows, I might be sitting at that library table to this day, pretending to write
that damn dissertation.

My second doppelganger is equally frightening but more contemporary. He's a
pathetic guy who lives right here in Boulder -- somewhere nearby, because he
frequently passes my window on his way to the mall, where he hits people up for
spare change. He looks alarmingly like me -- same size, same shape, roughly
of my age, though grayer and balder and dirtier. I could have been him if a
single one of my genes on a single chromosome had failed. There I would be,
living alone in a small room stacked to the gills with newspapers and magazines,
living off welfare and emerging only to shout leftist slogans at passers-by.
Doppelganger #2 is a crazy defective version of myself; a secret sharer who
embodies my deepest fears.

I confess that I hate these two guys, not for themselves but because I know that
I could have been them if I hadn't been lucky.

Source: 2020/06/money

Title: Money
Date: June 09, 2020

I don't know much about economics and never did --it's an area of knowledge
that has lived up to its reputation as a dismal, arcane science. It's not only
economics -- I don't even understand money, which has become more ethereal and
symbolic during the course of my lifetime.

In my first real job, at Sears, Roebuck during the now-historical 1950s, I was
handed, come Friday at 4:00pm, an envelope containing a few bills and coins.
Money as I understood it.

A guy had bills in his wallet and put some in the bank and blew some on
CrackerJacks at Ebbets Field.

That was before credit cards and electronic transfers and bitcoins, whatever
they are. Of course I understand that money is not just currency. It's a
mysterious commodity -- much prized, but  also the root of all evil. It has
no value until you spend it, and then, once you spend it, you don't have it.
The monetary value of things is often inversely proportionate to their utility:
diamonds, pearls, paintings. To have money in the bank gives you a sense of
security. Then you die.

Most people have way too little money, but some people have more money than is
necessary and more than is good for their souls. I'm enthusiastic about taxing
wealth. Let's say a guy has $100,000,000. Suppose there's an annual 2% wealth
tax and he has to contribute $2,000,000 a year to promote the general welfare.
How is he harmed?  He now has $98,000,000. What can you do with $100M that you
can't do with $98M? And moreover, how incompetent must you be if you can't make
your $98M generate a few million and restore you to $100M. You can do good and
still stay rich -- what a blessing!

In my opinion, many Americans think about wealth and money incorrectly. They're
like the Johnny Roccos who always want "more." I was fortunate to be taught by
my father, who explained to me that "no one owns anything. The most you can
say is that you have a lifetime lease." He believed in this maxim even though
he spent his life negotiating real estate deals. He wasn't much concerned with
money and it didn't seem to harm him a bit. He had enough, and "enough is as
good as a feast."

To me, wealth means very little, but standard of living means a great deal.
My standard of living is very high because my town has an excellent public
library and a thriving public school system. And fine mountain trails and other
recreational possibilities. These amenities aren't "mine" -- they're not money
in my personal bank. But they contribute immensely to my standard of living.

What would improve my standard of living? That's an easy question. I would enjoy
my life more if other people lived better. If there were no homeless people
panhandling on the mall or sleeping under bridges. If unregarded old folks
weren't thrown into corners. If refugees were welcomed. If medical help was
available to all as a birthright. Etc., etc., etc.

I would gladly pay more in taxes if my tax money was spent wisely. I'd be
"better off." There would be less money in my personal pocket but more joy in my
life.

Source: 2020/06/oxymoron

Title: Shakespeare at Work: the Oxymoron
Date: June 18, 2020

The oxymoron, a figure of speech in which there is a sharp contradiction
between modifier and noun, has become a boon to humorists: "business ethics,"
"military intelligence," "pretty ugly," "jumbo shrimp," "Christian Science,"
"Utah Jazz."  But it's a figure that has a serious side as well. The oxymoron
expresses very well the contradictions inherent in literary and also human
life.  Life is a mingled yarn, is it not?  Both fair and foul, sometimes
in the same moment; sweet sorrow. Because Shakespeare tried to convey the
complexity of things, he employed oxymorons  throughout his career -- in simple
straightforward formulas at the early plays, but in his maturity in innovative
and sometimes startlingly beautiful ways.

The oxymoron has a long pedigree. It may go as far back as to a classical trope
called the adynaton, or collection of impossibilities. There is a treasure-trove
of oxymora in Alain of Lisle's thirteenth-century poem (or, more exactly,
prosimetron) De Planctu Naturae in which "amor" is described as "pax odio,
fraudique fides, spes juncta timor... mistus cum ratione furor,/ Naufragium
dulce, pondus leve (peace in hatred, faith in fraud, hope joined to fear,
madness mixed with reason, sweet shipwreck, light heaviness); there is a similar
passage, from the same century, in Guillaime de Lorris extremely popular Romaunt
of the Rose that begins "Love is a hateful peace and loving hate."

The oxymoron was given new life and vitality by Petrarch, whose sufferings for
young Laura famously caused him to freeze in summer and burn in winter. Many
sonneteers, continental and English, were indebted to Petrarch, among them
Thomas Watson, a poet who flourished in the years of Shakespeare's adolescence.
One of Watson's poems, which contained the lines "Love is a sour delight, a
sugared grief/ A living death, and ever-dying life" lay behind young Romeo's
modish and easily parodied oxymoron-rich rhetoric: "O brawling love, o loving
hate,/ O heavy lightness, serious vanity,/ Misshapen chaos of well-seeming
forms,/ Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health.... " Romeo was so
besotted by his own rhetoric that Juliet couldn't resist a joke at his expense:
"You kiss by the book." Romeo in 1595 owes a lot to Will in 1580.

Shakespeare knew that Romeo indulged too much of a good thing. Half a decade
later, in All's Well That Ends Well, Helena imagined her perjured promiscuous
lover Bertram at the French court dancing attendance on the ladies in a series
of tired oxymora: "his humble ambition, proud humility,/ His jarring concord,
and his discord dulcet,/ His faith, his sweet disaster."  In these lines,
Helana, and Shakespeare as well, repudiated fashionable oxymoronic couplings. On
the other hand, it is not love but hatred and anger that give rise to Timon's
oxymorons. For him, the loathed Athenians, those "smiling smooth detested
parasites, are "courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears."

In Hamlet, Claudius's insincere but brilliantly accomplished oxymoron          s
camouflage his sin. He ha                                                      s

as 'twere with a defeated joy,With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,With mirth
in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,In equal scale weighing delight and dole

taken Gertrude as his wife. The pairing of "auspicious" (the root meaning of
which is looking to the heavens to prognosticate by the flight of birds) with
"dropping" is especially wonderful.

Claudius's "delight and dole" were anticipated by Richard II's rhetorical
theatricality upon his return to England:

As a long-parted mother with her childPlays fondly with her tears and smiles in
meeting,So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth.

And there's the "wholesome iniquity" of the bawdy house in Pericles -- a play
in which calm comes in the form of "litigious peace."

In King Lear, a play about, among other subjects  a "precious unprized"
daughter, there is a submerged but stunning oxymoron when (in Edgar's words)
Gloucester is at last released from his suffering: "his flaw'd heart.../ 'Twixt
two extremes of passion, joy and grief,/ Burst smilingly." "Burst smilingly" is
a phrase which the younger Shakespeare could not reach; nor could any other poet
before or since.

Source: 2020/06/bisson-conspectuities-2

Title: "Bisson Conspectuities"
Date: June 18, 2020

"Bisson conspectuities" is one of my all-time favorite Shakespearean oxymorons.
Although it's not as transparent as, say, "hot ice" or "living death," it's
much more quirky and colorful. "Bisson conspectuities" appears in Coriolanus in
one of the scenes in which Menenius banters with the Roman crowd. They attack
and he parries by enumerating his own strengths and weaknesses. He concludes
with an insult that flaunts his patrician education: "What harm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character?" (In this case, a "character" is a
summary statement of a person's habits or nature, a "characterization".)

The odd word "conspectuities" is an invention of Shakespeare's. He derived it
from the participial form of the Latin verb "conspicio" -- to observe, gaze,
or watch. It's a nonce word, a hapax legomenon; unlike some of Shakespeare's
more inspired coinages, conspectuities never domesticated into English -- the
OED lists only this sole appearance. "Bisson," on the other hand, which means
"blind," was not new to the language but was in fact an ancient word of Germanic
origin -- and already obsolescent in 1608, although the venerable proverb "the
bysom ledys the blynde" might still have been current in the provinces. In
Hamlet, the deliberately archaizing First Player uses the expression "bisson
rheum" for "blinding tears."

"Bisson conspectuities" means "blind sight" or "blear vision." It's an
especially striking oxymoron because its component parts are drawn from opposite
ends of the word hoard -- old and new, plain and polysyllabic, Germanic and
Latin, rustic and citified.

But there's a complication. The word "bisson" doesn't actually appear in the
Folio; there it is "beesome." "Beesome, usually spelled besom, meant and
still means, "broom." But in the context of Coriolanus, broom is meaningless;
and so, beginning  with Lewis Theobald in the 1720s, editors have uniformly
substituted "bisson" -- an inspired conjecture but still a guess. It's possible
that Shakespeare wrote "bisson" and a scrivener or printer incorrectly read
'beesome" -- but perhaps not. An oxymoron of transcendent genius might be merely
an illusion -- a creation not of Shakespeare but of editorial tradition.

"Bisson conspectuities" puts quite a burden on members of the Blackfriar's
audience. It's hard to believe that Shakespeare thought his first hearers
would grasp the phrase's meaning on the fly. It's easy for us to understand it
now, four hundred years later, with a treasury of annotations at the foot of
every page. Perhaps Shakespeare didn't care if the audience comprehended? Is
it possible that he was writing just for his own delight, for his pleasure in
words? For readers rather than playgoers? Or perhaps he had already divined that
he was writing for enthusiasts and scholars of a latter age.

Source: 2020/06/pitfall-1948

Title: Pitfall (1948)
Date: June 21, 2020

Pitfall is just shy of sensational. Error and evil intrude into a normal postwar
American suburban family. Jay Dratler and Andre de Toth, writer and director,
hit all the necessary film noir notes but without descending to cliche. The
beautiful blonde, is, for once, neither a temptress nor a gold-digger, but a
decent, troubled young lady; the private eye is not a lonely warrior for justice
but a brutal stalker; the police are not jerks; the wronged housewife is not
simple and materialistic but strong and resilient. Moreover, the plot is not
predictable and its ending neither pollyanna-ish nor disastrous, but balanced,
credible and inconclusive. There are no car chases.

Lizabeth Scott, Jane Wyatt, and Raymond Burr are terrific; Dick Powell is, alas,
Dick Powell.

Source: 2020/06/more-oxymora-loves-labours-lost

Title: More Oxymora; Love's Labour's Lost
Date: June 23, 2020

I'm detecting oxymorons in everything I read. Perhaps I'm even imagining them.
Love's Labour's Lost is a "great feast of languages" and also a savory banquet
of rhetorical figures. Here are some of the oxymorons (or "cross-couplers," as
Puttenham called them) that I came upon in my latest re-reading of the play.
Some require explanation.

"Civil war," not 'civil" as in the American Civil War but civil as in "civility"
or good manners (like the "merry war" between Beatrice and Benedick). "Trencher-
knight" because a trencher was generally a wooden dish, not suitable for knights
-- and therefore a trencher-knight would be a low-born knight. "Living art,"
where the art is a portrait or a statue, and therefore not living and breathing.
"Loose grace,' where "loose" means worldly rather than spiritual. "Profound
simplicity." "Evil angel." "Dainty Bacchus," because Bacchus was notably
disorderly. "Sweet misprision," because misprision is a dereliction of duty and
therefore not sweet but sour or bitter. "Rational hind," whether hind refers to
an animal or to a person of exceedingly small intellectual gifts. In addition,
two near-oxymora: "merry days of desolation," "as swift as lead."

These figures of speech are not as obvious as those in Romeo and Juliet, but
they allow us to observe Shakespeare at work, experimenting with the ingredients
of language, just as he was hitting his stride.

Source: 2020/06/e-l-chafetz-family-circle-c-1946-1952

Title: E & L Chafetz Family Circle c. 1946-1952
Date: June 29, 2020

When I was a boy in the 1940s and '50s, I was -- yearly or semi-yearly -- hauled
off to gatherings of the E & L Chafetz Family Circle. "Chafetz" was the maiden
name of my maternal grandmother, Sonia Green. "E" and "L" were Sonia's parents,
but the names that the initials abbreviated are gone for good. At the Family
Circle, twenty or thirty or sometimes even forty Chafetz siblings, cousins, and
spouses would share snacks, schnapps, and gossip. No question but that, selfish
and un-empathetic lad that I was, I very much resented being scrubbed and
fancied up to attend these meetings -- especially on a summer Sunday afternoon
when the Brooklyn Dodgers might be playing a double-header. Why would a young
scamp want to miss out on Red Barber and Connie Desmond in order to hang from
a subway strap for an hour and a half while the stifling IRT rattled to some
obscure corner of the Bronx -- just to while away the afternoon with a bunch of
old folks?

The Chafetz relatives were all immigrants from Belarus and thereabouts, born,
like my grandparents, in the 1870s or 1880s. They were small people -- tiny
really -- the men topping out at or 5'3" or  5'4", the women at 5'0" or
somewhat less -- their stature a consequence of their impoverished "old country"
childhoods. They spoke Yiddish or Russian to each other and very rudimentary
English to me. They smelled peculiarly -- of chicken soup overlaid with moth
balls, their "good clothes" having been retrieved from the storage closet for
this annual adventure. They assembled, if I remember correctly, at the second-
floor apartment over someone's store. (It seemed as though they were all keepers
of small shops -- newspaper kiosks or vegetable markets or candy stores or
perhaps a delicatessen or an "appetizer." One enterprising Chafetz cousin was a
glazier.) They seemed to be mostly childless -- or, at least I can't remember
encountering any other youths at these events.

Who were these people? Why were they so asymmetrical? Bent and twisted, most of
them, their faces marred by blackheads and lumps and swellings. Their mouths
were dental nightmares. Must I admit that my ten-year-old self was repelled and
disgusted, unconscious that their distorted bodies were a testament to their
arduous troubled lives?

Who was Uncle Joe Pessin? How was he related to me? What was his livelihood?
I remember only a small dark bald man with a grating voice. Did he have a
family?  And who were indistinguishable Lifscha and Leah? Were they twins or
sisters or sisters-in-law? Why did Uncle Usher smell so pungently? Was he in the
pickle or sauerkraut business? I know only that he had a great expanse of face
and outsized shoulders and that he longed to visit his brothers and sisters in
Winnipeg.

At these gatherings, I was put on display. My mother (my father refused to
attend) would take me around the room and introduce me to the various cousins
and uncles and aunts. It was a torment, frankly. "This is your uncle Nahum."
Uncle Nahum would shake my hand. I had nothing to say to him, but Uncle Nahum
asked the question that was every uncle's question. "How are you doing? You
doing well in school?"  "Yes, I'm doing well in school." And so this uncle
would smile beneficently upon me. And then on to the next one.

Because of what I perceived as their limited communication skills (though
English might have been Uncle Nahum's fourth or fifth language), I definitely
felt superior and condescending -- an acute embarrassment to me now. In my
heart, I silently patronized these strange people.

What I didn't know, and is so obvious now, was that I was much more important
to them than they were to me. That I was "doing well in school" were words
that they dearly wanted to hear. It was for my generation and for me that they
had braved the Cossacks, sold the farm, deserted from the Russian army, left
backward Belarus or Ukraine behind, endured the miseries of steerage, slept four
to a bed for years and half-acclimated themselves to a new world utterly foreign
to them. For me. They had sacrificed themselves to invest in me. So that I could
"do well in school," go to college, live a better life. I was their emissary to
America, to the future.

What could a ten-year-old have possibly known?  It's too late to regret that I
didn't learn their language and learn their stories. That world of theirs, that
universe represented by E and L Chafetz --- it's all gone now, vanished, present
no where else but in my failing memory.

Source: 2020/07/north-and-south

Title: North and South (1854)
Date: July 01, 2020

I read Elizabeth Cleghorn Stevenson Gaskell's North and South (1854) on the
Kindle. It's a long novel, but I don't know how long because when I don't have a
book to heft, I don't know how many pages I've read and how many more are left.
I can only say that I became impatient after a couple of days and started to
think that Mrs. G. was being paid by the word. But just when I thought the novel
would never end, I stroked the Kindle one more time, and by gosh and by golly,
Mr. Thornton finally proposed to Margaret and bam! it was all over in a flash.
I was unprepared. If I had been reading an old-fashioned "book," as we used
to call them, I would have known that I was approaching the last page, and my
reaction would have been much different. Instead of shock, closure.

North and South was originally published in parts, twenty of them, and therefore
was consumed over a period of months. Later it appeared in book form, so that
enthusiastic readers might binge for a long day or two -- a very different
experience than reading in discrete chapters, and one I prefer. Kindle-reading
is a third way. It's less satisfying to me because I want the weight of the
book in my hand and I want to track my progress by means of the physical act of
turning the page. Electronic reading will no doubt become the norm; something
gained, no doubt, but something also lost. I think I would have been more
satisfied with the novel if I had a solid object in my hands rather than words
on a screen. Strange to say, but I honestly feel that it would have been a
better novel.

North and South is self-consciously "progressive." Those money-hungry northern
industrialists turn out to be decent people after all. The strikers may be
misguided and impatient, but they have a genuine grievance. Women might be able
to live richer lives with a dollop of liberation.

I confess that I am troubled when I read books that were progressive their
own time but that seem reactionary now. I know, and I've been taught, that I
should be more historical, less time bound, less, as they say, "presentist."
Nevertheless, I was astonished, even offended, that Margaret Hale was to be
branded a loose woman because she was seen with a guy at a railway station,
unchaperoned. Good thing the man who was with her turned out to be not a
potential lover, but her brother, otherwise her gross impropriety would have
banished her, lifetime, from the list of the eligible-for-marriage.

I know that Mrs. Gaskell wanted us to think well of the mill-workers, but why
the heck did she make them speak in an impenetrable provincial lower-class
dialect which makes them seem sloppy, and ignorant-- another species entirely,
less than human?  Even though I tried to resist, the characterization of the
masses left me alienated and angry.

And then there's a problem particular to me: every time one of her characters
failed or suffered grievous injury or died (there are a number of spontaneous
deaths in North and South), Mrs Gaskell felt obliged to invoke an all-purpose
explanation -- "God's will!"  "God's will" whether thoughtful or just a tic,
becomes, in this ostensibly progressive novel, a justification for political
passivity and quietism.

I like this novel better when I read it the first time -- in 1963. Although it's
unchanged (except for the kindling), I myself seem to have become much less
empathetic and more cantankerous. Age?

Source: 2020/07/in-this-our-life-

Title: "In This Our Life" (1942)
Date: July 07, 2020

Talk about movie "bad girls"-- here's one of the most sordid. In this Our
Life is a doppelganger story of two sisters, one good and one evil. Roy (sic)
Timberlake, played by Olivia de Havilland, is too good to be true. Stanley (sic)
Timberlake, embodied by Bette Davis in an eye-popping, raucous performance, is
wicked at the Lady Macbeth or Goneril level. She steals her sister's husband
just for the heck of it and then drives him to suicide. Quite the scandal
anywhere, but especially in 1940s class-conscious suburban Virginia. Her very
good sister Roy marries the decent man whom Stanley betrayed -- and then Stanley
tries to seduce him back. It doesn't work, I'm glad to say, and Stanley,
failing and frustrated, runs her car into two pedestrians, killing one, and
then frames a young "colored boy" (we might say "black man") for the murder --
and almost gets away with it. There's more in this competent soap-opera romance
melodrama: a touch of incest, some distasteful bigotry, crass materialism,
morbid hypochondria. A couple or three weak, enervated men, upon whom we wait
for ninety minutes to grow backbones.

The movie was directed by John Huston and Raoul Walsh and written by Howard Koch
(Casablanca), so it has classy bloodlines. It's so overcrowded with events and
loose ends that I guessed that it must have been adapted from a novel. And sure
enough, according to Wik In This Our Life was adapted from a famous-in-its-time
Pulitzer prize book by Ellen Glasgow -- which I should have known but didn't.

In This Our Life piqued my curiosity enough to download the novel onto my
Kindle. I'm intimidated, though. Kindle says 745 pages.

Source: 2020/07/in-this-our-life-the-novel-by-ellen-glasgow

Title: "In This Our Life" -- the Novel by Ellen Glasgow
Date: July 08, 2020

In this Our Life, the novel by Ellen Glasgow is richer, deeper, and less bound
by convention than the film.  Film Life follows the inherited story for its
first forty-five minutes but then sharply diverges.

In the film version, bad daughter Stanley is less conflicted and complicated
a character and eventually devolves into a stereotypical noir "bad girl."
Novel Stanley doesn't drive Peter to suicide, nor does she she bring the film
to convenient closure by driving her car down a cliff. Novel Craig is far
less worthy and more passive than film Craig and doesn't redeem himself by
transforming into a sleuth who exonerates Parry.

Needless to say, the novel offers no Hollywood ending; in strong contrast, novel
Roy rejects Craig's offer of marriage because she knows that Craig is still
carrying the torch for Stanley. Instead, she tries desperately to leave town
and start life anew -- but it's not clear whether or not she will make a clean
getaway. We hope that she will.

The most extensive revision is to the character of the sisters' father, Asa
Timberlake. In the film, he's a uxorious martyred browbeaten milquetoast who is
the long-suffering caretaker of his hypochondriacal bedridden wife. In Ellen
Glasgow's novel, much of which is seen through his eyes, Asa loathes his wife,
knows that he's wasted his life, craves affection, and even admits to himself
that he wants her dead so that he can be free. It's Asa, not Craig, who unravels
the mystery of the automobile accident. Moreover, glory be to the proper gods,
Asa has a secret lady friend, a widow/farmer a dozen years his junior, whom he
visits on his occasional day off. And he nurtures an escapist fantasy that keeps
him sane -- he wants to end his life as a simple farm laborer. He doesn't quite
get there at the novel's end, but there's hope. Kaye, his very healthy, very
appropriate mistress (we think sexual partner, though Glasgow hedges) assures
him that she will always have an opening for a hired hand.

Source: 2020/07/lucasta

Title: Lucasta
Date: July 13, 2020

The "plot" of the lyric is simple: the "speaker" leaves his beloved in order to
"fly" to battle (he fought, naturally, on the royalist side). He loves "honor"
more than he loves his mistress. In fact, and perhaps paradoxically, honor has a
multiplier effect on his love. And yet, although honor enhances love, honor is
always primary, love subordinate. It's a curious kind of love lyric in which a
suitor says to his beloved, I like you, but only second best.

What is "honor" for Lovelace?  It's a word with a spectrum of meanings --
nobility of soul, magnanimity, scorn of meanness, reputation, privilege of
rank or birth, even chastity or virginity. But none of these possibilities
seem to specifically apply in this poem.  For Lovelace and his Lucasta,
honor is military. It is something won on the battlefield. About this he is
uncompromising: the "new mistress" he will now "embrace" is "a sword, a horse, a
shield" -- "war and arms." Not the "arms" of a lover, but weapons.

A cynical being might therefore rewrite the last two lines of the lyric thusly:
"I could not love thee (Dear) so much,/ Lov'd I not warfare more." Flat,
imperfect poetry, but the parody is perhaps what the demystified poem actually
asserts. Make war, not love.

What sort of war?

The primary weapons in the battles of the 1640s were mortar, cannon, musket,
caliver, carbine, harquebus, and pistol. Sword, horse and shield had not
entirely disappeared. Edge weapons were still in use, and the horse would remain
the primary engine of war until it was supplanted in the twentieth century by
internal combustion vehicles. But it would have been suicidal folly to go into
1640s battle with Lovelace's museum of weaponry. For "honor" and for the benefit
of Lucasta, Lovelace evokes a romantic nostalgic world of tilt and tourney.
Single combat, knight versus knight, hot horse against horse.

Lovelace imagines himself glorious in single combat, his mistress's favor
(handkerchief or scarf) streaming from his helmet. It would not be so glorious
to be mutilated by a cannon lugged into place by a base pioner.

Lovelace easily conflates love, which is a private emotion, with military
honor, which is clearly a public achievement. Very public, indeed, which is
what led Baruch Spinoza, Lovelace's younger contemporary, to note that "honor"
is not intrinsic, not an act of personal realization, but rather "a slavish
subordination to the opinion of others."

"I could not love the (Dear) so much,

Lov'd I not a slavish subordination to the opinion of others more."

The rewrite has a different ring.

Spinoza:

Source: 2020/07/the-whole-towns-talking-1935

Title: The Whole Town's Talking (1936)
Date: July 14, 2020

Why was I surprised that this was such a fine film? I should have done some
research before viewing. It was written by Robert Riskin and Jo Swerling. Riskin
had It Happened One Night to his credit and collaborated with Frank Capra on
Mr. Deeds Comes to Town. Swerling wrote It's a Wonderful Life and Lifeboat. The
Whole Town's Talking was directed by John Ford, venturing, for once, out of
Monument Valley and into comedy.

It's an amusing doppelganger movie, with Edward G. Robinson playing both Jekyll
and Hyde. His Hyde is a monster gangster of the Little Caesar variety; his
Jekyll is a meek apologetic clerk. Both of his manifestations are interested
in Jean Arthur, the wise-cracking babe, but Jekyll doesn't get her until he
assimilates some hydeishness and gets Hyde killed. That's America for you; until
you're willing to resort to violence, you're not going to land the lady.

Source: 2020/07/how-we-shop-now

Title: The Way We Shop Now
Date: July 18, 2020

The last time, a decade ago, that I needed a rug pad, I went hunting at various
malls and shops that might stock such an item. After a few exhausting hours, I
located an appropriate-size rug pad at one of those large import stores -- it
may have been Pier 1 or WorldMarket. The quality wasn't quite right, and the pad
was too large and too costly, but it was there --  and I do possess a utility
knife with a very sharp blade. So I bought it, struggled with it, but -- it
worked, and it's still there, doing its job, padding the Heriz.

This time, covid-time, I'm not allowed to search around town, and I don't want
to, so instead I did some internet sleuthing for "rug pad."

It's a revelation -- there are many, many vendors very anxious to satisfy my rug
pad needs: RugPad USA, Mr.RugPad, RugPads 'R Us, Rugpad-orama, eSaleRugPads,
RugPadStock, RugPadHome, RugPadSolutions, Dr. Pad, RugPad World, Royal-T
RugPads, Underfoot-Inc, and My Rug Pad, among others. Costco sells a "Mohawk"
rug pad made of "100% post industrial recycled synthetic fibers with all natural
rubber with SBR latex backing," whatever that is, not cut to exact size, and you
have to buy a shrink-wrapped package of four.

I choose RugPadUSA not only for patriotic reasons but because its site featured
a lengthy explanatory essay on the potential disasters, hazards and glories
of various species of rug pads. Are you not shocked to learn that that some
inferior rug pad manufacturers pad out their fiber with clay?

RugPad USA is a company that takes its rug pads very seriously. I am now up to
snuff on Grip, Cushion, Longevity, Sustainability, Safety, and Made-in-America-
ness. And also on materials: rubber, jute, felt, Pure Wool, hemp, and memory
foam, in their various forms and combinations (and prices).

I went with an "eco friendly Nature's Grip 100% natural rubber and plant jute."
It arrived in four days, cut to exact measure. Perfect. This rug pad is so
beautiful, let me tell you, that I'm thinking of laying it on top and putting
the old tribal Turkish Varamin tent rug underneath. Well, maybe I'm getting too
enthusiastic about my glorious new rug pad.

Advantages to internet shopping: it lets your fingers do the walking, there are
an infinity of choices, and after a while the item appears miraculously outside
your door. Disadvantages: you can't see or feel the product before making a
decision; it's a pain to return mistakes; your cash goes to an absentee merchant
(RugPad USA is located in Connecticut); local shops suffer, and also, slightly
delayed gratification. But the electronic mall is definitely the way we shop
now.

Source: 2020/07/where-i-stand

Title: Where I Stand
Date: July 19, 2020

I stand, like most in my cohort who have lived ordinary, conventional lives,
at the midpoint of a continuum stretching from grandparents to grandchildren
-- at an imaginary apex looking backward and forward, Janus-like. I remember
my grandparents, though only at the end of their long lives, and I know my
grandchildren, though only at the beginnings of theirs. Two generations back,
two generations forward and with 81-year-old me at the fulcrum.

It's been a long eventful tramp from there to here. My grandfather Isaiah
was born in 1863, a hundred and sixty seven long years ago, and my youngest
grandchildren, the twins Caleb and Asher, joined us just five years ago, in
2015. Although it was only an instant in geological terms, nevertheless, the
interval from my grandfather's birth to this moment has seen glaciers melt,
rivers change their course, cities arise, plants and animals go extinct,
governments and empires grow and decline, wars and epidemics rattle the planet.
He lived in a world of serfs and rabbis and pogroms; the grandchildren live in a
world of nuclear proliferation, global warming, threats to democracy.

There have also been tectonic shifts in the microcosm of my own family. My
Ukrainian-born grandparents would not recognize my third-generation American-
born grandchildren, and my grandchildren would have an even more impossible task
to understand or appreciate the lives of the great-great-grandparents. It's a
long leap from StaryConstantine, old Constantine, in the nineteenth century,
where my family originated in backward village Ukraine to Washington DC or
northern California or Boulder Colorado in the twenty-first. Rural to urban,
agricultural to technical, provincial to worldly, religious to secular, inbred
to genetically various. My grandparents were born into a world of carts and
horses; my grandchildren play with computers in their cribs. Yet here we are.

We're the same, but different. According to family legend, my grandfather Isaiah
left StaryConstantine and his family of origin because of a dispute about
religion. They, his father and family, were devout but he was a non-believer.
In this regard, Isaiah was a true patriarch, because he established an enduring
family template. Over the generations, we remain hostile or sometimes only
indifferent to religion -- and in its place we embrace the evidence of the
senses and the primacy of reason. Looking backward and forward from my pinnacle,
I cannot identify a single lapsed atheist or backslider in the family landscape.
I know that my father never attended a house of worship except for a rare
funeral or wedding. For him, the sabbath was sacred only to his roses and
azaleas. I once asked him if his father, Isaiah, had ever visited a synagogue.
He said, "I can't swear about what happened in the Ukraine, but I know that once
he got here he never did." For Isaiah, atheism would have been a revolutionary
fracturing; for subsequent generations, not even slightly stressful. The
precious gift of atheism I once called it.

What has replaced religion? Our extended family remains a people of the book.
Among my grandfather's forty-seven direct descendant, thirty-five of whom are
alive, six have written books, another is a journalist, and five others have
earned law degrees, where not unlike the older generations of Talmudists, they
can engage in disputations over nice sharp quillets of the law. There are
no rabbis, but I can count at least ten teachers of one secular subject or
another. My grandfather had no official schooling, but every one of his great
grandchildren is a college graduate and many of them have post-graduate degrees.

There are some families that can boast of painters or violinists or actors
in their old world heritage; not ours. Nor have we become creative or
imaginative in the new world. I count no poets, no musicians, no actors, and
except for my outlier brother who once wrote a novel and now makes bricolage
sculptures, no artists. If we make anything, it's useful. Furniture or pottery
-- not paintings. But then, no criminals or alcoholics or wastrels either.
We're substantial reliable citizens -- firmly nouveau bourgeois. We may be
conventional and dull, but we are what my father used to call, without irony and
with great pride, solid, tax-paying citizens.

Source: 2020/07/stranger-on-the-third-floor

Title: Stranger on the Third Floor (1939)
Date: July 23, 2020

Source: 2020/07/negative-bouyancy

Title: "Negative Bouyancy"
Date: July 27, 2020

Mogambo (1953), directed by John Ford, is an eternal-triangle story in which
earthy Ava Gardner and prim Grace Kelly compete for white hunter Clark Gable.
Unfortunately, it's less engaging as a romance than as a travelogue -- it offers
spectacular footage of African megafauna (hippos, giraffes, lions, gorillas,
etc.).

Whenever I watch classic films set in "the colonies," I'm fearful that the
native people will be exoticized and orientalized and trivialized, but I'm happy
to report that Mogambo is less offensively Tarzanish than most -- setting aside
a couple of embarrassing "fakelore" episodes. I would have been even happier if
the Africans weren't just animated wallpaper -- bearers or rowers or dancers
or spear-throwers -- and that they weren't depicted as entirely subservient to
their white overlords. Mogambo is based on Victor Fleming's pre-Code Red Dust
(1931) -- a much more sensual film than Mogambo and one which allowed Jean
Harlow lots of room to wink and flirt. It's most odd that the glamorous sexy
hunter in both Red Dust and Mogambo is played by Clark Gable - a rare example
of filmic auto-reprising. He's hyper-masculine, at age 30, in Red Dust but in
Mogambo it's too too obvious that his hair has been dyed a shiny black. When he
pounces on Ava and Grace and mashes their mouths with unpersuasive 50s kisses,
it is taken for granted that both ladies will immediately grow weak in the
knees.

I grew even less Gable-dazzled when I discovered a weird anecdote in Donald
Sinden's recollection of the filming of Mogambo. (Sinden played the part of
Grace Kelly's spineless, intellectual, oblivious husband). Sinden reports that
(prepare yourself to be stunned and disillusioned):

before leaving camp on the first morning [of shooting] I had been told to report
to the hair-dressing department's tent, where I found the make-up men armed with
electric clippers: 'I have to remove the hair from your chest.' 'Whatever for?'
I asked, 'Orders.' It transpired that Clark [Gable], whose chest was completely
devoid of hair, had always insisted that no other actor should appear on film
exposing a hirsute breast. This included any member of the crew not wearing a
shirt as well. He considered it a slight on his masculinity.

Surely, this is one of the most bizarre anecdotes in movie history. The King of
Hollywood, the legend whose mere presence famously set roomfuls of maidens all
a-quiver, was so sexually insecure that he required mass depilation of cast and
crew! Follicular fragility! Big-time nuttiness?

Question: was it in Clark's contract that he had the right to dictate the degree
of chest shagginess of cast and crew -- or was he just throwing his weight
around?  Suppose Sinden or some sweaty best boy had refused the electric
clippers. Would the production have ground to a halt?

It's well known that since the time of Samson and probably before, male hair
has been associated with strength, but even Delilah didn't set out to defoliate
every man in Gaza.

But Clark Gable's chest hair insecurity is only Donald Sinden's second most
curious anecdote. Even more astonishing, at least to me, is that Sinden suffered
from "negative buoyancy." Negative buoyancy is a condition in which a person is
unable to float in water. In Sinden's case, negative buoyancy was discovered, he
says, while filming a shipwreck scene in The Cruel Sea (1953). Sinden started
to sink and was rescued from drowning by his co-star Jack Hawkins.

Almost all human beings float. Bob like corks. I don't, and neither did my
father nor my male descendants. As a family, we're sinkers. I don't know why,
except that perhaps we have an eccentric specific gravity or because our swim
bladders go on the fritz, like sick fish. We regularly and uniformly plunge to
the bottom, like a stone or a heavy lump of lead.

How wonderful to know that there is a dignified name for our peculiar family
trait: "negative buoyancy."

And now we can be consoled that we're not alone.

There's got to be a support group for the negatively buoyant out there,
somewhere.

Source: 2020/07/the-small-house-at-allington-1863

Title: "The Small House at Allington" (1863)
Date: July 29, 2020

The nation is in an uproar -- the Covid-19 pandemic, mass unemployment, racial
reckoning, disorder in the streets, Russians sabotaging our elections, ignorant
authoritarian leadership.

We ourselves are sheltering at home, and are healthy, thanks to the masks and
the cooperation of friends and neighbors, but there's little hope of a getaway.
We certainly can't travel. What to do for an escape? There's no frigate like a
book, so it's time to read a long leisurely novel by Anthony Trollope.

The Small House at Allington is the fifth of six in the Barsetshire series. Had
I read it before? Certainly, but it doesn't matter. To read a Barset novel is to
put on well-worn old clothes. Loose slippers. The Small House is comfort food.
It's the mac and cheese of novels.

It's not 2020, it's 1863. Outside of Barsetshire, millions of working-class
Englishmen are living in grinding, soul-destroying poverty. Cholera is rampant.
India is being pillaged. Ireland is trying to recover from famine and mass
emigration. There's a second Opium War in China. British ships are running
the Union blockade of Confederate ports. But all is as ever in the perennial
untouched Allington microcosm.

Should the Dales continue to stay in the dower house even though the squire is
sometimes impolitic?  Should Adolphus Crosbie choose to marry Lily Dale (yes!)
or Lady Alexandrina de Courcy (big mistake)? Will Plantagenet Palliser run off
with Griselda Grantly -- don't do it, Planty Pall!  Should Lucy Dale accept
a dinner invitation from the Earl de Guest? Why won't Isabella Dale agree to
accept her cousin Bernard as a husband? -- everyone in the family thinks it's a
good idea, except Bell herself, who prefers poor but faithful Dr. Crofts.

Political and economic problems do not intrude into the small world of the Small
House. Finding a mate, keeping a mate, repairing a frayed relationship is its
subject; equally important for men, is to locate a woman of means, so that one
can support a comfortable style of life without stooping to real work.

Adolphus Crosbie, although far from our favorite, accurately describes the
three things that he requires in a wife: that she be of a good family, that she
have money, and that she be beautiful. Does Mr. Crosbie possess these qualities
himself?  No. But he does have a handsome set of whiskers, which seems to be
sufficient.

Source: 2020/08/crimeofpassion

Title: Crime of Passion (1957)
Date: August 04, 2020

I

Source: 2020/08/things-i-like-i

Title: My Life in Objects -- I (Tumblers)
Date: August 09, 2020

I bought these water glasses (sometimes called tumblers) about 35 years
at a long defunct antique shop in Lafayette, Colorado. They fall into the
large category known as Depression Glass in the trade and they were probably
manufactured in the 1940's or 50's -- but that's just an unsupported speculation
on my part. I don't know the name of the manufacturer so they are works of art
without provenance. I love the clean lines -- straight at the base and then
slightly flared at the top -- and also the way the glasses fit so elegantly into
the human hand. The tumblers are entirely unadorned and if they have a style
other than vernacular I suppose they might be called Art Deco. I once had a few
more of these tumblers -- perhaps as many as eight, but because they are in
constant use there have been losses. There's no saying how long these beauties
will survive -- the rims are a bit fragile and vulnerable in the dishwasher.
Although they have no monetary value, they are in my opinion both classy and
classic.

Source: 2020/08/things-i-like-ii

Title: My Life in Objects -- II (Owen Pots)
Date: August 10, 2020

This appealing pitcher and vase set were thrown by Ben Owen II, a potter
who lived and worked in Seagrove, North Carolina. In September of 1966, we
visited Tom and Margaret in Chapel Hill and they took us on an excursion to
Seagrove, where we bought these fine works of art. Ben Owen was very much a
traditionalist, sticking closely to tried-and-true shapes and glazes. He was
"old-fashioned," and I am equally so. Lots of weird things have been done with
clay during the last sixty years, but these shapes are more pleasing to my eye
than modernistic distortions and abstractions.

The glaze is called "frogspit" but "frogskin" would make more sense.

When I moved to a new home in 2009, the Ben Owen pots disappeared. I thought
they had been lost in the move, but after a couple of years of searching, I
located them. In fact, I had packed them so carefully and securely that they
were virtually buried. But I persevered.

These splendid objects have now (except when they went AWOL) been on prominent
display wherever I've lived for more than half a century. It's curious, and a
fact, that not one guest has ever asked a single question about them. They've
not been noticed. Are my friends unobservant?

I think that the pitcher and the vase are so discreetly beautiful that they
don't demand attention, a fact which makes me love them all the more.

Source: 2020/08/words-of-my-life-umpire

Title: Words of My Life -- Umpire
Date: August 10, 2020

Despite its marvelously odd sound, there was no word more familiar to me as
an infant than "umpire." "Umpire!!"  Say it, savor it, roll it about in
your mouth. It's a downright peculiar word. Am I exaggerating when I say
that "umpire" came into my ken right along with the initial acquisition of
language? And that it was accompanied by such other linguistic weirdnesses
as "inning,""fungo," "shortstop," "blooper," "rosin bag," "balk" (pronounced
"bawk,"),"dugout," "fan","knuckleball," "southpaw," "mitt," "bullpen," and
"slump" (among many others). Common baseballese words, all of them -- but
"umpire" is the strangest of them all, so foreign-sounding that some of the
lesser lights in the PS 217 schoolyard pronounced it "empire." The abbreviation
"ump" ("Kill the Ump") sounds less like a word than a stifled snort or
eructation.

The word came to us by a devious roundabout route. The "p" and "r" in umpire
descend from the Latin "par" (equal). Old French had nonper which came into
Middle English as noumpere. "A noumpere" became "an umpire"; it lost its "n" by
the same process of rebracketing or resegmentation by which "a nadder" became
"an adder" and "a napron" became "an apron" (and "an ewt" became "a newt").
"Noumpere" was not a sporting term; it signified a neutral arbiter of a dispute.

So Don Adriano de Armado in Love's Labor's Lost,  a man of "fire-new words," is
an "umpire" of mutinies, where mutinies simply means disputes. And Juliet says
that "twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife/ Shall play the umpire" -- a
phrase which Samuel Johnson glossed as "this knife shall decide the struggle
between me and my distresses."

Umpire did not acquire a sporting turn until 1861, just in time for the arrival
of the national pastime.

Most American sports feature a judge or a referee rather than an umpire, though
American football, which is highly policed, offers a referee, a head linesman,
a line judge, a back judge, a side judge and a field judge, in addition to an
umpire, who does not call balls and strikes, but instead counts the number of
players on each side, checks their uniforms, and watches out for an offensive
lineman who might illegally wander downfield. Because umpires are positioned
behind the defensive line they are subject to inadvertent concussions and
dislocations -- still another justification for my personal boycott of football.

In 1950, Beans Reardon and Jocko Conlan and Al Barlick were names as familiar as
Hodges and Campanella. Nowadays I could not name a single major league umpire.

Source: 2020/08/thingsilike3

Title: My Life in Objects -- III (Rug)
Date: August 11, 2020

Althea bought this rug at an auction in Warren, New Hampshire in 1968 -- and it
is the first rug we ever owned -- the first of many. I was startled when she
bid on it because we were in the market for crockery and glasses and chairs,
not for decorative objects, but she saw and appreciated its beauty. It's a rug
for a wall because it's too old and fragile to be tread upon by the shod. Rug
expert MP says that it's from the Caucasus -- specifically it's a Konaghend
Kuba -- from the late nineteenth century. Of course we didn't have the faintest
idea of its provenance but we knew that it was very appealing. In fact, I
was so inattentive that I owned and admired the rug for forty years before I
noticed that it was a prayer rug -- the mihrab is not much pronounced. Nor did I
appreciate the abrash; the indigo blue ground disappears two thirds of the way
down. It's probable that the woman who wove it ran out of wool from a particular
dye lot, but it's also possible that the weaver was nomadic.

When Althea lived in Washington for a year in the 1990s, she took this rug with
her -- the only personal possession (aside from clothes, of course) that she
brought. And then many years later when she entered the Alzheimer's institution,
I hung it on the wall facing her bed. I thought it would be a comfort to her --
but alas she did not remember or recognize it. When she died I  brought it back
home where it belongs.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-iv

Title: My Life in Objects -- IV (Pottery)
Date: August 12, 2020

This sugar and creamer are the only objecs I own that deserve to be in a museum.
They were made by Bauhaus potter Marguerite Wildenhain at her Pond Farm studio
in Guerneville, California, near the Russian River, sometime around 1972. I
don't think that the picture captures the strength or beauty of the workmanship.
They're beautifully thrown, beautifully glazed. To eye or hand they convey
almost magical power.

My charismatic, chaotic sister (technically sister-in-law) Phyllis brought these
to us from Guerneville, where she studied pottery for three or four summers with
"Marguerite." We sent her some cash to buy pots by the artist but these were
the only ones that we actually received. Phyllis bought many but she couldn't
bear to part with them. And then one by one her treasured possessions would slip
out of her hand or be knocked off the shelf by her cats or otherwise wind up as
shards. For many years after Phyl's untimely death I preserved in a shoebox the
shattered bits of one of Marguerite's most magnificent creations -- a landscape
pot which depicted  a dozen or so cavorting animals. Where is that shoebox now?

I rarely use these works of art -- they're too magnificent to put at risk.

On the bottom of the creamer, still visible next to the words "Pond Farm,"
Marguerite has pencilled a price: $12.50. But it's priceless.

Source: 2020/08/pure-religion

Title: Pure Religion
Date: August 12, 2020

For me, the summer and autumn of 2010 was a bad period, even though it led
to the only moment of prayer and reverence in my entire life. Readers and
fans of this blague know that I have more than once reported that I was born
into a purely, even aggressively, atheistic family and that have remained an
unquestioning atheist to this day. So what happened, you ask, in 2010 to cause
me to lapse once and only once from a lifelong want of belief?

It began with a ruptured disc, which is, as fellow-sufferers know so well, an
extremely painful condition. Surgery was recommended, but by every statistical
measure, surgery works only half the time, and therefore I was reluctant and
frightened to be cut, and instead figured that if I could just wait out the
pain, perhaps the affliction would heal itself, as, I was assured, it usually
does. So I lay on my back, crawled to the bathroom once a day, and started
taking drugs. Powerful drugs: oxycodons every four hours, those big 600 mg
ibuprofens several times a day, lots of valium to deal with the agitation,
steroids (some by mouth and some injected directly into my back), and because of
the insomnia, more ambien than was absolutely necessary along with some other
miscellaneous pills and tablets, the names of which I can't quite recall. It
was my fault, in part -- I had too many doctors and no one was in charge, so
various medical people prescribed various pills, and because I was in such pain,
I gobbled them all.

After two months, I was still in acute debilitating pain and I had to face the
fact that my plan wasn't working and that something had to be done. I submitted
to surgery at the end of August down there at the Mary Hitchcock Hospital in
Lebanon. Relief was instantaneous -- why had I waited so long? But I was now
faced with the problem of drug withdrawal. Not having good medical advice, I
became the coldest of turkeys.

My digestive system went completely out of whack. For days, perhaps two or three
weeks, I could tolerate only the blandest foods. I survived on baked potatoes
and very little else. My heartbeat was very high and settled to an even 110 for
six weeks. I was agitated and nervous.I suffered from dramatic night sweats
-- two or three times I woke up with nightclothes soaked and dripping. Muscle
cramps.

And also severe constipation which led to badly bleeding hemorrhoids. For six
weeks, whenever I had to "honor a call of nature," I'd look into the pot --
bright bright red. Day after day. "O no! When is this going to end?" And then
one blessed day -- and here at last comes the moment of pure religion -- I
hesitantly inspected the bowl, and miracle of miracles-- no blood. And I cried
out, spontaneously, without forethought, these words: "Glory be to God."

What god? I wasn't in a theological frame of mind, but in retrospect, it may
have been Cloacina, the Roman goddess of sewers, to whom I directed my fervent
thanks. Or possibly Sterquilinus, although he was more a god of manure and
fertilizer than of the toilet bowl.

The good old Romans -- a god for all occasions! Even for me.

Source: 2020/08/jacsettle

Title: My Life in Objects --VI (Settle)
Date: August 13, 2020

When we moved to Manhattan, in 1965, for a first real job, we had hardly a stick
of furniture. We thought we needed, in addition to a bed and a kitchen table, a
bench for an entrance hall. Wandering around Greenwich Village (Althea was very
big with child), we stumbled into an antique store, one of scores that populated
the area in those pre-Ebay days. Pisces Antiques, it was called and it was owned
by a young English woman named Kim Sylvester. (Isn't it astonishing that I
remember these details?) This bench (properly a settle) caught our eye, not the
least because it cost half as much as a functional bland modern equivalent at
Macy's or Wanamaker. "What is it?, I asked. Kim said, "English, Jacobean, about
1650." And so it was. A surprise.

I've since learned a bit about seventeenth-century English furniture and I'm
convinced that the large back panel is genuine. It's late medieval in style and
exhibits all three of the kinds of carving that are typical of the age. The four
central panels (stylized poppy on the outsides, stylized thistle on the insides)
are called "recessed ground." Separating the flowered panels are pieces that are
"gouge" carved. The crosspiece at the top is "incised." As for the body of the
settle, I suspect it's not very ancient, but instead assembled from old wood by
a furniture maker who had respect for the carved back and wanted to re-use or
re-purpose it. When was this reconstruction accomplished? It might have been
anytime before 1965, but most probably during the long 19th century. Possibly
during the so-called gothic revival period in the 1880s and 1890s.

I've admired this settle for 55 years. Nowadays It sits proudly just to the
right of our entrance door. I like it that our guests pile their coats and bags
on the Jacobean settle when they enter our home, not noticing that this discreet
piece of furniture is old and rare and singular. No one asks about it and I
don't tell. It's my secret.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-v

Title: My Life in Objects -- V (Bell)
Date: August 13, 2020

This unassuming object played, and continues to play, a consequential part in
my life. It's a plain brass bell, unadorned, maker and age unknown. It's not
musical but when properly agitated it can make a helluva loud noise. It was
given to my mother in 1947 by her mother, my grandmother, Sonia Green. How my
grandmother came into possession of the bell, I don't know and can't imagine. A
mystery.

I begged it sometime in the late 1960s and have owned it ever since,

My family spent the summers of 1947-48-49 at Makamah Beach on the north shore
of Long Island. It was the high point of my childhood; I've written about those
glorious summers right here. The function of the bell was to call me and my two
brothers in for lunch or dinner. The clang traveled well even against the whoosh
of the wind and the rhythm of the surf. There I'd be, all alone, studying shells
or snails somewhere along the shore or on a sandbar, hungry, and I'd hear the
insistent jangle and hurry home. My brother Jon says that to this day he can't
hear the peculiar noise of this bell without salivating.

The bell was equally useful, a generation later, when my own independent,
wild children wandered freely around our Hackett Hill property. It rang,
they returned. I wonder if they associate its sound with corn-on-the-cob and
hamburgers. They have ample reason to do so.

And even now, of summers, when it's the hour for food, or just time to call the
day to a close, out comes the bell, and children, grandchildren, and guests
respond to its harsh but historic call.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-vii

Title: My Life in Objects -- VII (Tibetan Rug)
Date: August 14, 2020

I

It's not a very good picture, but then, I'm not a very good photographer. It's
a Tibetan rug, monochromatic and undramatic, but in my opinion, extremely
handsome. Sometime during the 1970s, a store selling Tibetan antiques opened in
Boulder, stayed with us for a very few months, and then closed. I fell deeply
and passionately in love with this rug, all the more so because its price was
greatly reduced during the closing fire-sale.

The rug is supposed to be "old" and it certainly wasn't recently knotted. It was
represented to me as being made of yak hair, but MP, our rug expert, fingered
it and said, "No, that's wool." MP wouldn't hazard a guess about its age, but
he did enlighten me about the symbolism: the three cranes in the center panel
signify longevity; the four corner figures are "happy bats," and happiness is
also figured by the four very small, almost unnoticeable, swastikas. So it's a
joyful rug. There are also many snakes and a number of figures that MP couldn't
identify. It's remotely possible that this rug was originally some sort of
monastic bench cover and that each of the crane figures represented a place to
sit. I doubt this theory because the sitters would have had to be very small
monks with tiny tushies.

Source: 2020/08/viiisilver

Title: My Life in Objects -- VIII (Silverware)
Date: August 15, 2020

It's a place setting, sterling silver, "Diamond" pattern," manufactured by Reed
& Barton of Taunton, Massachusetts in 1958. I own nine such place settings as
well as a few miscellaneous serving pieces. I like them now but I didn't back
then.

In the 1950s, dear grandchildren, it was considered ideal for respectable
middle-class women to marry at a young age; if possible right after university.
Or even sooner -- when Althea graduated from high school, her Uncle Mendy, who
was never the absolute epitome of tact, said to her, "Don't worry, you'll meet
someone in college."

Despite her intelligence and experience, Althea was at heart a conventional
small-town girl, and she wanted a wedding with all the trappings -- and the
trappings included not just a cheese tray and a fondue pot, but a long white
dress and bridesmaids and a bridal registry and china and especially silver.

Althea chose "Diamond." If I was consulted -- I don't remember -- it wouldn't
have mattered. It was her decision. All I knew was that Althea and I were
moving from Ithaca to Massachusetts, I to graduate school and she to a teaching
position at Warren JHS in Newton -- and that if I wanted to wake up in the same
bed as my beloved, I had to be married (remember, grandchildren, this was the
retrogressive Eisenhower era, and men and women did not live together without
legal sanction). Apparently, in order to get married, it was necessary to go
through a series of utterly mystifying rites, all of which were arranged by
Althea and her mother. I was completely indifferent and oblivious to formal
wedding invitations and to seating charts and to the choice of music (a piano
player I believe) and most especially to the rabbi (who drowned himself in a
local lake a month after officiating at our ceremony). Honestly, I felt as
though I was just an extra who was trundled onto the set to stand next to the
bride and, when called upon, to say "I do."

But I console myself by remembering that I was not alone --that I was one
of an entire generation of bewildered half-grown gawky 1950s bridegrooms in
tortoiseshell glasses and borrowed suits.

Once I got my adult legs, I could admit to Althea and to myself that I resented
the "Diamond" silver. For 1970s me, it embodied and symbolized everything that
I disliked about the conservative prudish postwar culture into which both of
us had been indoctrinated. With the advent of the war in Vietnam, the civil
rights movement, and the series of ghastly assassinations, the silver became, to
me, an index of bourgeois conformity and pretense. It offended me, deeply. And
therefore the silver utensils went into the closet and remained there for 35 or
40 years.

When we shifted to this new address, in 2009, I took the silver out of its
banishment. I looked with new apolitical eyes. "Wow -- these things are
beautiful." The utensils were not elaborate, or fancy, or pseudo-baroque like
most such tableware, but clean, modest, spare, understated, and not at bit
pretentious. In retrospect, Althea had astonishing judgment and extraordinary
taste.

Upon investigation, I discovered that Diamond silverware is highly regarded
and much prized. It is, in the language of enthusiasts of mid-century
modernism, "important." It was created by Gio Ponti, who was, one might say,
the Frank Lloyd Wright of twentieth-century Italian designers. Among his other
achievements, Gio Ponti was the architect of the celebrated Denver Art Museum.

So now, at long last, I've restored the Diamond silverware to a place of honor,
and I enjoy setting the table with these sleek utensils. And I'm as pleased as
punch that none of my guests realize that when they spear that last fragment of
barbecued chicken, they do so with a fork of distinction.

Source: 2020/08/yellowstone

Title: Yellowstone
Date: August 16, 2020

We watched the first season of Yellowstone (eight episodes, or about 350 full
minutes, all told). It's not our usual fare, but because a close relative, an
accomplished actor, has just contracted to appear in Season Four, it seemed
important to investigate. Yellowstone sustained our interest but in my opinion
it's mighty derivative. I think the title should be changed to The Sopranos
Go West. The principal character, played by Kevin Costner, isn't precisely a
Mafia don, but he's modeled on one. He owns a Rhode-Island-size slice of Montana
and he protects his property with gangster tactics. Like Tony Soprano, he
fights with his family, feuds with his consigliere, corrupts public officials,
strong- arms his enemies, and doesn't hesitate to bribe or ice his opponents.
Yellowstone creates a nasty dog-eat-dog Hobbesian universe that offers only an
occasional redeeming event and, among a huge cast, only two or three sympathetic
characters.

Yellowstone is not at all pastoral. The spectacular western landscape is brimful
with events common to gruesome noir and urban crime films. In the episodes we
watched, two tourists fell from a cliff and splattered, a woman was impaled by a
steel fence post, a teacher who tried to intervene in a playground scuffle was
accidentally struck to the ground and developed a brain hemorrhage, a cowboy
trying to leave his job was shot in the head and his body dumped in a ravine, a
new Yellowstone employee was branded on the chest with a red-hot iron, a woman
was crushed to death by a horse, two brothers-in-law were shot and killed in a
gunfight, a 10-year-old boy was stranded in a culvert with a rattlesnake twice
his size, a real estate developer was kidnapped and hanged, and a meth house
blew up and burned its occupant to death. I didn't keep a running tally of the
various atrocities so there were probably a few that I've forgotten.

We're hoping that our relative has a continuing part in the series (he's
supposed to play a doctor), but we're fearful that he'll be on screen for a
minute and a half before he gets his throat slit or loses a limb or two to an
enormous John Deere harvester. We won't know for a year.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-ix

Title: My Life in Objects -- IX (Shovel)
Date: August 17, 2020

It's called a transplant shovel, and it's manufactured by Sneeboer, a company
located in Holland. If you want to buy a garden tool from Sneeboer, you get on
the virtual line, and then wait until your number comes up. Worth waiting.

I have a weakness for well-made garden tools. This one might be the best I own,
my favorite, although the Felco #2 hand pruner is also a work of art.

Note the construction. The V-shaped blade is one piece of solid steel. It's not
screwed or bolted to the ash shaft, but rivetted, twice. The "D-handle" itself
is carved out of a single solid piece of hardwood, so it can't fall apart.

I use the shovel to dig plants from crowded areas of the perennial garden
to transplant or to separate. It's also ideal for poaching ferns from the
forest. The shovel is the only tool that lets you easily divide a woody clump of
Siberian irises (or any other clumping perennial). With a standard spade, when
you try to get a little purchase, you fall to left or right or to the ground,
endangering your cranky old vertebrae. It's a superbly balanced tool, a pleasure
to use. It's going to be around for many more years.

We call it the "magic shovel."

Source: 2020/08/my-live-in-objects-x

Title: My Life in Objects -- X (Eyeglasses)
Date: August 18, 2020

I own no more genuine nor no more dated an artifact than these frames. I wore
them during high school, college, and for a few years afterward. They were
mighty conventional, but no more than I. In retrospect, I can't say that they
enhanced my manly beauty. The glasses made me, like all my contemporaries,
look rather like an owl. For me, the design was camouflage. I was trying to be
invisible, but if I had to be seen, I wanted to look as much like everyone else
as possible. The frames speak to the moment -- bland, ordinary, ugly.

But a few years later, during that period in the 60s and early 70s when there
were the bombings on the CCNY campus, anti-war marches and riots, and constant
social upheaval, I went rimless:

These were frames that I inherited from my father, so my new presentation was
part an anti-establishment statement, part paternal homage.

However, rimless glasses were not a good choice for a new father with three
active grabby young children. They required far too much repair and attention,
and so were always in and out of the shop. Eventually I was forced to switch to
glasses that were less political but much sturdier  -- titanium, in fact, which
is where I have remained for several decades, resisting design fads such as
huge, tiny, aviator and spangled.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xi

Title: My Life in Objects -- XI (Typewriter)
Date: August 19, 2020

This is a picture, found on the internet, of the Underwood portable that was my
dear companion for many years. I bought it for $20 in the summer of 1956 at a
second-hand shop on Flatbush Avenue and I brought it with me to college. I even
transported it to Vermont for many summers and depended on it until the 1980s
when it was superseded by the word processor. In my mind's ear, the clickety-
clack of all those letters home as well as undergraduate and graduate-school
essays, and later, typed and re-typed manuscripts, still resonate. My fingertips
remember the cupped, pseudo-ivory keys.

It was a sturdy machine, only needing repair once, when, in a moment of
compositional enthusiasm, I hit the return bar so hard that I snapped i off.
Many were the ribbons that I wore to a frazzle.

I had enrolled in a course in "touch typing" at Erasmus Hall HS -- asa, ada,
afa, sdf, for twenty weeks. I took only the first semester of a two-semester
sequence because I was interested in the letters and not the numbers. My typing
has always been distinguished more by rapidity than by accuracy. I once claimed
that I typed so fast that my ribbon would break into flame -- a slight hyperbole
(but I admit that have always been a trifle vain about the speed of my fingers).
I am a noisy power typist and to this day I bang the keyboard of my computer
many times harder than is advisable or necessary. But heck, I learned my craft
on an imperfectly lubricated old monster of typewriter, probably purchased by
the NYC school district in the 1920s.

Where is that old Underwood now? Most likely buried in a landfill somewhere.
I should have reverenced it for all the hours we spent together. Given it an
honorable retirement.

Rest in peace, partner.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xiichair

Title: My Life in Objects -- XII (Chair)
Date: August 20, 2020

This is my favorite chair. It's made of solid oak and was constructed at the
turn of the last century, possibly as early as 1880. In style, it's cross-
cultural, a hybrid -- part European and part pure American. The top rail, the
apron and the central splat are Gothic or Renaissance Revival, though they
are not carved as they would be if authentic, but pressed. Attached to the
stiles are matching extensions, the formal name of which I don't know, which are
pierced with what looks like a double keyhole -- an element of medieval style.
But it's a rocking chair -- and rockers are distinctly American in origin --
sometimes credited to Benjamin Franklin himself. I think it's a handsome chair,
but I must admit that it's not at all graceful. It's foursquare and clunky. Tho
body sits awkwardly upon the rockers. It's appropriate for me but it's not a
chair for the dainty.

I bought this misbegotten Gothic rocking chair at an auction, either in Fairlee
or Thetford, Vermont, in 1970, for $3.75.

The armrests are darkened from fifty years of supporting my sweaty forearms.

There's been lots of good sitting in this chair.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xiv-puppy

Title: My Life in Objects -- XIV (Puppy)
Date: August 21, 2020

This woebegone object was once a plump and thriving stuffed animal -- a bear, in
fact, though for some reason my children always called him "Puppy." Their only
other stuffed animal, a snake, was named "Snakey." Pedestrian nicknames to be
sure. I admit that our family wasn't very imaginative about naming our mascots.

Even though Puppy is past his prime, he's still a most treasured critter. If
the house broke into flames, and I could only rescue one item, I'd have to grab
Puppy and leave to their fates the jeweled goblets, the ancient diamond tiara,
the Stradivarius, the Vermeers, and the First Folios. Puppy is more valuable.

Puppy looks as though he was abused, but it's not so. He was only loved to
death. Because he was our only bear, the three children struggled for ownership.
Poor Puppy was a field of combat. He was pulled, stretched, thrown, dunked,
employed as a soccer ball, and in at least one memorable instance, voluminously
vomited upon. Over the course of the decades, the sad fellow lost almost all his
fur, his corneas, his entire snout, two-thirds of his stuffing, and both of his
original ears. I myself attached two prosthetic leather ears, only one of which
survives -- and also sewed on his asymmetrical leather mouth. In addition, early
in Puppy's career, I performed a delicate musicboxectomy.

Why only one stuffed bear to be struggled over? Why not three -- one apiece --
as would be sensible in families that hope to avoid sibling strife? Why the
paucity of stuffed animals? Because both Althea and I came from families that
were ideologically opposed to such indulgences. Grandma Anne, Althea's mother,
wouldn't allow stuffed animals in her home because they were "unsanitary."
My parents didn't much believe in toys of any kind -- kids were supposed to
make their own entertainment out of pots and pans. (My father came from so
impoverished a family that a stuffed bear would have been an inconceivable
luxury.) Therefore my brothers and I grew up deprived of warm, furry, reassuring
"transitional objects," which had no consequences whatsoever, for me, setting
aside the periodic gloom and the vast existential void in my soul.

Puppy is now in my care because my children can't decide to whom he properly
belongs. I hope they don't fight over him after I die -- he can't take any more
pummeling. I stow Puppy in a drawer of the old Irish desk, but because of his
long service to the family, he deserves much better. Rightly, Puppy should lie
in state, ensconced in an illuminated lucite display case atop a stately jasper
or malachite plinth.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xiiinangyai

Title: My Life in Objects -- XIII (Nang Yai)
Date: August 22, 2020

This is the most unusual and perhaps the most beautiful object I've ever
owned. It's a rawhide or leather puppet used in traditional Siamese theatrical
performances. On the reverse, it's dated 4 IX 85, or September 4, 1885,  which
I presume is the day the puppet was acquired (or "collected"). I purchased it
from an antique store in Denver in the early 1970s. The dealer explained that he
bought from the estate of a local man who had been a foreign service officer in
Thailand in the last part of the nineteenth century. I had never seen anything
like it, didn't know anything about it, but fell for it in a big way, and have
enjoyed it ever since.

It's called a Nang Yai puppet, and I've written a bit about it here.

She's a musician who plays a mandolin-like instrument. She wears an elaborately
decorated outfit with long sleeves and pants. For many years, she hung in a
north-facing window (our fierce Colorado sun would destroy her in a summer if
she faced south). Now she has a light box all her own, and when she's lit, she
dominates the room, but only in a benign way. She's harmoniously proportioned,
graceful and not without a touch of majesty. To my eyes, she's radiant. She
ennobles her surroundings.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xvdvorak

Title: My Life in Objects -- XV (Dvorak)
Date: August 24, 2020

Although my mother loved classical music and listened daily to WQXR, our family
did not own a phonograph. Eventually, sometime around 1953 or 1954, a record
player appeared courtesy of my older brother Eugene, who set it up in his
bedroom and also bought a few albums. His collection consisted of a few Broadway
musicals and some pop standards (Sinatra and the Mills Brothers for sure). He
allowed me to use his machine when he wasn't at home. What an opportunity! I
memorized Oklahoma and Guys and Dolls, among others.

When I was eleven or twelve years old, I was home from school of a week. Was it
whooping cough? The radio became my constant companion (no TV in those years).
Every day for a week, I listened to a "dramatization" of a novel by Dumas. I
believe it was Twenty Years After, but I can't be positive. The story was not
memorable, nor were the performances, but the "background music" was to my ears
astonishingly beautiful. On Friday, when the story came to conclusion, it was
announced that the music that had entranced me was the New World Symphony.

After I gained access to Eugene's record player, I saved my nickels and for
$1.98, the standard price of LPs at that time, I bought a copy of the Symphony.
It was an expenditure of significance, even for someone who was pulling down
$.75 an hour shelving books at the local public library.

Having discovered that one could buy and own recorded music, I little-by-little
added to my collection. By the time I graduated from college, I owned ten or
a dozen recordings. I remember Dennis Brain's performance of Mozart's Horn
Concertos, Paul Kletzki's version of Mahler's Symphony #1, an Angel recording
of Bach's Magnificat, and a Prokoviev Lieutenant Kije Suite. There were a few
others that I can no longer remember. But none of them were as important as the
Szell Dvorak, which was my gateway to the classics.

I'm listening to it now. Via Alexa.

Source: 2020/08/life-on-the-hill-1969-2009

Title: My Life on "The Hill," 1969-2009
Date: August 26, 2020

We settled on University Hill by lucky accident. Shortly after accepting a
teaching position, I received a letter from my then-chairman Harold Kelling,
urging me to write immediately to Professor J. D. A. Ogilvy, who had a house to
rent near the University. I jumped to follow instructions and in August, 1969,
the four of us (ages 30, 29, 4 and 2) took up residence in a small and lovely
jewel of a Craftsman bungalow at 9th and College. It was not only a splendid
home in which to start life in Boulder but it was also conveniently located:
walking distance to Norlin Library, to the bus to Denver and to the Boulder
Public Library, as well as just a block and a half from Highland Elementary
School. We lived in that fine house contentedly until January of 1973, when
(we were now 5, Eve having joined us in June of 1970) it became clear that we
needed room to grow. The boys, Nathaniel and Ben, were adamant that we must
remain in the Flatirons school district (Highland had been closed and abandoned
-- a significant loss to the community). The children had good instincts;
Flatirons Elementary was a wonderful school. It was led by Robert Rea, the
finest principal I've ever known. During the winter of '73, we migrated from 9th
all the way to a 10th street house that had, as they say, "good bones" but which
had been "modernized" -- actually brutalized -- by a succession of owners who
had trashed almost all of its Arts and Crafts splendors in favor of oversized
mirrors, bright green shag rugs, beaded curtains, flocked wallpaper, and plate
glass (replacing stained glass) windows. But heck, it was spacious for a family
of five even though fabulously expensive ($46,500). We felt fortunate. There was
a bonus: when Althea returned to work after a seven-year interval of pregnancy,
birthing, and nursing, she was able to walk back and forth to Boulder High
School, where she taught mathematics for many years. With the purchase of the
house, our commitment to the Hill strengthened.

10th street was our home for 35 years. Over the course of the decades, we
restored our abused home to the extent that our resources permitted. We
added insulation (its first) and a modern kitchen, refinished the oak floors
and stripped the paint from the warm fir woodwork, replaced the wallpaper
and allowed the ornate brass registers to glow once again -- and moreover,
transformed a backyard wasteland into a pleasing peony-iris-daylily garden.
I'm proud to say that we left the house in much better shape than we found
it. Meanwhile the neighborhood, sad to say, did not improve along with us but
spiraled downward. In 1973, when we arrived, three quarters of the 24 houses
on our street were owner-occupied; when we departed in 2009, only four or five
houses remained in family hands and the rest had devolved into rentals --
occupied and often over-occupied by CU students. Our block was representative
of developments that took place on the Hill during our years of residence.
While the Hill had once been an essentially peaceful place, with only a rare
disturbance, by the turn of the century, it had deteriorated into a combat zone
where we and our adult neighbors engaged in constant struggle with graffiti,
overflowing trash bins, weedy untended lawns, noisy late night and early morning
sleep-obliterating parties, neglected barking dogs, gratuitous intermittent
fireworks (explosions, actually!), thefts, vandalism, as well as fraught face-
to-face encounters with rude entitled young malefactors.

What had happened between 1969 and 2009? What caused the decline from a thriving
pacific neighborhood to a disorderly student ghetto? There were a host of
factors, a few of which I can enumerate. Probably most important is that the
University added at least 10,000 students during those years and did not provide
housing for a single soul. The Hill, just across Broadway, was easy pickings for
enterprising landlords, many of them decent but some unscrupulous, who bought
advantageously, and (inasmuch as rental licensing codes were largely ignored and
unenforced), maximized their income by dividing dignified, solid old Victorian
or Arts and Crafts homes into rabbit-warrens. Many of the new occupants were
first-time-from-home students who came from far away, spent a semester or two
boozed up and hung over, failed out, and left behind their tuition money, their
damage, and their trash. What might have been profitable for CU was disastrous
for the neighborhood. Along with the increase in the absolute number of students
came a resurgence of fraternities. During the late 60s and early 70s, when
many students opposed the Vietnam war and conceived themselves to be anti-
establishment, fraternities were among the institutions that were disfavored.
Membership in the frat clubs declined significantly, but then recovered with
the coming of the more conservative, less troubled Reagan era. I need not dwell
on the fact that the burgeoning fraternities, flaunting an ethic that was anti-
intellectual and pro-alcohol, were a major cause of increased neighborhood
disruption. Along with these factors, came the replacement of marijuana, the
drug of choice during the antiwar era, with beer. Marijuana, at least in the
mild varieties of the 70s, is a contemplative drug while beer is a noisy one.The
turn to alcohol had the effect of increasing the number of bars at 13th and
College; while there had only been a couple of drinking establishments when I
arrived (Boulder had been "dry" until 1967), by the time I left, there were
more than twenty such, and the area had become a drinking "destination" that
attracted outsiders to the street and inevitably also to Hill fraternity and
house parties. And then sometime during the 70s or perhaps early 80s, the
University moved many classes from a Monday-Wednesday-Friday to a Monday-
Wednesday schedule, which meant that the weekend, and weekend drinking, now
began on Thursday night and continued until Monday morning. It was sometime
during this period that a couple of national magazines proclaimed CU as the
nation's Number One Party School, which I must assume negatively impacted its
pool of applicants. In addition, the welcome liberation of women from oppressive
social restrictions had an unintended consequence: it led to much more alcohol
consumption by female students. What had once been a rarity -- a drunken woman
-- became, I'm sorry to say, commonplace. (I had become accustomed to male
revelers untrussing and pissing on my roses, but I was genuinely flabbergasted
to see young women pull down their panties to squat on my front lawn). Still
another factor was the advent of the cell phone, which made it easy for small
nomadic bands of young people to find each other and rapidly coalesce into
sprawling alcoholic hullabaloos. Both the city government and the university,
two institutions that should have noticed these developments, remained supine
and indifferent.

Then came the riots. In 1971 there had been a protest, which turned violent,
against Nixon's secret bombing of Cambodia. But the scary riots of the 80s
lacked a political or social agenda -- as far I or anyone else could tell,
they were meaningless expressions of anomie, anarchy, and vandalism. Asked
for justification, students claimed that "there's nothing to do in Boulder
but drink" -- an unpersuasive argument about one of the most prosperous small
cities in the nation, one in which gymnasiums, theaters, libraries, hiking and
climbing trails, swimming pools, and other recreational opportunities abound.
The Hill experienced four riots in three years -- associated, if I remember
correctly, with Hallowe'en or homecoming. Sloppy, reeling revelers crammed the
streets, overturned vehicles, and hauled couches off porches to set dangerous
street- corner fires. I remember one instance in which rioters on the prowl for
fuel appropriated a substantial section of the wooden fence at the alley side
of my lot. At last, the city took notice. A commission was empaneled to study
and make recommendations. I attended a few of these meetings and was impressed
by the seriousness with which the panel took its responsibilities. Members from
the Hill neighborhood were Terry Rodrigue and Annie Fox. A report was issue and
recommendations were made, but to no perceptible effect, and the deterioration
continued.

The riots led to the re-founding of the University Hill Neighborhood Association
by the late Jane Stoyva, Rosemary Crowley, Steven Walsh, Lisa Spaulding, and 
Eleanor DePuy, among many others. With my children now departed for college,
I was able to become a contributing participant. Simply put, the Association
was divided into two camps, which I thought of as the "enforcers" and the
"socializers." The enforcers (among them Terry Rodgers, Gregg deBoever, and Ken
Wilson) patrolled the neighborhood on Friday and Saturday nights, calling in
violations to the police. The "socializers" (myself and many others) tried every
which way to integrate the students into the community. In retrospect, neither
the one nor the other technique had much of an impact.

Nevertheless, the effort to socialize the young folk had very beneficial social
side-effects, at least for me. For example, I was a member of a small group
(with Kathy Tucker, Terry Rodrigue, and LeRoy Leach) that established the
annual Beach Park Party (does it still exist?). Not only did these neighbors,
who had been until then no more than faces to me, become my friends, but I
had the delightful experience, several years in succession, of dishing out
free ice cream to both adults and children. It was my best job, ever. On 10th
Street, Althea and I initiated an annual block party, where, for many successive
Septembers, we explained to new arrivals over hamburgers and beans that they
were welcome to the neighborhood but that they should respect the people with
jobs and young children who also lived on the street. For three or four years
I was part of a group that met monthly at The Academy, trying to figure out
how to make use of that institution's resources to benefit the community. I
made a lasting friend with one of the participants, Ron Roschke, then pastor
of Grace Lutheran. I edited an upbeat, cheerful bi-monthly newsletter that
was distributed throughout the hill to permanent and new residents alike. In
addition, I represented aggrieved neighbors at restorative justice hearings,
where young scamps were counseled by their practiced attorneys that to clear
their records and escape punishment, all they needed to do was to grovel a bit
and feign remorse. I attended and spoke at many City Council meetings. I made
many friends by patrolling our street on Sunday mornings with a black plastic
bag, picking up beer and soda cans, empty cigarette packs, those ubiquitous red
beer cups, and various pieces of discarded clothing. (If there's a good reason
why a bra should lie in the gutter on a weekend morning, I can't imagine what
it might be.) I made my best Hill friend, Vin Scarelli, when we met at 2 AM,
both of us on the hunt for "trumpet man" -- a student who like to pop out of his
house in the wee hours, blow his trumpet (it might have been a bugle) as loud
as possible, and then scurry inside before anyone could nab him. The reward for
these activities was that I became member of a vibrant community -- and there's
nothing like a common enemy to bring people together

I left the Hill in 2009 in part because I was exhausted by the fight but also
because Althea's illness had progressed to the point that we needed to live on
one floor, with an elevator.

I reside now in an age-appropriate downtown condo, but I regret that I can no
longer walk around the block and enjoy a brief "how are you" with neighbors with
whom I've collaborated on one project or another. I miss the society of the
Hill, but not its disorder. Among its other virtues, there could have been no
better place to raise children.

One might succumb to nostalgia -- except that when I sit on my Walnut Street
balcony on a summer evening, I can hear distant booms coming from up there on
the Hill, and I remember that they were exceedingly jarring and disturbing.
The far off blasts remind me why I relocated and they cancel out any longing
to return. But let me confess that if I were to come back to the Hill, I would
return as a committed "enforcer."

Can the Hill be saved, or is it doomed to further decline?  There's no better
location -- everything is at your doorstep -- schools, libraries, Chautauqua,
foothills, all the diverse riches of a large University. It's a neighborhood
of great architectural integrity -- an outdoor museum of 1900-1920 American
design, almost as interesting as antebellum New Orleans or Art Nouveau Riga.
Its housing stock is unparalleled in Boulder; in a better world, it would be
a tourist destination. UHNA does a wonderful job of advocacy, but it's in an
unequal contest with powerful political and business forces. I think it was
during the 90s that a few of us, the late Neil King most prominently, tried
to engage the university in an improve-the-Hill project. We proposed that
the neighbors and the university (we hoped also for grant support) pitch in
to create an entity that would buy houses on the Hill and rent them to, say,
newly-arriving professors or staff who would otherwise be forced to commute
from Lafayette -- nowadays, Erie or Ft Lupton. And by doing so little by little
to undo and reverse the tipping point and rebalance the ratio of adults to
students. Although Neil was persuasive and influential (he had once been city
attorney), he could not develop any traction with either the city or CU. I am
not sure if our plan was workable, but I learned that to save the Hill will not
be easy and will require big money, big thinking, and the coordination of many
disparate groups.

In the meanwhile, the struggle between the  enforcers and the socializers
continues. Should police educate or should they arrest and ticket our student
hooligans?  Let's do both. If a new first year student arrives in Boulder on a
Thursday, misbehaves during the weekend, and the following Monday forwards to
his mommy and daddy the news of a $5000 fine -- well, that will certainly be
educational, will it not?

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xvijohndeere

Title: My Life in Objects -- XVI (Cart)
Date: August 27, 2020

It's a lawn mower, or as the John Deere people like to call it, a lawn tractor.
We call it a "riding mower." I've spent a thousand hours upon it and upon its
used-to-death predecessor. Keeping up the lawns take just about three hours --
twice a week in May and June, bi-weekly come a dry September. It's a useful
machine -- uncomplicated, rarely out of service, finely engineered. With its
wide cutting deck, I can maintain the lawns with minimum of fuss. It's a royal
pain when it does break dow. You can read such a failure here.

But it's not the mower but the #10 cart that has changed my life for the better.
I came into possession of the cart twenty years ago, and have used it, hard,
every summer since. Sometimes it develops a flat tire, but otherwise, it's
perfect.

In the pre-cart days, from 1968 to 2000, I possessed only a battered old
wheelbarrow. If you want to move manure from the pile to the garden, you can
fill a wheelbarrow with about two cubic feet of material. Then you use your own
personal arms and legs to haul the wheelbarrow to its target, always uphill, and
dump it. But if you  use the cart to move manure, you can fill it with a full
cubic yard or perhaps more of the "well-dried." Then you hop gracefully onto the
lawn tractor and let the mower pull the cart to your garden. The machine does
the hard work and your back doesn't "go out." (The rear panel of the cart is 
removable and with not much effort the front of the cart can be raised to dump
stuff out the back). You drive away a few feet and the cart empties itself.

Same thing with brush. If you've accumulated a couple of hours worth of brush
and weeds, and you want to move it to the brush pile -- why then, a trip's worth
is only what you can carry in your arms. But with the cart, you can stack and
compress the stuff and move ten times as much, especially if you've learned how
to make use of bungee cords. And again, you don't have to carry or drag; you
let the machine do the hard work. Some decry the gasoline engine, but I'm all
gratitude.

The cart allows me to do many times the amount of work as a wheelbarrow, and at
much less cost to my aging body. It's a gol durn miracle.

(Those are NGP's miniature donkeys, Big Joe and Little Joe, in the background.
They may not be aware of it, but they've also made important contributions to
garden fertility.

Source: 2020/08/deadline-at-dawn-1946

Title: Deadline at Dawn (1946)
Date: August 31, 2020

Some very serious contributors to film art created this almost forgotten
whodunit. Deadline at Dawn was adapted from a novel by Cornell Woolrich and
the screenplay was written by Clifford Odets. Cinematography was by Nicholas
Musuraca and direction by Harold Clurman. That's some pretty good bloodlines.
Moreover, the principal roles were played by young, sparkling Susan Hayward and
by the always reliable Paul Lukas.

Source: 2020/08/my-life-in-objects-xvichina-1

Title: My Life in Objects -- XVII (China)
Date: August 31, 2020

These very pretty pieces of china mean nothing to the world at large but they
have great importance to me.

When I was a boy, the only holiday that was celebrated at 539 East 9 Street was
Thanksgiving. Why was it not forbidden along with all the others? The reason, I
suspect, is that it was the holiday least tainted by religion.

My parents were not sociable people and Thanksgiving was the only time of year
that our house ever saw a guest or that I experienced conviviality -- which is
why this particular china pattern of became important to me. My parents owned a
broken set -- perhaps a dozen or so pieces. I don't know how or when they were
acquired, or why, but I do know that they appeared, annually, in November. To me
they said, and still say, not only turkey and sweet potatoes, but friendship and
laughter.

I'm still surprised that they owned such handsome pieces -- far too fancy and
decorated for our modest utilitarian household.

I inherited these remnants because neither of my brothers expressed any interest
in them. For the record, they are Charles Field Haviland, commissioned by
Macy's, and originally manufactured in 1938, so they would have been newish
when acquired by my parents. I once knew the name of the particular pattern,
but I've forgotten it. In the catalogue they're listed as "Head 174".They are
terribly respectable and have "establishment" written on their faces, but they
have almost no monetary value. Less than nothing, in fact -- you'd have to hire
a couple of guys to cart them away.

One day, on ebay, I found on auction a full set of of what I had come to think
of as "my family pattern."  A hundred or so pieces -- three different size
plates, soup bowls, cups and saucers, serving dishes, sugar and creamer, a
butter dish -- the works. Needless to say, it was not difficult to outbid the
competition. I "won" the auction -- a small triumph which I choose to regard as
tribute to my heritage.

Now, whenever we have guests, which is a lot more frequently, believe me, than
it was in my family of origin, out come the Charles Field Haviland dishes.
Especially at ceremonies and Thanksgivings.

I'm sad that my children show not the least interest in this chinaware. But why
should they? They were not a mysterious feature of their childhoods.

Perhaps, some day, one of the seven grandchildren will be intrigued. But I'm
doubtful.

Source: 2020/09/amnesia-on-film-secret-fury-

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Secret Fury (1950)
Date: September 09, 2020

t

There are amnesia movies and there are gaslighting movies. The Secret Fury is
both, and, I'm sorry to say, it fails to hit two separate marks.

A bad bad lawyer and cadre of hired subordinates contrive to gaslight rich Ellen
Ewing (Claudette Colbert) into believing that, while amnesiac, she killed a
man. In any recognizable universe it would be impossible or at least extremely
difficult to persuade a sensible, mature woman that she suffers from a loss of
memory. Not in NoirThrillerMysteryLand, where amnesia is just about as ordinary
as a case of summer sniffles. So Ellen takes the amnesia bait and gets herself
consigned to a mental hospital until her boyfriend David McLean (Robert Ryan),
who is not the swiftest, finally figures out what's going on, and after a
frantic fistfight, rescues and vindicates his lady.

I myself was thoroughly confused by the multitude of loose ends in the plot. Who
was it who strangled the hotel maid, played by Ethel Mertz aka Vivian Vance? And
why?

Bosley Crowther of The New York Times, who hardly liked anything at all, was
more-than-usually outraged by this film. He called it "wantonly unintelligible"
and "cheap and lurid trash." I rarely agree with BC, but in this case he he went
easy on The Secret Fury. I was equally infuriated -- The Secret Fury is a film
without a shred of integrity. But what's to be expected when a phony case of
false induced amnesia is at the heart of the matter?

I feel for Philip Ober, who put his heart into playing the villain and was
forced to mouth with a straight face some of the most ludicrous dialogue ever
composed. I feel also for Jane Cowl, a graduate of Erasmus Hall High School,
who played bland Aunt Clara. Jane Cowl had a long career and appeared in many
respectable films. This one is an embarrassment.

So is the crowded, unartistic poster.

Source: 2020/09/more-on-my-dreamlife

Title: My Dreamatorium
Date: September 14, 2020

The house was surrounded by bears. They were, I must admit, not very convincing
bears -- my dreamatorium didn't seem to be able to generate realistic grizzlies.
Instead, these bears looked like actors in bear costumes. Even though they were
silent, they were menacing and I was frightened. I remained inside the house
trying to protect some children who may or may not have been my own offspring. I
thought, if I just fire my pistol into the air a few times, I should be able to
scare the bears and drive them away. So I started to look around for my pistol,
but no luck. I searched the drawers, several of them, and also looked through
my luggage. No weapon. Then I had a revelation. I remembered that it's not in
this dream that I have a pistol -- that was in an earlier dream, a few days or a
few weeks ago. If there's no pistol, how do I deal with the bears?  I was out
of ideas, but just then a woman, not someone known to me,  but middle-aged and
blonde, appeared, and inquired, do you want me to get rid of the bears? What is
your plan, I asked, and she responded, with the "performance." A "performance"?
She added that it would cost me a bit of money but that we would settle about
the payment later. I agreed with the plan and told her to go ahead with the
performance. Which she did -- she gathered a number of people, including some
very young children, who formed themselves into a circle and sang a song (more
like a chant) and danced. The performance chased the bears away, so I woke up. I
never did settle with her about the fee.

It wasn't my best dream -- but it's not entirely without interest. I'd give it a
B-plus at most. I admire the details about the wrong-dream pistol and about the
"performance."  By the way, I've never owned a pistol and haven't had a weapon
in my hands since ROTC in college, and I have no idea why my dreamatorium is so
convinced that I did so.

I continue to be amazed that my nighttime life is so much more inventive than
my daytime. In actuality, I'm not at all an imaginative person. When I set out
to write fiction or poetry, which I have done at various times in my life, it's
a disaster. The truth is that I have nothing to say. No plots, no situations,
no dialogue, no wit, no insights. And yet, night after night, I find myself in
crazy, bizarre but also imaginative situations. I wake myself out of dreams,
like this one, that refer back to past dreams -- as if Tuesday's dream, were a
continuation of Monday's and Monday's a piece of a continuing narrative -- as if
my dreams were chapters of a long novel or perhaps episodes in a TV serial.

My dreams are almost always nightmares. I'm lost in a strange city, can't find
my way back home. Surrounded, defenseless and alone, among enemies. Infinite
variations on themes of helplessness and hopelessness.

The pleasant dreams are very few but they can be inventive and fun. Once I
dreamed that I could swim like a fish, not by flailing my arms but rather by
swiveling my entire body. I was as as quick as a pickerel. And several times, I
had gravity-defying dreams in which I compete in the long jump, but don't come
down, just skim along the surface of the earth like a Greek goddess. A very
liberating fantasy.

It wouldn't be difficult to interpret the bear-pistol-performance dream. Life is
dangerous (the bears), there are possible remedies (the pistol), but community
support (the performance) is more effective than individual action. If I were
feeling Jungian, I could find all sorts of bear or half-bear archetypes in the
folklore. I'm absolutely positive that sometime during the long haul from the
Olduvai Gorge to Ellis Island, one or more of my ancestors, living in a cave or
a daub-and-wattle hovel, faced off against carnivorous creatures. Perhaps the
dream emerges from some atavistic portion of my brain or is embedded in my DNA.

But I don't believe it. I attach little meaning to dreams. Surely, they reflect
one's anxieties, but they don't predict the future or explain the deeper
mysteries of life. I think that they're nothing more than the chemical circuits
of the brain going haywire. It takes a lot of effort to keep the synapses
under control, and when we sleep, those controls are compromised. We become
unhinged. Didn't WS say something like lunatics and dreamers are of imagination
all compact?  Or did he?  Well, lunacy and dream and imagination are closely
related, whether he said it or not.

Source: 2020/09/vikings

Title: New Light on Vikings
Date: September 19, 2020

I read all 599 pages of Neil Price's just-published Children of Ash and
Elm, a detailed history of the Vikings, and I'm mighty proud of myself for
persevering.  It's a long book bristling with details and data. The author,
an archeologist, has made his own original contributions to Viking research.
To produce this synthesis, he seems to have read every relevant article and
monograph of generations of scholars. An impressive feat. I wonder, how much
will my intermittently faulty memory retain?

Has my understanding of the Vikings changed? Yes, I think it has. I knew that
the Vikings were famous for cruelty, plunder, pillage and rape, but I had no
idea that they were so deeply involved with human sacrifice and slavery. 
"The Vikings," says Price, "were not only slavers, but the kidnapping, sale,
and forced exploitation of human beings was always a central pillar of their
culture." Slaving was "the main element" of commerce with Russian and Ukraine.
The chapter on Viking slavery is grim reading indeed. It won't make you proud of
your species.

Here are a couple of Viking slave collars

Source: 2020/09/new-viking-words

Title: Curious New Words
Date: September 20, 2020

In his new book on the Vikings, Neil Price uses some words that I didn't kno  w.
Some old, some ne                                                             w.

"Haptic" -- relating to the sense of touch. A "byre" is farmhouse in which
humans live in contact with livestock. A "volute" is a spiral or scroll-like
ornament. An "allodium" is land held absolutely and not subject to feudal duties
or burdens. A "skald" is a Norse poet. "Theophoric" refers to words, often
place names, that embed the name of a god or goddess. "Futhark" is an early
or older form of the runic alphabet. A "quern" is a simple mill for grinding
grain and consists of two stones, one on top of the other. A "dirham" is an
Ottoman coin; the word derives from the Greek drachma. "Tephra" is fragmental
material produced by volcanic eruption. A "sigil" is a symbol used in ritual
magic. "Lamellar" is the adjectival form of "lamella," which is a thin flat
overlapping scale, in this case used to describe a kind of leather armor. A
"hydrarchy" refers to the rule of a piece of land from shipboard, and also to
"a pseudogovernmental system of law between pirates at sea." "Emic," a fire-new
word, describes the analysis of a culture from the perspective of a member
of that culture. And my favorite (how could I not have encountered this word
before?) -- an "ogonek" is a diacritical hook placed under the lower right
corner of a vowel.

Source: 2020/10/bleak-house-once-again

Title: Bleak House Once Again
Date: October 01, 2020

I just completed another long stroll through Bleak House. It's either my fifth
or sixth time through -- or almost once a decade since 1958. During this
reading, which will no doubt be my last, I felt that I was imprisoned by the
novel, hogtied; that I couldn't do anything or read anything else until I made
it to the end of entire 900 pages. Dickens took over my life, and not for the
first time. It was a struggle, perhaps made worse because my eyes are not as
good as they once were and because the print in my Oxford Classics edition seems
to be growing tinier and grayer.

It was a willing surrender and I was a willing captive. How can I not be dazzled
and impressed by the profusion of Dickens' imagination and by his genius at
keeping a dozen plot-balls in the air.

Nevertheless, I don't ever remember being quite so angry and impatient at Mr.
Dickens.  "Let 'em wait." Well, I waited for five days, which as fast as i can
trot nowadays.

The good parts of Bleak House are as good as anything in the language. The death
of Jo the crossing sweeper ("And dying thus around us every day") remains the
single greatest paragraph in the long history of the English novel. "Dead, your
Majesty." The encounter of Sir Leicester and Rouncewell was much better than I
remembered it. Mr. Chadband, the oleaginous preacher, was, this time, remarkably
pertinent. Mr. Bucket is a triumph. Lady Dedlock's long repressed love for
Captain Hawley was more poignant.

But I've lost my admiration for some other parts of the novel. I could hardly
bear Esther Summerson's goody-goodiness; and, this time, I have to say that
Esther's relationship with her dear darling Ada seemed suspect. Far too
sentimentalized. Ada herself, still in mourning seven years after the death of
her misguided weak husband -- unbearable.  The Jellyby and Pardiggle satires
seemed misguided, excessive.  I was not amused by Mrs. Snagsby's jealousy or
by the relentless pillorying of poor Mr. Guppy. Harold Skimpole's infantile
nattering has lost its charm.

There's never been a novelist with more heart or less intellect than Dickens. He
is the best of novelists, the worst of novelists.

Source: 2020/10/my-life-in-objects-post

Title: My Life in Objects XVIII-- The Menhirs
Date: October 02, 2020

This standing stone might look like an ordinary piece of granite, but it has a
rich history. If you look very closely, you can almost see the two deep holes
that have been drilled into it. Though it's now merely a garden ornament,
decorating a perennial border, it was once a working fence post. Hinges would
have been hammered into the holes.

We found this post up on the hill, deep in the second-growth forest, very close
to the remains of what was either a well or a cesspool and beneath the giant
senescent maple that must date from pre-Colonial times.

There's also a second megalith, also drilled but not visible in this picture,
that now guards a parallel perennial border. Long ago, the two posts flanked
an old farm road but the wooden gate that once stood between them had already
rotted and disappeared fifty years ago when I first happened upon the posts.

The area where the post stood is surrounded by numerous substantial stone walls
that once delineated the boundaries of various fields. Tom Roberts, who farmed
the property from 1926 to 1967, told me that he grew apples and potatoes on the
hill. There's no need for a gate for potatoes, so the posts must date from a
previous era when the land was used to pasture sheep.

We decided to honor the posts by placing them in a more prominent position, so
one day we loaded them into the bucket of the Deere tractor and brought them
down. We dug a hole about a third the length of the post, chained it to the
bucket, and lowered it into place. NGP is getting to be mighty skillful at
maneuvering the tractor. The posts are handsome in their new situations. Robins
like them too, as places to perch.

Source: 2020/10/my-month-the-secret-diary-of-president-donald-j-trump

Title: "My Week": the Secret Diary of D*n*ld Tr*mp
Date: October 06, 2020

Dear Diary: why is everybody always picking on me? It's been a really bad month,
even before someone deliberately gave me the virus. Sometimes I want to cry,
it's been so tough, but Daddy Fred would hate me for that. The press, the TV
people, some of those losers at Fox (not Hannity). Even my own niece, Mary, who
claims that I cheated her out of millions of dollars. What an ugly bitch she
is!  And then someone leaked that I called American soldiers losers and suckers
for dying -- I never said that, and if I did, it was private. They claimed that
I wouldn't visit that frog cemetery because it would mess up my hair -- well,
I paid $70,000 for my hair and they want me to go to some foreign cemetery for
some war that nobody's ever heard of -- in the rain. Fuck, not me. That's for
dummies. Then I went to Tulsa for a celebration of me me me and nobody showed
up. Parscale was responsible for that mess;  I got rid of him. Someone will try
to get him to rat on me, but he won't. I've got him by the pecker because of
all the money he's embezzled. And then some disloyal son of a bitch leaked that
I said that the virus was good because I could get away without shaking hands
with donors, Of course I don't want to touch them, they're disgusting losers,
full of germs. But I got to take their money, I don't want to spend mine. I'm
already into Putin for millions. My pussy advisors tell me I have to pretend to
be friendly, when I'd rather relax at Mar-a-Lago and eat cheeseburgers and spend
time with Hope. Then, a couple of days ago the nasty, failing New York Times has
a big story about my income taxes. Fake. Fake. Fake. I pay plenty, of course a
lot less than loser teachers and nurses who don't know how the system works.
Then Woodward, who I thought would give me good press, says that they're all
ganging up on me behind my back. Cowards and losers. Woodward says that wacko
Mattis, the turncoat, said that I had the understanding of a fifth or sixth
grader. How can that be -- my uncle taught at MIT? Plus I had great SAT scores.
Dummy Kelly thinks I'm an idiot and unhinged. That blimp Omigault says that I'm
a racist, a misogynist, and a bigot. Wacky nut job Gary Cohn says I'm as dumb as
shit and corrupt McMaster called me a dope. Publicity-seeker Bannon says that
I'm like an 11-year old child. Lightweight grandstander Tillerson called me a
moron. What's with all the name-calling? Good thing Jeffrey Epstein pulled his
own plug, if he really did, he had me worried for a while. Then all these dumb
women! All out to get me!  Katie Johnson and Summer Zervos and Jean Carroll and
twenty others. They all wanted it bad and then they changed the rules and now
they're out to cash in. Sad! Low IQ slut Stormy still trying to make me look
bad. And Rudy lobbying me every day to pardon Manafort and Roger Stone and his
other friends. Sometimes I just want to go to Russia and move in with Putin. God
I love that guy. I wish Roy Cohn was still alive. So much smarter than disgraced
idiot Michael.

Why is everybody always picking on me?

Source: 2020/10/natural-disasters

Title: Natural Disasters, Fear of
Date: October 11, 2020

It's unlikely that I will be killed by a tsunami. I just don't get to the
seashore very often -- the last time was five years ago -- and I happen to
reside most of the year at an altitude of 5300 feet. It would have to be one
heck of a tsunami that would find me here -- 1200 miles inland. An ordinary
rainfall-caused flood is a more likely cause of death. We have a big one every
decade or so. But still, I live on the second floor of a concrete and steel-I
beam building and even a thousand-year event wouldn't touch me. I might be in
danger if I happened to be hiking in one of our many narrow canyons, where you
see signs that say "in case of sudden flood, climb to safety." But I'm not
much worried about a narrow canyon situation because I like to stay home and
in bed when it starts to rain or even when there's a threat of rain. For the
same reason, I'm not afeard of dying in an avalanche. I don't ski and I don't
climb mountains, especially in the winter. In fact, I tend to stay at home,
sipping hot cider, on cold days because I'm afraid of slipping on the ice and
busting an arm or a leg or a hip. A volcano, then? Not likely. There are no
active volcanoes nearby and those hotspots under the geysers in Yellowstone
aren't scheduled to explode for a few hundred thousand years. I just can't
see myself racing ahead of a pyroclastic flow. A forest fire? Always a danger
because they've become more frequent with global warming. Nevertheless, I don't
think a forest fire is likely to kill me because even though I live less than a
mile from the mountains, there's enough buffer between my home and the forest
that it's pretty impossible for a fire to cross into my zone. (A house fire is
even more unlikely, especially because of the up-to-date built-in sprinkler
system and the cinderblock-enclosed staircase). I suppose I could be killed by a
lightning strike but I'm not likely to be outside dancing during a sudden storm.
A hurricane -- well, we don't have any here and although I spend a significant
amount of time in New Orleans, I limit my visits to the late winter or early
spring, so I'm not in residence during  the bad season. A tornado is a remote
possibility. Once again, I'd have to go far to find one, because they don't seem
to come into my city. I once identified a funnel cloud out to the east, but it
didn't touch ground. A blizzard? Well, I've certainly experienced blizzards
and once I was caught in one, but frankly, unless I should happen to drive the
Subaru into snowbank and freeze to death, or go out for a long walk in the
open space in the midst of a storm, I'm not likely to perish. Then there are
earthquakes, which would be a real possibility if I lived in California or along
a fault, but not here in the stable Rockies. So on the whole, I don't think I'm
going to die in some natural disaster.

Wait, what about a meteorite falling from the sky and bopping me on the head?

Actually, that sounds like a good way to go. No long period of fear and anxiety
waiting to drown or burn or be buried, just instant death while strolling in the
park on a sunny afternoon. A perfect ending.

Which reminds me of the death of Aeschylus, who, according to the story, while
walking on a beach, was killed when an eagle picked up a turtle, and trying to
break its shell, dropped it on him, thinking that his bald head was a large
rock.

Death by falling turtle -- ridiculous. Death by meteorite -- glamorous and
romantic. A story for latter generations to savor.

Oh, oh. I just thought of another natural disaster. Sinkholes. I don't want to
be swallowed by a sinkhole. Not at all glamorous. Memorable, yes. Glamorous, no.

Source: 2020/10/my-montaigne

Title: Montaigne, Kinship with
Date: October 14, 2020

There is no author with whom I feel greater kinship than with Michel de
Montaigne and there's none with whom I've passed more hours and days, except for
Shakespeare. For many years, Montaigne's Essais has been my bedside companion,
first in the old Everyman Library edition as translated by John Florio, a book
which I early discovered among my father's small collection, and latterly in the
1958 version by Donald Frame. Of the two writers, Shakespeare is the greater,
but he is unknowable and certainly not a comrade. "Negative capability" --
and all that. Shakespeare, the human being, lies hidden behind a profusion of
characters and borrowed stories. Sometimes I think I can catch a glimpse of the
man himself in recurring images or in a repeated motif, but how can I be sure?
It's all guesswork and supposition. Shakespeare is an auctor absconditus. He can
be admired, even revered, but he's too mysterious ever to be a pal. Montaigne,
on the other hand, is insistently present. He talks directly to me, guy to
guy, teaches me, argues with me. Even though there's a universe of differences
between me and this astonishingly erudite sixteenth-century French Catholic
skeptic, I feel that we are good friends.

Why the kinship? Montaigne is so various, so mutable, so inconsistent, that he's
difficult to define, but nevertheless exhibits traits with which I l am in deep
sympathy. Of all the important thinkers, he's the least systematic -- which is a
benefit, at least for me. I can't make heads or tails of his near-contemporaries
Spinoza or Descartes because both are too orderly and logical for my unsubtle
head. But Montaigne works differently -- he advances an idea, modifies it,
retracts it, illustrates it with a dozen anecdotes, and then announces that
he can't come to a definitive conclusion -- which is the way my mind works,
although obviously at a much lower order. And then Montaigne's brain is a
hodgepodge, a gallimaufry of formidable learning strewn in heaps, like the last
scene of Citizen Kane. So is mine, although it's a cramped attic compared to
Montaigne's warehouse. And of course, Montaigne writes almost exclusively about
himself, as I do in these fragmentary blague entries.

Moreover, we both seem to be at least in part writing for the same purpose.
I compose these essaylets for what I conceive of, pretentiously, as dynastic
reasons. Because I I so much wish that I had some artifacts or writing of my
grandparents or great-grandparents, who left nothing behind, no scrap remaining,
I want my descendants to have something of mine. Montaigne agrees: "What a
satisfaction it would be to me to hear someone tell me of the habits, the face,
the expression, the favorite remarks, and the fortunes of my ancestors. How
attentive I would be. Truly it would spring from a bad nature to be scornful
of even the portraits of our friends and predecessors, the form of their
clothes and their armor." [Montaigne came from a family with a strong military
tradition, unlike mine, which is epitomized by grandfather's desertion from
the Russian army.] "I keep their handwriting, their seal, the breviary and a
peculiar sword that they used, and I have not banished from my study some long
sticks that my father ordinarily carried in his hand." I have no "sticks," but
as I sit here pecking at the word processor, I see out of the corner of my eye
my father's library ladder, used for retrieving just the right law book.

Montaigne is not done with the topic. He continues by exploring an idea about
which I also have ruminated. For whom do I devote these hours, if not for
myself?  He is eloquent upon the subject.

"If no one reads me, have I wasted my time, entertaining myself for so many idle
hours with such useful and agreeable thoughts. In modeling this figure upon
myself, I have had to fashion and compose myself so often to bring myself out,
that the model itself has to some extent grown firm and taken shape. Painting
myself for others, I have painted my inward self with colors clearer than my
original ones. I have no more made my book that my book has made me -- a book
consubstantial with its author, concerned with my own self, an integral part of
my life....  Have I wasted my time by taking stock of myself so continually, so
carefully. For those who go over themselves only in their minds and occasionally
in speech do not penetrate to essentials in their examination as does a man who
makes that his study, his work, and his trade, who binds himself to keep an
enduring account, with all his faults, with all his strengths."

I wish I could say that I'm as honest as Montaigne; I'm not. I recognize that
the "me" that appears here is to some degree different from the me that is
me. Although I do not lie about myself, I conceal some of my most flagrant
deficiencies. Nor do I blow my own small trumpet. As a result, the portrait that
has emerged is solider and also less troubled than the true-to-life person.
Don't say I didn't give you notice, unwary descendants.

Source: 2020/10/the-yips

Title: The "Yips"
Date: October 16, 2020

The yips have been big news this week because Jose Altuve, Houston's golden-
glove second baseman has made three throwing errors in two games. Glaring,
costly errors. He's bounced balls to first base and to second base -- throws of
twenty or forty feet which he has made successfully thousands of times in his
outstanding career.

The "yips" is sports jargon for the sudden, inexplicable inability to make
an ordinary or routine play. It's commonly used by golfers when they start
missing short putts --but baseball has its famous yippers -- Steve Saxe, Chuck
Knoblauch (both of them second baseman who have the shortest, easiest throws) 
and now, possibly Altuve. Sometimes a good pitcher will lose his control and
start to miss badly; the retired pitcher at the microphone will say, "he's
lost his release point," which is a yippish diagnosis without using the word.
Athletes think that the problem is psychological but it's possible that the
condition is merely neurological - a "focal dystonia" or muscle spasm in the
wrist. Basketball yips? Yes, sometimes a good foul shooter will miss four or
five in a row.

I suspect that the yips may not be a sports-only syndrome.

Once, a decade or two ago, I was driving across the country on a four-lane and
needed to brake. For some reason, my feet (I was driving a standard transmission
so both feet and the clutch pedal were involved) couldn't remember which was
the brake pedal. I flailed with both feet and was utterly panicked for about
five long seconds. Then I came to my senses, put the correct foot on the correct
pedal, and continued on in normal fashion. Life continued. But if I had crashed
the car and killed myself, which was certainly a possibility, investigators
would have thought that I had fallen asleep at the switch. They'd have been
wrong; it was just the yips -- a failure to perform a task that should have been
entirely routine.

I wonder how many road disasters are caused by undiagnosed yippishness.

Do actors get the yips? Do musicians? Dentists?  Airline pilots? Surgeons ("You
know, I've done that back surgery hundreds of times but three out of the last
four, I've sliced entirely through the guy's spinal cord").

Source: 2020/10/george-raft-why

Title: George Raft. Why?
Date: October 20, 2020

TCM, the indispensable channel, has been delivering us a raft of old George Raft
movies. They Drive by Night (1940) of course, but also such unmemorable noirs as
Johnny Angel (1945), Race Street (1948), and I'll Get You (1952) as well as a
couple of others so unsubstantial that, although viewed during the past month,
they've already evaporated from my tired old brain.

This last while, whenever a George Raft picture began, we'd set a challenge:
will Mr. Raft's face show an expression? Any expression! Will he smile, smirk,
pout? Will he be angry, contemptuous, happy, lustful, disappointed? Anything at
all, any human emotion? After painstaking study, I can now report that although
we've examined every single frame, slowly and carefully, not once in any of
these films has George Raft exhibited the slightest discernible human feeling.
Moreover, on even more diligent examination, I can now affirm that he has
delivered every single one of his memorized lines without the least variation in
speed, volume, pitch, or intensity. Every sentence, no matter its significance,
exits his mouth with the exact same cadence. It's all low affect, all the time.

It's a puzzlement. What was George Raft's appeal? Certainly not his skill as a
thespian. Nor his negative charisma. He's not handsome, and because of his oddly
short legs, he walks funny (and he walks at exactly the same speed when crossing
the nightclub floor to question a "canary" or when prowling a dark alley, gat in
hand.

Even more astonishing -- in a couple of these movies he's cast as a romantic
lead who gets the girl in the last scene -- a girl who is younger, prettier,
taller, and a much better actor. There's nothing more embarrassing or
impossible-to-take-seriously than a George Raft kiss and fade. The End.

George Raft with Ella Raines.

Source: 2020/10/where-i-live-2020

Title: Where I Live, 2020
Date: October 27, 2020

For the last eleven years, I've lived in a downtown Boulder condominium. I much
enjoy living here -- it's age appropriate. The rooms are all on one floor;
there's an elevator; underground parking for the new Subaru; no snow shoveling;
hardly any upkeep. It's quiet inside and out -- but right around the corner,
just a block away, is the semi-famous Boulder Mall, with all the urban stuff
that one could want. A music venue. Restaurants, shops, a bank, a drugstore,
a barbershop, and just a half mile to the west, the very resourceful Boulder
Public Library. In season, a farmer's market. Tourists and natives peacefully
strolling. A good place for a guy my age to "hang."

There is, however, a small fly in the ointment. This past January, Ms. Reynolds,
my consort and odalisque (we don't use the W word, or the H word either) bought
a condo down the corridor from mine. As a result, both of us traverse the short
distance (75 feet) between hers and mine multiple times a day before ending
up in my place for dinner, perhaps a movie, and sleep. The difficulty is that
there's a quirk in this building's heating system. The corridor is always
frigid; for some reason that no one seems to understand, the air-conditioning,
need it or not, is always turned up to 11. The temperature stands at 58F, summer
and winter. The people who manage the building say that nothing can be done
about the arctic blasts. Hard to believe, but apparently true.

We call our passage from one apartment to the other, "braving the polar vortex."
The corridor itself is "the tundra                                            ."

In an effort to remedy this situation, I have written the following letter to
the authorities.

"Dear Managers of the Building:

Inasmuch as it has proven impossible to raise the temperature of the corridor
higher than 58F, I propose that we attack this flaw with a new and, I dare to
suggest, more imaginative strategy. If we can't raise the temperature, let us
lower it. With a little effort we can get it down to a consistent 48F. We could
then make some money by using the corridor as a sort of root cellar. I envision
a series of individual wooden boxes, say, perhaps 6' by 4', where residents at
modest cost could store their beets, carrots, onions, and potatoes (bought in
bulk at the Farmer's Market). It might even be possible to rent some of the
boxes to outsiders and bring a little extra income into the building. What a
marvelous (and ecologically sound) solution to our problem!!

Wait. On further thought, I have an even better idea. Let's lower the
temperature another couple of degrees, to 37F, the ideal for storing dry-aged
beef. The corridor could then be re-configured as a meat locker. I doubt it
woulds cost more than $100 to install a series of hooks in the ceiling, from
which residents (and outside renters) could hang their sides of beef. Everyone
knows that dry-aged beef is premium eating. I think this could be a real money-
maker for the property.

I don't see any possible objection to either of these ideas, but I'd want the
board to decide which one seems most promising and most lucrative.

And by the way, I noticed the other day that a pair of arctic foxes seem to have
taken up residence in the corridor. We'd probably have to do something about
them before we hang the beef, or there could be complications.

Also, I might be mistaken but I think a saw an ermine skittering right near the
elevator."

Source: 2020/10/worldseries2020

Title: Overmanaging, 2020.
Date: October 28, 2020

The 2020 World Series is over, and I'm in a royal snit.

It's Game 6, the Dodgers are ahead 3-2, and Tampa Bay has a chance to win and
make the series go to seven, which is what I'm rooting for (I don't have a dog
in the hunt, because I disapprove of both teams: the Dodgers, are the despised
simulacrum of the organization that abandoned Brooklyn 50+ years ago and Tampa
Bay is from Florida, the Nowhere State -- plus it's an American League team,
but that doesn't matter this year because for some phoney-baloney covid-related
reason both leagues are using the DH. Tampa Bay is ahead 1-0 on a first-inning
home run by Randy Arozarena, who has a great short powerful swing and is either
the second coming of Henry Aaron and the centerpiece of the best trade in
history (the worst for St. Louis) or the most spectacular flash-in-the-pan in
major league history. It's the fifth inning, and Blake Snell has been pitching
a masterpiece. Nine strikeouts and not a ball hit solidly. He's throwing 95 to
the corners and his sinking curve is keeping the Dodger hitters completely off
balance. He's looking almost like Koufax, for goodness sake. So what does Kevin
Cash, Tampa Bay's manager do?  He takes out Snell and brings in Nick Anderson
and two batters later, it's 2-1 Dodgers and the game is over and the Series
is over. Removing Snell is the worst decision in baseball history, perhaps in
sports history, perhaps the worst of any human decision since the emergence of
homo sapiens.

Why was Snell relieved? Because of some bullshit trumpery statistics about
pitchers being less effective going through the lineup the third time. Not
applicable in this case; Snell had lost nothing off his fastball, he was still
hitting his spots, and he was still demoralizing the Dodgers, who looked like
dejected losers. Until -- that is, they were invigorated by the prospect of not
having to hit against Snell any longer.

Is there a word "overmanaging?"  There ought to be. Both teams were over-
managed. Too many pitching changes, too many absurd fielding shifts -- even
putting four men in the outfield--, too many pinch hitters. Baseball used to be
a players' game, and the job of the manager was to put his nine best players
on the field and let them do their jobs, perhaps calling for a sacrifice or a
steal or an intentional pass, or replacing a tired pitcher with some ex-starter
or never-was from the bullpen. But now, baseball has turned into a manager's
game, like (gasp) football. And when it backfires, as it did last night, what a
disaster! What does Kevin Cash deserve, besides firing. If I were a Tampa Bay
fan, I'd be outraged. I'd want revenge or his scalp, perhaps both.

I'm a baseball fan, and I'm outraged, livid, angry. I wanted to see what Blake
Snell could do with the Dodger hitters, third time through. More reliance on his
slider, more on the slow stuff? Could he keep getting them to swing and miss at
his fastball at the top of the zone, or just above the zone?

I'm a fan;  baseball should try to please me and the 90% of the spectators in
America who knew that Cash was making a major blunder to pull Snell. I didn't
watch the end of the game. Left the room. Boycotted.

Baseball is not as exciting as it was in the days of my youth. The players
themselves are bigger, faster, stronger, and better trained, so it's not their
fault. But because the hitters are so powerful, there are too many home runs.
Home runs are only exciting when a batter catches all of it and blasts one 440
feet into the upper deck or 40 rows back into the lower.  There's nothing more
boring than a muscular guy swinging under it and popping one up 340 feet onto
the short porch. A travesty home run. The fences should be moved back 20 feet
and raised to a mandatory 10 or 12 feet. A triple is much more exciting to
watch than a Texas League homer. When was the last inside-the-park homer with a
relayed throw to the plate, just a hair too late?

And let's put the statisticians in their place. Tampa Bay is the only team
in the league with a professional statistician on the bench -- one who never
advanced past T-ball. Is he responsible for the manager's monumental gaffe? 
And for goodness sake, let's get rid of the DH. When the pitcher is in the
batting order, there's strategy in the game. It becomes a test of intelligence,
not just a home run hitting contest. I want to admire a well-executed sacrifice
bunt.

My father had been a catcher in his younger days and had the busted fingers
to prove it.  When he was dying, I went to visit him in the hospital. He was
watching the Dodgers on the TV.  The next day, when I returned, he wasn't
watching. I said, "Dad, there's a Yankee game on the TV; you could watch it." 
He said, "Yankees. American League. DH rule. Not baseball."  He died soon
after.

I'm scared that baseball, greatest of all games, has become "not baseball."

Source: 2020/11/bush

Title: Douglas Bush's Milton Course
Date: November 12, 2020

In the mid 1980s, thirty-five years ago, I was 'in residence' for a week at the
Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, D.C., researching an article on one of
the lesser English Renaissance dramatists -- a pleasure as well as a condition
of employment. The article that I completed turned out to be not a bad piece of
academic prose, if I do say so myself, but not something for the ages either. It
was a mere twenty years since I had completed my degree in "English and American
Language and Literature" at a Large Eastern University, specifically Harvard. I
was not drawn to the Folger for professional reasons only. It was a delight and
a great privilege to hold in my very own hands and to read dozens and scores of
four-hundred-year-old ephemeral books that -- more than the canonical literature
-- helped me to understand the age of Shakespeare. Sermons by the wagonload,
biblical commentaries, almanacs, political pamphlets, poems by minor and unknown
versifiers, broadsides, medical textbooks, collections of jokes, how-to-write-a-
letter-in-Latin trots, schoolbooks. The library possessed inexhaustible troves
of such material. The Folger's plenty licensed my dilettante brain to follow its
own naturally wayward inclinations.

While doing my duty and also having some fun, I fell in with a fellow Folgerite
named Boyd Berry who was visiting from Virginia Commonwealth University in
Richmond, Virginia. Over cups of coffee, Boyd and I discussed some of the less
well-known writers of the period in whom we shared a mutual interest. I remember
that we also talked about the teacher's perennial frustration at engaging the
interest of our sometimes less-than-enthusiastic students. I do not remember
what prompted me to ask Boyd this question: "what was the worst course that you
ever took either as an undergraduate or graduate student." He replied, without
hesitation, "Douglas Bush's lecture course on Milton at Harvard in 1961." I
was flabbergasted, in part because I hadn't guessed that Boyd had been at
Harvard during my years there, but more because I had enrolled in exactly the
same course -- same time same station same year -- and because Douglas Bush's
Milton course was also my own nominee for the worst course ever. Parallel
lines had accidentally and miraculously met, so to speak. Although Boyd and
I were the same age, he was one year behind me and had taken the course as a
senior undergraduate while I had been a first-year graduate student. It seemed
an astonishing coincidence, but then, the universe of students of English
Renaissance literature is a small one. Nevertheless, the fact that we shared
the same opinion about Professor Bush's course was comforting and, as they say,
"validating." Boyd said out loud words that I had only speculated upon in petto.
Perhaps I wasn't the only outlier.

Why were we in such accord? The obvious answer is that Professor Bush, then
in the tail end of his much-celebrated career (he had uttered his infant
cries during Grover Cleveland's second presidency), was tired and bored
by his teaching and put little heart into the work. In brief, he droned,
unconscionably. Not only did he drone, but it seemed as though there was an
invisible shield between his podium and our seats. He didn't speak to us --
he addressed the empyrean. His lectures consisted of a superficial running
commentary on Milton's poems. "There's a particularly lovely passage starting
on line 695," -- as if a challenging idea would be beyond our collective
capacity. If a student broke into the drone to hazard a question, Professor
Bush's characteristic answer was, "Well, that seems self-explanatory." But
Bush's classroom style was not the only reason for my unhappiness; I had more
substantive concerns.

Let me interject a few words about Professor John Nash Douglas Bush. Although
almost forgotten today, Bush was by all odds the most formidable and learned
literary scholar of his generation. He knew everything there was to know about
English, Romance, and classical literature and had written a dozen comprehensive
critical and historical books. If the gossip can be trusted, he greeted the
dawn of each new day by reading two hundred lines of Latin poetry and a hundred
of Greek. I am sure that he knew more about John Milton than Milton knew about
himself. He had edited the volume of Milton's complete poetry (English, Latin,
Greek, and Italian) and, astonishingly, had memorized the entire twelve books
of Paradise Lost. He was an exacting scholar and a stylish and witty writer.
Moreover, he was a kindly, gentle man, cordial and generous to his students --
even to me. If he had flaws of character, I didn't know of them. To my mind,
he was an unimpeachably excellent person and scholar -- and at the same time a
teacher from whom I learned just about nothing.

I was once invited -- along with a clutch of my ambitious graduate-school
classmates -- to some sort of reception at Professor Bush's Cambridge residence.
His home was exactly as it should have been -- that is to say, if one were
making a movie about a distinguished Harvard professor, one's location scout
would not rest until he discovered the Bush quarters. It was a spacious and
civilized home presided over by gracious Mrs. Bush, who was also exactly as she
should have been. I remember that the giant main room in the house -- which
must once have been two or more large rooms that had been sutured together, was
Professor Bush's enormous study. It was more like an institutional library than
something to be found in a private home. Just as one would expect, the study was
lined floor to ceiling with handsome wooden bookcases chock full of an enviable
display of publications in many languages, some of which I could identify. I
remember being served sherry, I think, and also something preternaturally green
and fishy on an unfamiliar but I'm sure very elite kind of cracker. This dream
of an academic utopia filled me with envy. It also scared the living blazes
out of me. Why? Because for all Professor Bush's elegance and his library, and
his lovely deferential wife, his movie-set home struck me as soft, fey, self-
satisfied, and bloodless. I was dazzled and intimidated by its splendors but
at the same time wary and resistant. Only five years beyond crowded Erasmus
Hall High School in darkest Brooklyn, I knew myself well enough to know that,
however seductive, his style of life was not for me. I would have to find a more
appropriate path.

Now I want to step further back and report on two cases in which I was in
conflict with Professor Douglas Bush. Actually, the conflicts were only on my
side; Professor Bush, Olympian and serene, did not notice -- nor should he have,
frankly. These incidents continue to haunt me to this day, sixty years after
the fact. Both occurred not in the Milton course, but in an "advanced" seminar
called "Science and Humanism in the Seventeenth Century." I must explain that
the word "humanism" did not carry the meaning that it does today, as in the
phrase "secular humanism" -- an approach to the natural world that is allied
with agnosticism and which sometimes resolves into pure atheism. Professor
Bush's humanism was the altogether different "Christian humanism." It was, in
brief, the noble but ultimately unsuccessful Renaissance attempt to fuse the
"inspired" and "revealed" truths of Christianity with the thoughtful, upstanding
but unfortunately "natural" morality of the Greeks and Romans. If "Christian
Humanism" could be distilled to a sentence, it would be Desiderius Erasmus'
daring speculation -- that he would like someday to be able to say, "Sancte
Socrates, ora pro nobis", or "Saint Socrates, pray for us."

I was a humanist of the secular variety -- by birth, inclination, education
and because in my brain there was no place, not even a lone neuron, where
"faith" or "prayer' or "worship" might in more standard heads be lodged. Bush,
on the other hand, was not just a scholar of Christian Humanism, he was an
honest-to-god trapped-in-amber Christian Humanist -- and a devout one, deeply
rooted and entirely comfortable in late medieval/early renaissance thinking. In
his seminar on Science and Humanism, humanism was right and just, and science,
its antagonist, was, if not altogether bad, at a minimum a very dangerous
alternative. Did not both Bacon and Descartes assert that "nature" -- the
real world -- could be studied directly, on its own terms, rather than as
an entity infused with god's being and majesty. That we mortals might study
nature not to reaffirm the goodness and omnipotence of god, but to accumulate
objective knowledge and to reap practical material benefits. It's a fact that
the separation of nature from the "truth" of religion has over the centuries
unquestionably led to the marginalizing of Christian thinking and therefore,
according to Bush's view of the world, to the steep decline of civilization. The
world, no longer driven by revelation, has been going to hell in a heathen hand
basket, as Professor Bush said or implied every Tuesday at 4:00 pm.

Regular readers of this blague as well as Dr. Metablog's family and friends
will recognize that Youthful Me did not accept Bush's premises. In fact, in
those days, I was probably even less open to religious ideas than I am now. And
therefore, each Tuesday was a day of discomfort.

And then, one afternoon, Professor Bush began the allotted two hours by
launching a surprise assault on the then-new and controversial Third Edition
of the Merriam-Webster dictionary. The Third had shocked traditionalists.
Until 1962, dictionaries had been "prescriptive "-- that is, they explained
how language "should" be used and they stigmatized as colloq. or subst.
[substandard] those words or expressions that fell beneath the bar. The Third
forsook tradition and was not prescriptive but descriptive. It aimed to record
the language as it was really used. The Third therefore included many words
hitherto banned as slang or vulgar and it was loose and permissive with regard
to "shall" and "will", and "imply" and "infer," etc. For Professor Bush, the
Third was a plunge into darkness -- another example of the collapse of Western
Civilization as we know it, or should know it. So he excoriated the new
dictionary and its editors and its supporters. The tirade having been completed,
he turned mildly to the class and asked if anyone present had a different
opinion. Now I had learned a little about modern linguistics at Cornell, and I
was a descriptivist both by education and democratic instinct, and I knew that
Bush was completely out of step with contemporary thought. I was astonished to
discover that I knew more about this particular field of knowledge than he. But,
alas, I was totally intimidated and did not open my mouth. What abject cowardice
on my part! Nary a word did I say, and so the class segued to a discussion of
the Cambridge Platonists and their vain attempt to tame and assimilate Descartes
and Spinoza. I still wonder if any of the other 2G's around the table were aware
of my shame. Probably not -- did my peers, the late Arthur Oberg, the late Jake
Mills, the late Brian Hepworth, the late Terry Logan, the late Bill Godshalk,
and others whose names I have forgotten, notice my moral collapse? I suppose
that it's too late to worry. Nevertheless, my failure to raise my hand and voice
still humiliates me, still rankles.

Another Tuesday, another surrender. In 1961, William Empson published his
innovative study, Milton's God. While Empson was not as learned as Professor
Bush (no one was) he was a much more imaginative and challenging reader. Some
say that after Johnson and Hazlitt, Sir William has been English literature's
most insightful critic. Empson was an intellectual and social dissenter (he
had been banished from Magdalen College, Cambridge when a condom [horrors!]
was discovered among his possessions). He had written two highly influential
critical books that every serious mid-century student of literature studied
-- the first on ambiguity, the second on pastoral. Empson read Paradise Lost
through a very different lens than Bush. He was not a Christian; in fact,
he confessed himself anti-Christian because he judged there to be a serious
moral flaw at the heart of the religion -- that the sacrifice of Jesus was a
highly elaborated form a scapegoating. About Paradise Lost, he concluded that
God (that is, the character God in the epic) was confused and contradictory,
repeatedly tying himself into logical and rhetorical knots in order to justify
the unjustifiable. He also argued that irrespective of Milton's intention,
the character God became more complex and interesting when he became less
ideological and more dramatic; more, so to speak, human. He revered Paradise
Lost, but for his own, not Bush's, reasons. Milton's God was trashed by
Professor Bush, who dismissed Empson as a simple "village atheist." I was
stunned. True enough that Empson was an atheist, but true also that he was a
powerful thinker, not someone to be given the back of the hand with a flippant
ad hominem. Bush's review came out in The New York Times on a Sunday; the
following Tuesday, our teacher was lauded by my fellow seminarians. He basked
in their admiration. Did my young colleagues genuinely agree with Bush, or were
they egregious sycophantic toadies? I don't know and will never know. And then,
after the celebration, Bush asked, as if he were open-minded, "Does anyone here
have a different opinion?" If Empson had been summarily dispatched, what chance
had I? So once again, I fled the field, remained mute -- and slunk deeper into
my expensive leather chair.

Source: 2020/11/how-i-came-to-hackett-hill-road

Title: How I Came to Hackett Hill Road -- I
Date: November 17, 2020

What factors led a city boy, age 28, to purchase a rural property where he has
now passed fifty glorious summers? Where he is as happy as a lark with a packet
of seeds and a pruner, rake, and hoe.

It all began with my father's love for his backyard garden. "Have you ever
seen a more perfect flower than this?" he would ask, pointing me to one of
his splendid hybrid teas. During the growing season, he'd come home from work
at 6:00 p.m. on the dot, hurry through supper, change out of his lawyer suit
into his old clothes, and get to work. I never saw him more contented. He
cultivated his 30' by 40' plot with the assiduity of a Javanese terrace farmer.
I watched him carefully and participated when he would let me. I studied, with
the concentrated attention of childhood, the growth habits of snapdragons,
sweet peas, and marigolds. Then one year I was allotted a square foot of
space, right next to the dwarf peach, in which to plant seeds of my choice. 
I chose a pumpkin, a vine that did not recognize boundaries, and produced two
astonishingly large fruits. The die was cast.

There was also my maternal grandmother Sonia, originally a country girl, who
never bought an orange or a grapefruit but that she planted its seeds on the
window sill -- in one of those old wooden Philadelphia cream cheese boxes. Her
tiny apartment had a pleasant hothouse-y odor. She loved her seedlings.

And then there were the three summers ('47, '48, '49) which my family spent on
Makamah Beach near Northport on the Long Island Sound. It was my original rural
experience, and the earliest hint that there were places other than concrete and
chain-link-fence Flatbush. It was the first time in my life that I felt at ease
in the landscape.

I must not forget the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, where I spent many a happy hour.
I remember in particular its famous Japanese garden. There was also a bank of
colorful bottlebrush buckeyes that caught my youthful fancy. Many years later,
I tried to reproduce that bloom in my Vermont garden. The curve and slope of
the land were ideal, but the plant itself was not for our subarctic winters.
The buckeye has survived, barely, for forty years now and has never produced a
single flower, nor ever will.

It was at the BBG that I learned that gardening was not just about growing the
biggest pumpkin -- it was about aesthetics and design. I started to read about
the history of gardens and whenever I traveled I detoured to visit the great
examples: the Huntington, Dunbarton Oaks, the Winterthur in Delaware. And scores
more, all intimidating because they were created with the help of enormous
fortunes, huge spaces, and unlimited supplies of labor. Good thing I had my
father's example of "much in little."

Source: 2020/11/bulletin-more-than-100000-people-have-visited-dr-metablog

Title: Bulletin:  More than 300,000 Readers Have Visited Dr. Metablog
Date: November 26, 2020

[March, 2012]  Well, maybe not readers. Page-viewers. But did they view
closely?  Did they savor the wit and learning?  Did they browse?  Or did they
merely Ctrl-C and plagiarize a few sentences for that high school essay which is
due tomorrow morning?

Still, 100,000 is a good round number. Some bloggers, alas, have as many
visitors in a single day.

[November 25, 2020: 315,000 visitors, or viewers, or readers, or whatever
they're called. And counting.]

Source: 2020/11/spider

Title: Brown Recluse
Date: November 29, 2020

Last night, I was lying in bed comfortably reading Michael Kulikowski's
excellent new book on the last years of the Roman Empire. I was concentrating
very hard, because it's difficult for me to retain the decisions made at Nicaea
in 325. I can read a paragraph about the Arian or some other "heresy" and five
minutes later I can't remember who was on what side, or why it matters, except
that those on the wrong side were liable to be burnt alive. What part of the
brain is supposed to retain this stuff?  In any case, I was lost in the book,
quite content, comfortable -- supportive mattress, soft pillow and all that --
while, unbeknownst to me, a spider was making its way up the backside of the
book cover. Why? Where did it come from?  All I know is that it rounded the
bend, so to speak, nonchalantly strolling into view at the very top of the verso
page.

Immediately the most primitive part of my brain was activated, I elevated out
of the bed like some sort of 1950s cartoon character, hovered for a second or
two, and then found myself on the floor, frantically flapping the sheets and
blankets, searching for the offending arachnid. Get him before he gets me!

If I understand what happened, the amygdala, the part of the brain that's in
charge of fear, governed my actions. The amygdala has been producing fear and
flight responses long before it came to be incorporated into homo sapiens.

After a few minutes we (I had called in auxiliaries) located the offending guy,
and he's now sitting on my desk in a tightly sealed Bonne Maman jam jar.

I think it's a brown recluse. It sure looks like one. The color and shape are
right out of the official catalog. According to the authorities, the only
foolproof way to ascertain if it's a brown recluse is to count its eyes -- six
rather than the usual spidery eight. But anyone who thinks that I'm going to get
close enough to this spider to count its eyes has another think coming. Brown
recluses are rare in our part of the world, but they're not unknown. My book
came via interlibrary loan from Laramie, Wyoming; perhaps the spider came along
for the ride.

Why be frightened of a brown recluse the size of a quarter, legs extended? 
"Brown recluse bites can inflict significant or even life-threatening damage.
Bites may cause severe pain, ulcers, fever, chills, nausea, joint pain, or even
seizures."  Also, necrosis. Scars from necrotic flesh can last a lifetime. A
friend of a friend lost a few months of his life and a hunk of gluteus maximus
to a bite on the butt.

The spider is quite active now in its new home -- the jam jar. It's a
beautifully engineered little creature and very industrious, unceasing in its
determination to find the way out. I admire it, behind glass, and I probably
share a lot of DNA with it -- though it's hard to feel a close kinship.

The "take-away": even though some parts of my brain have deteriorated, my
amygdalae are in splendid working order.

Source: 2020/12/astonishing-feat-of-memory-and-facial-recognition

Title: Astonishing Feat of Memory and Facial Recognition
Date: December 03, 2020

Source: 2020/12/replacement-children

Title: Replacement Children
Date: December 07, 2020

Friends, relatives, and stray internet pilgrims know that Dr. Metablog, aka
Vivian de St. Vrain, etc. is a "replacement child" and has written about it in
the blogpost Susan P. and also in brief remarks on Louis Aggasiz, Edward Gibbon,
Thornton Wilder, and a guy from the old neighborhood.

Now, I'm happy to say, there's a new website devoted to the study of
Replacement Children. You can access it here, and learn about Mark Twain, Frida
Kahlo, Vincent van Gogh, Elvis Presley, and other famous and not-so-famous
"replacements." It's worth a visit.

Source: 2020/12/nook-and-cranny

Title: Pairings
Date: December 09, 2020

"Kith and kin" is an excellent example of a "pairing" -- sometimes called a
"coordinate pair." A pairing is a linguistic event in which two words join to
produce a single meaning.

"Kith" has no independent existence nowadays and only exists as an element of
the pair. "Kith and kin" means "family." Originally, back then, "kith" meant
"known" and therefore signified "friends." "Kith and kin" was "friends and
relatives." No longer; now it means "family and family." "Time and tide" is
another fine pairing; "tide" meant "time" centuries before it came to refer
to the moony fluctuation of the seas, although its older meaning survives in
"eventide," "Yuletide," and similar words. Now "time and tide" seems to evoke
the inevitability of both clock and waves -- both of them joined to wait for
no man. "Kit and kaboodle" is also a lovely pairing, because "kaboodle" lacks
independent existence. It may derive from "boodle' -- a thief's bundle -- with
the "ka" added just for the fun of it. "Dribs and drabs" is more obscure in
origin and may not be a true pairing. "Dribs" is probably a variant of "drip"
but "drab" was in times past not a small amount of something or other, but an
untidy or unchaste woman. It's possible that "dribs and drabs," now a rather
neat pairing, is better thought of as a reduplicative like mumbo-jumbo or
hoity- toity. "Nook and cranny" is a pairing in which both elements survive
independently; "nook" originally a corner of a room, and "cranny" a narrow
space in which a brown recluse might hide. When someone or something grows by
leaps and bounds, it's hard to tell which is the leap and which the bound. The
same with "hot and bothered" -- the two words simply reinforce each other.
Similarly, a person might want to "pick and choose" between alternatives, but
to do so requires only one action. "Flotsam and jetsam" is an amusing pairing
of uncertain origin. It is often thought that flotsam lies on the surface of
the water and jetsam is thrown into it, but such a definition might be merely
a folk etymology derived from the words "float" and "jettison." A "hoot and a
holler" both refer to shouting, but now they mean "shouting distance." "Stuff
and nonsense" is obvious, but what sort of "stuff" is nonsensical? Perhaps
it's the very vagueness of "stuff" that it allows it to pair up and reinforce
"nonsense." "Alack and alas" is a weary but euphonious pair. "Wrack and ruin"
becomes more transparent when it's remembered that wrack is a variant  form of
wreck -- as "beck and call" becomes clearer when it is recalled that "beck" is a
foreshortened version of "beckon." The cry in "hue and cry" is obvious; the hue
is thought to derive from the OF verb huer (shout).

Null and void, bag and baggage, prim and proper, vim and vigor, are self-
explanatory.

Bits and pieces are sometimes called odds and ends. That's the long and the
short of it. Jot and tittle have been thoroughly researched and explicated
here.

Is "footloose and fancy-free" a pairing. Yes, I think so. An energetic and
imaginative pairing.

Source: 2020/12/inventive-remark-in-an-otherwise-undistinguished-dream

Title: Inventive Remark in an Otherwise Undistinguished Dream
Date: December 09, 2020

Once again, I was lost, this time in a strange city -- apparently, I was trying
to drive from somewhere down south all the way to Vermont.  We park the car
and my companion (a guy totally unknown to me, by the way) asks a traffic cop
the name of the city at which we've arrived. The policeman says to my friend,
"ay, ya" and my friend says to me, and I quote this lunatic absurdity absolutely
verbatim, no embroidery whatsoever, 'He says we're in  ay-ya, which is West
Indian for New Brunswick, New Jersey."

"West Indian for New Brunswick, New Jersey?"  Goodness gracious, is that
creative, or what? Another brilliant achievement of my dreamatorium.

Source: 2020/12/female-1934

Title: Female (1933)
Date: December 12, 2020

Source: 2020/12/state-of-my-mind-end-of-2020

Title: State of My Mind -- End of 2020
Date: December 23, 2020

It's been a rough year what with the madman president and the covid pandemic.
And also deaths and diseases among my close friends. I have at least ten male
friends who've lost their wives after long marriages. Some have bounced back,
some will never get over the grief. At the beginning of 2020, I made a joke: 
"it's going to be the year of the ophthalmologist." It turned out to be the year
of the thanatologist.

Nevertheless, I can honestly say that my dominant mood is one of gratitude.

Grateful that I've lived a long life, mostly healthily, and that my children and
grandchildren are thriving. I'm not rich, but I've never missed a meal for want
of cash.

When my father was my age, he was crippled with arthritis and he was widowed,
living a sad solitary life. I take long walks in the mountains and have a new
love in my life.

As of today, 1.1 million Americans have been vaccinated against the virus. There
will be errors and disruptions and scandals, but in a few months we'll be mostly
back to normal. And I believe and hope that our wonderful country will survive
this accidental lunatic presidency.

Source: 2021/01/hmt-how-many-today

Title: HMT? (How Many Today?)
Date: January 07, 2021

For two days, I kept track of the initials that I needed to know to make sense
of the world. Here they are, all familiar, no doubt: HOA,, MRI, IED, CNN, EPA,
FDA, DNA, OMB, ED, NBA, COVID, GPS, AWOL, PTSD, TCM, WTF, BPL, TIA, ETA, MST.
Just two days. IK that there's a part of the brain that stores nouns; I wonder
if humans will evolve to develop an area to store acronyms.

Source: 2021/01/a-scots-quair

Title: A Scots Quair
Date: January 12, 2021

I've given over the last week or ten days to Lewis Grassic Gibbon's A Scots
Quair and I'm very pleased to have done so. And I'm embarrassed that I've only
now read this strange brooding wondrous series of novels. How could I not have
known? For those equally as ignorant as I, the Quair is a trilogy -- Sunset Song
(1932), Cloud Howe (1933) and Grey Granite (1934). Together they tell the story
of Christine Guthrie from childhood -- about the turn of the century -- through
the years of the Great Depression. I can't remember reading a piece of fiction
that has so thoroughly engaged me, or encountering  a fictional character so
fully realized as Chris Guthrie Tavendale Colquhoun Ogilvie.

Here's a picture of Gibbon (birth name: James Leslie Mitchell) who died at age
34 from a botched surgery.

The novels do for the northeast corner of Scotland what Thomas Hardy did for
the southwest of England. Gibbon's corner of Scotland is traditional agrarian
society beset by doctrinaire religion, industrialization, war, and the Great
Depression. The novels range from extremely brutal to marvelously lyrical. They
are not without defect: sometimes too long, often too preachy. Occasionally, I
felt that I was being treated to a Scottish version of "orientalism": Scotism,
perhaps. The books want condensation, editing; sometimes I felt that I was
reading a first draft -- but Gibbon wrote fifteen books in seven years, so signs
of haste are inevitable. Gibbon might be called a local colorist or a social
realist, but he's much more. His feel for the landscape and for history is
unparalleled.

In subject matter and tone, A Scots Quair reminds me most of Halldor Laxness's
great Icelandic novel, Independent People. It's also like one of Hardy's Wessex
novels, but funnier, more playful, and yes, more sensual. There are stream-of-
consciousness speeches that recall Faulkner and passages that might have been
written by James Joyce (not the Joyce of Ulysses but the Joyce of Portrait).  A
much neglected masterpiece.

Source: 2021/01/the-dreaded-american-hug

Title: The "Dreaded American Hug"
Date: January 13, 2021

The coronavirus has been sorely inhibiting. It's no fun for me to keep a
distance from members of my family with whom I'm not podded up. But there's
a benefit, because for a year now I haven't had a single anxiety attack over
what a European acquaintance calls "the dreaded American hug."  My needs
for acknowledging friends and acquaintances have been well satisfied by an
occasional and discreet elbow bump.

I'm not a hugger either by nature or by training -- my family of origin was,
well, whatever is the diametrical opposite of "touchy?"

When did the hug creep into our lives? I suspect it had its origins in late 60s
early 70s counter-culture. At least in my social circles -- that is. For all
I know, the Brewsters might have regularly hugged the Bradfords back there in
Mayflower days. Although not without massive attacks of disabling guilt.

When males want to hug me, I tend to shrink backwards. I don't want to give
offense, so I offer as much hug as my hug-averse nature can tolerate. With
women it's much more difficult -- because of the bosom problem. Too quick an
embrace and you're unsociable, but one that lasts a second too long and you're a
pervert. The best solution, I've found, is the sideways hug -- just throw an arm
around the lady's shoulder and briefly touch your right ribcase to her left. And
then beat a retreat.

Let's bring back the straight-on traditional handshake. It's sensible and
proven. And for goodness sake, no kissing each other's cheeks "like them
foreigners do."

Source: 2021/01/tails

Title: Tails
Date: January 22, 2021

Most animals, mammals included, sport tails. As well they should. Tails are
truly excellent appendages -- essential equipment for survival in many cases.
Most primates have tails, but alas, the apes, our most immediate cousins, lack
these useful "limbs." Some random mutation, way back when, and zap, no more
tails. As a result, we humans live in a tragically diminished universe. And deep
down, we feel the loss -- it's a fact that humans have been desperately trying
to grow tails for countless millennia. Embryo after embryo puts his or her whole
heart into the effort. Tails are there, prominently, between day 31 to 37 of
the gestational process, but then they disappear -- leaving the poor embryo
dispirited and regretful. In mourning! How much happier a species we would be if
we could only wag.

Tails have many uses. For locomotion, obviously. We'd be much better tree and
monkey-bar climbers if we had good prehensile tails. We wouldn't be nearly so
earthbound. There would be fewer dangerous falls if we had tails -- they're
essential for balance. Just watch a cat or a squirrel. Plus a human with a tail
could grab on to something to keep himself upright. A tail can also be used for
defense. Grab the bad guy's arm with a good strong grasping tail. Think about
how much more interesting the martial arts or wrestling would be if were were
betailed. Imagine how useful a prehensile tail would be at a cocktail party;
both your hands are occupied spreading the green stuff on the cracker, so you
hold your wine glass with your tail.

Tails are also good communicators; they're expressive. Observe canis
domesticus: submission, aggression, defiance, excitement, puzzlement. Tails
would be important for parent child interactions. "Don''t you dare swish your
tail at me, young lady." If dogs can do it, why couldn't we do it better?

And also sexual activity. Imagine the possibilities.

Style: "how are you wearing your tail this year?" Billion dollar industries
revolve around haircare. Tailcare offers even greater possibilities. I'm sure
that the expense of tail grooming, tail coloring, tail enhancing, and tail
bejeweling could lift us out of most recessions. Tailcare would be one of the
major drivers of the economy.

Human life would have been infinitely richer.

Source: 2021/01/people-said-to-me

Title: Some Memorable Sentences That People Said to Me Long Years Ago
Date: January 28, 2021

My mother: "Stop slouching."  "Stop moping."  "Don't be a melamed."  (A
melamed is a pedant.)

My father: "If you lose your man, go directly to the front of the rim." "Keep
your hand on the man you're guarding. Keep your eye on the ball."  "Never be
embarrassed to accept a favor from a friend. Never omit an opportunity to do a
favor for a friend." "Don't forget to wash behind your ears."  "Anyone can make
money if they make it the sole business of their life to do so."  "When the
stock market is going up, everyone's a genius."

L Y Kaplan: "Give her a chance."

Harry Wedeck, a teacher at Erasmus Hall: "Read biographies."

Clara Gerstner (librarian, dying of cancer): "Get the most out of life."

David Novarr (revered teacher at Cornell): "You have to outwork the
competition."

B. J. Whiting (at my doctor's oral examination, after a discussion of the French
sources of Chaucer's Wife of Bath's Tale): "What's a Flemish one?

Source: 2021/02/2020ws

Title: World Series Results Claimed to be a Hoax
Date: February 03, 2021

Source: 2021/02/a-dream-of-swordfish

Title: A Dream of Swordfish
Date: February 06, 2021

I was on a rubber raft in the middle of an ocean.  Three or four swordfish
surrounded me. They were about to spear my raft and drown me -- because they
wanted my pension.

I wondered how I was to transfer my wealth to them -- could they take it out in
small, edible fish?

And so my dreamatorium continues to exceed expectations.

[February 13.  Still another "I am lost" dream, but this one with an unusual
feature. I am at a subway kiosk, trying to get a token or change for a $20 bill
so I can board the train, and the attendant says to me, "do you want your change
in money or in spaghetti?" Honest to Pete, that's what she said. I say, of
course, "I'll have it in money, please," but nevertheless she hands me a pound
of dry spaghetti, wrapped in cellophane or plastic, but already falling apart. I
walk away with the pound of spaghetti and try to get rid of it by placing it on
a window ledge, but a passer-by retrieves it and hands it back to me. "You
forgot your spaghetti," he says. Soon after I find a garbage can and stow the
spaghetti, and the dream continues in predictable channels.

I think the question, "Do you want your change in money or in spaghetti?" is one
of the best sentences my dreamatorium has ever generated.]

Source: 2021/02/today-let-us-celebrate-the-blanket

Title: Today Let Us Celebrate the Blanket
Date: February 07, 2021

What an excellent invention! Imagine life without the blanket. At night, we'd
still be keeping warm with hay and leaves. Yeesh, defective insulation. Hay and
hayseeds in our noses and mouths. Leaves, leaflets, thick main ribs and petioles
poking and imprinting our skin. Constant renewal problems: "Have remembered to
fetch the hay for tonight yet?" Cleanliness problems -- small insects in the
hay and leaves, however carefully processed. And then frequent trips to "Hay
and Leaves" -- the chain of stores that dominates the market. "Do you know what
they're asking this year for a half bale of leaves?"

When we pull that luxurious blanket over our shoulders, do we remember to thank
the inventor or inventors of the cotton or woolen blanket?  Are we sufficiently
appreciative of the luxury in which we live?

Coming soon: National Pillow Day.

Source: 2021/02/more-on-the-old-west-bradford-cemetery

Title: More on the Old West Bradford Cemetery
Date: February 11, 2021

In September of 2014 I wrote about a horrible tragedy that is commemorated in
our cemetery -- the old West Bradford cemetery on Hackett Hill Road. Inasmuch
as I've lived adjacent to it these last 52 years, I feel a strange proprietary
connection to the people it houses. I've wandered in it, tended it, studied it,
and cleaned up the trash left behind by visitors. I know that old burial ground
very well.

Here's what I wrote seven years ago:

"The old West Bradford cemetery, which is carved out of our land, is peopled by
the Worthleys, Hacketts, Kidders, and Sleepers who first settled this part of
Vermont. Some of them were long lived, some wandered through this thoroughfare
of woe only briefly. There are o-so-many of those sad stone lozenges at the foot
of a grave that represent infants who died too young to be christened.

Our most disturbing gravestone, in my opinion, is the the one for Stanley
Franklin Dwinell, M.D., born in 1920 and who died along with James Scott Dwinell
(age 7), Peter Dewey Dwinell (age 6), and Jonathan Dwinell (age 2) all on the
same day, December 11, 1952.  What a horror, I thought -- a man and his three
young sons all gone at once. A tragedy. But what sort?  A plane crash?  A
boating accident? House fire?  Perhaps even an infectious disease.

An internet search came up empty-handed, so I enquired of our longer-tenured
neighbors. Here's the local legend as it was reported to me. "Oh yes, the vet,"
I was told (although the tombstone distinctly says M. D., rather than D. V. M).
 "He was driving along Route 5 in Fairlee one winter morning and it was an icy
road and foggy and he went out of control and all four of them died instantly.
His wife was at home drinking a cup of coffee when she got the phone call. She
left the coffee half-finished on the kitchen table, left the house without a
word, and was never seen again. Didn't even take her clothes. Just disappeared."

It's a dramatic, heartbreaking story that sounds like the plot of a short
story by Alice Munro -- but I don't believe it, not a word of it. The same
gravestone that records the four simultaneous deaths also asserts that Constance
S. Dwinell, wife of Doctor Stanley Franklin Dwinell, died January 25, 1985, at
age 65.

I'm trying to imagine the remainder of poor Constance's life. It's hard to
construct a scenario that isn't completely dreadful. Most likely, Constance
returned, shattered, to the small town in New Hampshire, let us say, where she
must have been born. She moved back into her parents' house and took a job as a
town librarian, her life blighted by the tragedy. She never remarried.

But I prefer to imagine that after a period of intense mourning, she moved to
Paris (she had majored in French at Wellesley, I'm guessing,) and never told
a soul about her first family. There she was wooed and won by Baron Guy de
Condorcet de Noialles but could never conceive a child. It was a long happy
marriage. After Guy died, crashing his motorcycle on a winding Riviera road, she
returned to the States a rich woman, and lived out her life in a Park Avenue
apartment in New York. Friends and neighbors who had no idea of her first life
were shocked when they read the will which specified that she be buried, along
side Stanley and the children, right here in West Bradford.

That's my story and I'm sticking with it though I would very much like to know
the truth."

Then a year later, I was contacted by Larry Coffin, president of the Bradford
Historical Society. My local informant, it turns out, was all wrong about the
circumstances of the accident. Mr Coffin wrote this: "I would like to correct
your information on Dr. Stanley Dwinell. He and his three sons were killed in a
collision with a train on a crossing in Newbury, VT as he was going to treat a
patient at Woodsville (NH) Cottage Hospital. His father Dr. Franklin Dwinell was
in a car following."  Mr. Coffin did not comment on the half-finished coffee
cup.

[February 11, 2021.  I've now received the following communication from a
correspondent who calls him/herself "R". He or she is a "descendant of Stanley's
brother" and has sent me the link to this article In the Rutland Daily
Herald.  How could I have missed it?

So that's a slightly different version of the horrible story. The details are
different, but it's the same story in essence.

"R" also refers me to a letter in the Bradford Opinion by attorney Bud Otterman
of Otterman and Allen. It offers other details from the prior accounts but it's
no less tragic. "Franklin Dwinell was a a longtime doctor in Bradford when I
opened my law office in 1951. His son, Dr. Stanley Dwinell, had come home from
World War II and joined his father's practice.Their patients went to the old
Cottage Hospital near the railroad tracks in Woodsville. One of the doctors
would visit their patients each morning. When Stanley went, he would often take
his three pre-school sons with him. They would play in the waiting room while
their dad made his rounds. The morning of December 11, 1952 was overcast with
cold rain and snow in the air. About 11:30 am Dr Franklin Dwinell was called to
an accident at the grade crossing south of Newbury Village. When he arrived,
he found his son and his three grandson dead as a result of a collision with a
southbound train. There were no warning lights at the crossing."

"R" also says that Constance (Stanley's wife and the mother of Dwinell children)
"wasn't alone after Stanley and the boys passed. They had an older daughter who
was 7 and in school at the time of the accident. She's moved away from the area
and is reportedly somewhere out west now."

The older daughter, Hannah Dwinell, would therefore be 76 years old, as I write
this, if she is still alive. I feel for her. She had to overcome the loss of her
father and three younger brothers. Such an event would leave an irremediable
scar. I hope Hannah has had a good life. I wonder if she has ever returned to
West Bradford. It would be most painful for her to do so.

[I've also written about "my" cemetery here.]

Source: 2021/02/anadromous-or-catadromous

Title: Anadromous or Catadromous?
Date: February 12, 2021

Until this last week, when I read Patrik Svensson's Book of Eels (2019), I
had never encountered either of these lovely and mysterious adjectives. I'm
delighted to add "anadromous" and "catadromous," along with their cousin
"diadromous" to my vocabulary, though when I'll be able to drop any of these
words into my quotidian or even hebdomadal discourse is not immediately obvious,
especially inasmuch as I'm not all that confident about their accentuation.
Moreover, I rarely get into heart-to-hearts about icthyic migration.

Anadromous fishes hatch and spend their first months in freshwater streams and
rivers but then they migrate to the vasty deep, where they grow and mature.
When they feel ready, they return to the streams in which they were spawned
to deposit and fertilize their eggs. Salmons are famously anadromous (as well
as romantic and celebrated), but equally so are less-heralded smelt, herring,
and shad. Eels, on the other hand, are catadromous. They are hatched deep
in the ocean and then drift and wander to freshwater streams and rivers.
European eels may spend, according to Svensson, as many as fifteen years in the
shallows until they get the urge for going. No one knows what calls to them,
but they plain have to go. Then they set out for the dangerous Sargasso Sea
in the mid- Atlantic. Eel reproduction has entirely evaded the eyes of human
investigators.  Nor has a single eel egg ever been identified. Eels are modest,
private, discreet. No one  knows if or how eels select their mates. Do they
enact elaborate courtship rituals, or do the females simply lay their putative
eggs amidst a cloud of eelish milt?

Eels are not kosher, but not because they are catadromous. The rules, as set
out in Leviticus, are very clear: "Everything in the waters that has fins and
scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, you may eat. But anything in the
seas or the rivers that has not fins and scales is detestable to you."  Why
the Lord of Hosts set His face against shrimp and clams is unknowable -- but it
worked, in the sense that the religion survived and, some say, prospered for
lo these three thousand years. Food taboos are a common feature of religions
-- they help to separate us from them. But shouldn't taboos be minimally
consistent?  If the author or authors of Leviticus had said, don't eat eels,
they're slimy, ugly and tasteless to boot -- well that would be a religious
prohibition I could honor. But the scales thing, I don't know, because it's now
clear that eels do have scales (as well as fins). Eel scales are very small.
They are embedded in the skin, and they are smothered with eel slime. They are
difficult to find, but they're definitely, unquestionably present. Yet the
authorities continue to deride eels as treyf and have added the distinctly
unBiblical gloss that the fish's scales must be visible and detachable without
harming the skin. Unjust to eels, I say. I think they deserve a retrospective
pass and a full rabbinical apology.

My reasons for not eating eels are plain and sincere: eels are hideous beasts.
Even Svensson, who loves eels and eel-fishing, admits that they are loathsome to
any sensible palate.

Query: my daughter was born and lived here in her home town until she was
eighteen years old. Then she left for California, where she birthed and raised
her two fine children. Now she's returned home to her native streams at last. So
is she catadromous or anadromous?

Source: 2021/02/where-i-lived-viii

Title: Where I Lived --VIII
Date: February 13, 2021

From August 1976 to summer 1977, we lived at this odd, modernistic house at 1
Leycroft Close in Canterbury, Kent. The small tree, something in the prunus
line, wasn't there at the time so the house was more visible. The house wasn't
suitable for a family of five, but we made it work, barely. Two blocks away
was St. Stephen Protomartyr School, which the kids attended for a year. The
boys learned to play soccer and the daughter learned how to speak with an
English accent, which she forsook after two weeks back in the USA. The abandoned
railroad embankment behind the house, loaded with blackberries and wild plums,
afforded the kids much amusement.

Source: 2021/02/jacquardcoverlet

Title: My Life in Objects XIX -- Jacquard Coverlets
Date: February 14, 2021

A coverlet is not a small cover. The "let" is not a diminutive -- it's let as in
copire lectum (L) or "cuivre lit" (Fr).  A bedcover. Neither a blanket nor a
bedspread, but both -- a decorative but warm item of bedclothes.

"Jacquard" refers to the Jacquard attachment, which was a series of punchcards
(the ancestor of the IBM cards) that controlled the weaving and allowed a
skilled workman to produce complicated patterns relatively inexpensively.
Jacquard coverlets were produced in large quantities (about 700 craftsmen are
known) in villages and small towns in the US between about 1820 and the coming
of the Civil War. Weavers were mostly immigrants from the old country whose
skills had already been rendered obsolete by factory-based manufacture. Weaving
was a cottage industry -- many weavers wove in the winter, farmed in the summer.

This coverlet was woven by Benjamin Hausman of Allentown, Pennsylvania, in 1842
-- it says so in the "corner block." It's in amazingly good shape for a weaving
that's 180 years old. The colors, especially the madder red and indigo blue
wool, are still vivid. The coverlet is impressive and beautiful and keeps us
mighty toasty at night.

Source: 2021/02/my-brain

Title: My Brain -- for my Grandchildren, etc.
Date: February 22, 2021

(This entry is written for my grandchildren and any subsequent descendants,
should there by any, who might like to know how and where their brain anomalies
originated. Whether they will revere or curse me for what I've bequeathed them,
I'll never know. Just as well. The further they are removed from me, the less
they have to worry, for I'm only a one-fourth donor to my grandchildren, only
an eighth to the greats. With progressive diminishment they have less and less
reason to be concerned. But they'll never arrive at zero --there's no escape
from me or from a genetic Zeno's Paradox.]

I've lived with this brain for 80-plus years now and have a pretty good idea of
its strengths and weaknesses and peculiarities. I'll try be candid about the
poor pink mass.

I have a very good memory but little capacity for synthesis or organization. I
imagine that the contents of my brain look like the last scene of Citizen Kane.
A warehouse of stuff strewn in heaps, nothing organized, everything disorderly
and random. A great twisted miscellany of jumbled information. Nothing where
it should be, everything a mess. I "know" lots of facts and data, but I've
never had the capacity to make sense of them. When I read, for example, a
well- organized book of history, I'm regularly dazzled by authors who are able
to discover and explain patterns of change or to compare one century or one
civilization with another. My brain can't do such things -- or anything remotely
similar, even at a much lower order of achievement .

I have almost no imagination or creativity. Over the year I've tried to write
stories and poetry, but the stuff that emerges from my brain is piss poor. I'm
only comfortable dealing with facts and evidence. When I'm asked to invent
stuff, to make things up, I falter badly. I'm reminded that when I was a youth
in college, many of my friends enrolled for courses in "Creative Writing." I
couldn't take such a risk -- creative writing terrified me. I was conscious,
even then, of my total want of invention or artistry. On the other hand, I'm
quite a good detective. I can follow clues. I'm a good researcher. Strange to
say, though I'm without imagination in real life, I experience spectacularly
fanciful dreams. There's hardly a night goes by that I'm not transported to some
vividly brilliant alternative world. Why can't I access my nighttime imagination
during the waking hours?  I could have been a pillar of neo-surrealism.

I'm good at arithmetic but a total bust at mathematics. I can do mental
arithmetic much better than most -- add, subtract, multiply, or divide quickly
and accurately without pen or paper. But once things become even the slightest
bit abstract, I go blank. When there is something to count, I'm your man; when
there's something to extrapolate or imagine, no go.

I have a strong aesthetic sense, especially about visual beauty. Museums or
gardens can move me almost to a swoon. I've even experienced Stendhal syndrome
a few times. Majestic mountains and spacious landscapes move me less than a
well- designed garden. Yet my delight in human artistic achievement does not
cross over into anything that might be called spirituality (as it does for many
people). I entirely lack what Charlotte Bronte called the "organ of veneration."

I have a woeful disabling case of directional dyslexia -- worse than anyone
I've ever known except my younger brother. I can't follow directions and I get
lost even in familiar territory. I believe that my inability with left right
east west (I'm brilliant with up and down!) has contributed to my general lack
of daring. Inasmuch as I've always been afraid to go a step too far in space,
I became too cautious to strike out intellectually. Perhaps my inability with
directions is also tied up with my sometimes disabling shyness -- but that's
a guess. I do know that it's the reason that I am regularly bested a jigsaw
puzzles by five-year-olds -- I can't deduce the relationship between pieces.

I'm not prone to guilt but I'm devastated by shame. I suppose I would feel guilt
if I killed or harmed someone, but I've never done much in the pure villainy
line. Though largely guilt-free, I suffer dreadfully from embarrassment. I think
that I've retained in my memory every foolish fatuous pretentious thing I've
ever said or done. I live with a highly punishing shame superego -- which is
good, because it limits the number of times in which I might make an egregious
fool of myself, but it's bad because it's kept me from taking risks that might
have been productive or liberating or just simply pleasurable.

I have a good sense of humor. I can occasionally be witty. I also appreciate the
wit of others. I've learned, over the years, not to be witty at others' expense.
I'm articulate and occasionally, but rarely, eloquent.

I'm observant. When I walk in the woods, or walk down the street, I see and
interpret more clearly than most people. Sherlock said, "You see but you do not
observe." I'm no Holmes, but I do observe. Perhaps it's false pride but I think
that I "read" people pretty well. And I read relationships well. I'm curious
about people and about things, which is why I am happier reading non-fiction
rather than fiction. I'm more interested in the facts than in "make-believe." 
An odd admission for a person who spent a lifetime teaching and studying
literature.

I'm a good listener.

I love music but I have as inadequate a sense of rhythm as anyone on earth. My
dancing is pathetic and ludicrous. My sense of rhythm is so bad that as a youth
I could never learn to pump a swing -- even though in bat and ball games I was a
passable schoolyard athlete.

I'm impatient, easily bored. If I don't get it quickly, I'm liable to give up.
But there have been times in my life when I worked with admirable perseverance
and diligence. Not often enough.

I'm fascinated by language and know more than most people about the way
languages are structured and how they work. I read foreign languages pretty
well. At the same time, I have no ear for sound. My hearing is now very bad,
except when I turn the apparatus up to 11, but even in my youth I didn't easily
distinguish "t" from "d" or "v" from "b." I seem to have to see the word in
my head before I can understand or translate it. I was good at the ancient
languages because they made no demand on ear or tongue. French was a trial
because the sounds were so distant from their spelling. In English, I'm an
excellent speller.

At this point in my life I'm more conscious of the deficiencies of my brain
than of its strengths. I feel fortunate that I had a strong memory, a feel for
language, and a decent prose style, and that those few traits were enough to
let me live a respectable life and make a decent living. But I also know that
many people perform a multitude of tasks without strain that are a torment and a
struggle for me. Which has kept me appropriately modest.

Source: 2021/03/snobbery-in-the-verb

Title: Snobbery in the Verb
Date: March 02, 2021

Sometime during the hippie period, say the early 1970s, I  was driving the
big green Dodge station wagon solo from who knows where to somewhere else,
and as was my custom in those turbulent days, I picked up a hitchhiker -- a
mighty scrawny young guy. He seemed to be in bad shape -- underfed and dirty.
I suspected "speed." Compassionately, I offered him a piece of my sandwich. He
turned me down, saying, "I don't use white bread."

What an effective sentence! In a mere five words,  he managed to claim complete
moral superiority over me. I was now dismissed as a "user" of white bread. and
therefore clearly an unenlightened conformist bourgeois -- probably a rabid
supporter of the carpet bombing of Cambodia. He, on the other hand, was a
butterfly, free and liberated and a dissenter from the Loathed Establishment.

But I don't think I would remember this incident if it weren't for his
deployment of the word "use." "Use" asserts an equivalence between two habits
-- between whatever cocktail of drugs that he might be injecting or snorting or
dropping, and the white bread that I was consuming. It was also implied that my
addiction was the worser one. My emaciated pal was, in his own mind, doing me a
favor, enlightening me about the depravity of my bread habit.

But let me say a word in defense of the bread -- I don't "use" white bread in
the sense of Silvercup or Wonder Bread -- at least not since I left Flatbush
neighborhood of origin. The slices of bread in question might not have been
made of steelcut handmilled wheat berries enhanced with millet and quinoa and
baked in a hickory-fired furnace, but it would have been a perfectly respectable
bread and one that should not have been denigrated by a skinny tie-dyed trust
fund baby soon to shave his scraggly beard and rejoin his father's insurance
business.

But I sure do admire his use of the verb "use."

Here's a more recent incident. On the semi-famous Boulder Mall, not long ago,
a panhandler carrying a sign that said, "Anything Helps" held out his hand. 
Compassionately, I gave him a quarter.  He returned it to me, announcing, "I
don't take coins."

Well, everybody has to have standards.

Once again, I've been put in my place by a verb. "I don't take coins."

A third instance: I was in Boston and I wandered into a ragged antique store
that sold old and truly ancient Chinese art. The place is a mess but I notice
that the goods are museum-quality -- sculptures, mostly, but paintings and even
a few bronze pieces -- Neolithic for all I know.  Way out of the range of
my wallet or checkbook. Trying to appear knowledgeable, I ask the proprietor
if he has any Green Fitzhugh. Peering over lunettes, he says, with aggrieved
condescension, "I don't do export."

Floored again. Put in my place by Mr. Hippie, Mr. Panhandler, and Mr. Antique
Dealer -- all of them master practitioners who know how to make a simple
monosyllabic verb do a heck of a lot of snobbish work.

Source: 2021/03/pandiculation

Title: The Many Uses of "Pandiculation"
Date: March 20, 2021

I've just learned a new word that and I'm trying to figure out how to work it
into the conversation. Some sample usages:

"Have you pandiculated today? How often?"

"I'm not pleased when you pandiculate at the dinner table."

"There were a bunch of kids at the museum today, and half of them were
pandiculating."

"I thought that the way he pandiculated was ostentatious and rude."

"Pandiculation can be very pleasurable, especially early in the morning."

"I wasn't aware that many kinds of mammals pandiculate. You'd never see a
reptile or a bird do it."

"Not only did he pandiculate during the concert, but he did it noisily."

"I think that people should at least cover their mouths when they pandiculate."

Source: 2021/04/beffaapril

Title: Beffa -- April 1, 2021
Date: April 01, 2021

Regular readers of this metablague know that Dr. M. has resumed his study of
Italian. Foolish say some, but heroic say others, because to try to master a
language when one is an octogenarian is truly daunting. However, native speakers
of English, even older ones, can, if patient, slowly acquire Italian. Its sounds
are similar and sometimes identical to those of English; the conjugations, only
three of them, are on the whole regular; and many of its words have English or
Latin cognates. For me, pronouns present a problem, because they're sometimes
required when I wouldn't think to use them, and sometimes dropped when I'd
prefer them to be there -- and, moreover, they come in slightly varied direct,
indirect, and reflexive forms. And then there are the pronomi combinati or
double pronouns which are confusing in themselves and which are sometimes but
not always attached to infinitives, gerunds and imperatives as enclitics.
It's probably too late in the game for me to become a fluent speaker, but I
have hopes of becoming a competent reader. I can now read at about the 6th or
7th grade level; I have the grammar under control so it's mostly a problem of
vocabulary and idiom.

For a greater challenge, I've begun to study a little Beffa. Beffa is a
Kartvelian language with admixtures of Cascagian and Ghetti. Fortunately for me,
there's a small Beffan community here in our town. I work with an introductory
textbook -- Pathways to Modern Beffa (2012) by Divino Divano -- and with a
native speaker named Ismail Kartakov. We meet three times a week when he's
available. Sometimes I enjoy a Beffa-speaking dinner with Ismail and his wife
Soraya and their three young children. I've also been to some Beffan parties and
exuberant dances. I sometimes feel odd-man-out but it's been fun. The Beffan
community, reputedly hostile to outsiders, has been very welcoming. And the
goat, mountain oyster, and black radish stew is superb.

Beffa is a bit more complicated than English. For example, while English has
26 consonants, Beffa has 56, including a two kinds of glottal stops that sound
almost like clicks as well as a voiced glottal fricative that resembles a cat's
purr. It also has both a voiced and unvoiced bilabial trill that sound a lot
like an English "raspberry," and an unusual, possibly unique lingual-dental stop
in which the tongue is pushed firmly against not the upper but the lower teeth.
One peculiarity of Beffa is its consonant clusters -- a word may begin with as
many as six consonants yoked together before the first vowel appears. Some words
have an initial six consonants followed by a vowel and then a cluster of five
or six more consonants. This can be strange to English speakers and sometimes
I notice Ismail's younger children giggling at my feeble attempts to replicate
their plosives. (Voiceless plosives are usually aspirated and one must take care
not to insert a schwa between aspirants.) Beffa also has a varied repertoire
of vowels, including a number of diphthongs and a couple of triphthongs. There
aren't any tones, thank goodness. There's one triphthong the use of which can be
perilous, for if you get it wrong the observation "your blue parrot is pining
for the fjords" apparently sounds almost exactly like "my knife is longer and
sharper than yours."

Nouns have both natural and grammatical gender. Nouns can be masculine,
feminine, neuter, ambiguous, common, animate or inanimate. They can be singular,
dual, plural, or paucative (i.e. a few). Neuter nouns rarely have duals. Beffa
has six fully formed declensions, distinguished primarily by the fact that
plurals in declensions 1 and 3 are formed with a prefix, in 2 and 4 by a suffix,
and in 5 and 6 by an infix. There are also some fifteen cases, all useful but
some slightly unusual. There are the familiar nominative, possessive, accusative
and dative (or indirect object). There are also a series of cases that describe
motion: the locative ("the ball that is lying on the ground"), the ablative
(("the ball that is coming in your direction"); the separative ("the ball that
is moving away from you"); the commitative ("the ball that is touching your
hand"); the partitive ("the ball that has left your hand"); the terminative
("the ball that has stopped moving"); the superessive ("the ball that is on top
of another ball"); the penetrative ("the ball that is inside another ball"); the
perditive ("the ball that is lost"); the oscillative ("the ball that is going
back and forth"); the thumpative ("the ball that is bouncing"); the plungitive
"the ball that has fallen into the water"); the remunerative ("the ball that
has been bought or sold"); the joculatorative ("the ball that does not fall
to the ground"); the alfactorative ("the ball that stinks like a corpse");
the perplexive ("the ball that has disappeared"); and the insouciative ("the
ball that has disappeared and no one cares"). Nouns can be either proximate or
obviative; nouns that are central to the discourse (proximate) are declined
very differently than nouns that are of marginal importance (obviative). There
is also an unusual suffix (at least, unusual to me, for I had never encountered
it before) that indicates whether the object specified touches the earth or
is removed from the earth. And an infix which indicates whether the object is
horizontal, vertical, diagonal, spiral, or invisible.

Verbs can be singular dual, plural, paucative, or undetermined: active,
passive or middle. There are five fully-formed conjugations and apparently
remnants of three others that are retained from the past when the language was
more fully synthetic. The most commonly used tenses are present indicative,
imperfect indicative, past imperfect indicative, future indicative, future
imperfect indicative, future perfect indicative, pluperfect indicative, past
pluperfect indicative, future pluperfect indicative, future stative, pluperfect
resultative, present optative, future optative, past imperfect optative, present
subjunctive, future subjunctive, past pluperfect subjunctive, future pluperfect
subjunctive, future pluperfect conditional subjunctive, and future pluperfect
optative conditional subjunctive aorist. Curiously, there is no future imperfect
subjunctive. Moreover, there are two kinds of vocatives: one when a woman
addresses a man; a second when a man addresses a woman or an animal. There
is also votive, a tense that was formerly used for addressing the deities in
prayer, but is now reserved for tribal chiefs, heads of state or royalty. The
votive is very similar to the conditional and the erroneous substitution of
a conditional for a votive was formerly grounds for mutilation but nowadays
leads only to acute embarrassment, or, in the case of a particularly egregious
grammatical lapse, to exile.

Some verbs are ergative so that the subject of either a transitive or
intransitive verb can be in an absolutive case. Some common ergative verbs are
"to become," "to eat,", and "to gouge" (as in, "to gouge out the eyes of an
enemy").

Beffan script is known as "dabbenaggine." This passage comments on the familiar
Beffan proverb, "If you steal my horse, I will steal your wife."

.

Beffa used to be written boustrophedonically, but since the reforms of 1912
has been written right to left. For some reason which I cannot possibly imagine,
dabbenaggine leaves no spaces between words but runs them all together without
breaks, which makes it just slightly harder to master.

Pronouns and determiners are difficult and complicated and perhaps I'll describe
them sometime in the future when I'm more familiar with their multiple and
various forms.

Source: 2021/04/my-life-in-coffee

Title: My Life in Coffee
Date: April 04, 2021

Although both my parents were dependent on their morning coffee

percolated out of a can like this one, I myself never touched the stuff until
my first year at college. In the 1950s, coffee was 10 cents a cup and I drank
gallons of it, morning, noon and night. It became essential to my well-being.
Black, no sugar or milk, but in truth, not black but barely brown, weak by
present standards. In the early 60s my hipper than I -- not much of a leap -- 
friend SDS introduced me to the coffee shop. Figaro in Greenwich Village, mighty
sophisticated for a boy from Flatbush. I became addicted to coffee shops as
well as coffee itself for many a year. I couldn't handle any routine paperwork,
or indeed grade a tedious set of papers without infusions of caffeine. With
the Starbuck's revolution, coffee became tastier and more luxurious. But,
conservative as I was, I never succumbed to fancy drinks but kept to what had
come to be known simply and condescendingly as "Americano."

During these thirty-five or so years of pleasant coffee dependence, atrial
fibrillation became an annoying feature of my life. Frequent bouts, longer and
longer. Debilitating, possibly dangerous -- there's a strong association of
fibrillation with strokes. Finally, a doctor suggested that I might consider
giving up caffeine. So I stopped on a dime. It took six weeks to get the
caffeine out of my blood and put an end to the longing for coffee -- but the
atrial fibrillation came to a total halt. Ceased. Not a single episode these
last two and a half decades. Astonishing. I had been poisoning myself -- or at
least, compromising my well being.

Do I miss coffee? Yes, I'm afraid so, every morning. I still love the odor
(which was always better than the taste). More than that, I miss the society
of coffee cup and conversation. In those days, I loved to sit with a book in a
nook, warming my palm with a bottomless cup. Once, only once, about two years
ago, I did venture to order a medium Americano -- but I couldn't stomach more
than a couple of sips. Coffee's an acquired taste, and one that I had I de-
acquired.

Tea? I haven't found one that is more than barely tolerable. Hot chocolate?
Feels juvenile. Acceptable for breakfast but not for Peet's or Ozo or Starbuck's
or the Trident.

On the other hand, a heart that keeps to a regular rhythm and doesn't go
creatively syncopated several times a week is also a pleasure.

Source: 2021/04/linen-silk-etc

Title: Linen, Silk, etc.
Date: April 06, 2021

I've been reading about the origin of spinning and weaving -- specifically
E. J. W. Barber's Prehistoric Textiles (Princeton, 1991), a comprehensive
and exhausting survey of everything that was known about the subject thirty
years ago. I'm dazzled -- in part by the author, who turns the story into an
adventure, but even more so by our brilliant neolithic ancestors. Some among our
forbears, starting perhaps 30,000 years ago, looked at this plant, common flax,

and figured out how to turn it into linen -- a complicated, many step process.
How did they even begin to imagine such a transformation? Did they examine
the plant and say, hey that looks like it will make a nice shirt or a pair of
pants? To arrive at such a concept seems like an act of almost preternatural
intelligence. After all, there was no template or model. It's not as though
there were other fabrics made from other plants fibers. Flax into linen was a
first. There were predecessors. Clothes, I imagine, in the form of animal skins
or furs, must have been in use. I've read that reeds and other plant materials
had been plaited into baskets and nets. But flax into linen was not at all
obvious. We can be proud of our ancestors.

Here's a picture of the oldest recovered linen garment: the so-called Tarkhan
Dress, which was found in a cemetery near Cairo in 1913 and radiocarbon-dated to
between 3482 and 3102 BCE, or 5 and a half millennia ago. It's quite stylish and
isn't in much worse shape than some of the favored garments in my own personal
wardrobe.

Source: 2021/04/dumb-luck

Title: Dumb Luck
Date: April 14, 2021

I can remember five near misses -- five times when through inattentive or
incompetent driving I put my own and others' lives at risk. I give thanks that I
avoided killing or mangling myself or the innocent victims of my failings. What
wondrous life is this I lead -- how fortunate I have been!

The first: it was 1963. I was an inexperienced, overconfident driver, traveling
westward, somewhere in southern Illinois. My first cross-country trip. A two-
lane highway, a downpour, very wet pavement. I saw, or thought i saw, an
oncoming car in my lane. There would have been plenty of time for him to pass
and dive back, but I panicked and braked hard. My vehicle, an old Rambler, not
a great handler in the best of times, swerved into the oncoming lane, then spun
out of control and landed backward in a ditch on the right side of the road. We
sat there, stunned, relieved, because I had been in the left oncoming lane long
enough to have killed ourselves self and others. (Within a minute, a man pulled
up in a truck, attached a chain to our car and winched us out. I'm perpetually
grateful to this Samaritan.)

A second instance: an icy winter day in Boulder, early 1970s. Driving the old
yellow Saab with my sister Phyllis (legally, sister-in-law) in the "death seat"
east on Arapahoe, I hit a slick of black ice and made a bad situation worse
by applying the brakes. The car spun out of control and eventually halted
facing backwards in the oncoming lane. Once again, no one injured or even
inconvenienced.

Another: driving across the USA alone in the clunky blue Camry, doing 80 in a
55 zone, I didn't quite fall asleep at the wheel but certainly lost focus, and
didn't see a car stopped in the parking lane until I was just adjacent to it.
If I had been a bit to the right or if there had been someone fixing a tire,
I would have crippled myself and murdered an innocent. Here's another one,
probably the most idiotic. Driving alone through Chicago in heavy traffic, on
one of those horrible highways where there are eight lanes east and another
eight west, I found myself in the third lane from the right and needed to exit
right. Instead of playing it safe, and continuing on, I impulsively dove across
two lanes and made it to the exit. Angry horns to the right of me, horns to the
left of me. Why did I take such a risk? I don't know but I thank the drivers
around me for being alert. What arrogance, what stupidity! The most recent
event, and most inexcusable, happened just a few years ago. I was returning
home from a very disturbing visit to the "memory care" facility. Somehow, in
my grief, I ignored a prominent red light and sailed right through a busy
intersection -- a gross violation of sense and law. But there was no crash and
no police and I proceeded blithely on my way -- only, after a few moments,
realizing with shock and horror that I had put my own life and that of others at
completely unnecessary danger.

When people two hundred years from now look back on our "civilization" --
assuming that there will be people on this planet two hundred years from now,
which is not a certainty -- they will wonder how was it possible that those
people in our century were able to survive. Dashing 70 or 80 miles an hour in
a tin can just six feet from a line of onrushing tin cans? Weaving among giant
tandem trucks and buses and cement mixers -- and expecting to survive. What sort
of brave or foolhardy individuals were these strange, death-defying people?

For myself, I'm astonished at the dumb luck that's allowed me to preserve my
life and mobility to this advanced age. So far, that is. It's not over until
it's over.

Source: 2021/04/the-brown-corpus

Title: The Brown Corpus
Date: April 24, 2021

Interviewing ten candidate a day for a couple of days can make a guy a little
crazy. On the one hand, you owe each candidate your thoughtful attention,
because careers are at stake. But conducting interviews is a tedious process
and everyone who has ever done it knows that faces and voices and attitudes
tend to blur into an indistinguishable lumpy mass. So much earnestness! So much
contrived presentation of self!

I remember one such endless day in a featureless room in a high floor of
a pretentious modern hotel in Chicago, or Atlanta, or perhaps Houston. We
were making an appointment to our budding "Writing Program" -- an academic
innovation that I now believe to have been a total disaster. Writing Programs
hired "writing specialists" -- experimentalist social scientists who believe in
"theory" and who generally can't themselves write a lick. Or half a lick.

I remember one candidate with whom I had this remarkable exchange:

Me:  "Could you remind me about the subject of your dissertation."

He:  "I worked with the Brown Corpus."

Me (astonished): "What the heck is the Brown Corpus."

He:  "It's a computer file of one million edited words drawn from magazines
and newspapers. It was compiled at Brown University. The idea is to study the
English language as it actually written."

(I interrupt this conversation to say that "Brown Corpus" may be the most
injudiciously-named academic enterprise in history. To me, "brown corpus" might
have something to do with decayed corpuscles, or a fecal mass, or someone or
something a-mouldering in its grave. Not a phrase with much poetry to it. But
let us proceed.)

Me: "That seems interesting. What exactly did you study in this corpus."

He: "I studied the use of the comma."

Me: "The comma. You studied the comma." (More astonishment). "What in the world
did you learn about the comma?

He:  "I learned that the comma is used to link a sequence of nouns, or phrases,
in a series."

I was already giddy and aghast when I heard this news and I had a sudden
revelation, a flash. I saw myself picking up the candidate and throwing him
through the plate glass window and watching as he plummeted painfully to the
street below. But I controlled myself and thanked the candidate and, I believe,
ended the interview politely. I didn't even indulge myself with something
snarky, like, "do you intend to do any follow-up work on a more challenging mark
of punctuation, as for example the exclamation point?"

Source: 2021/04/signs-of-spring

Title: Signs of Spring
Date: April 25, 2021

Pictured is a variety of daylily called the Charles Johnston. Looks good,
doesn't it?  First introduced by Gates in 1981, it won an award of merit
1988 from the American daylily society. I ordered a couple from a nursery in
Tennessee because they are VE (very early), tetraploid, fragrant, and reputed
to be accomplished re-bloomers (although daylillies that rebloom in the upper
south don't always do so in Vermont). It's the VE part that interests me because
I don't have any early reds. "Rich burgundy blooms."  Sounds delicious. I think
I'll put them in the vegetable garden temporarily, where the soil is, as LERM
says, "like chocolate cake" and plant them out in the perfect place, yet to be
determined. Somewhere where the large VE blooms can make a statement.

I wonder how my gardens survived my Covid 2020 absence. We'll find out in three
weeks.

Source: 2021/05/overtonjacquard

Title: Overton Mystery
Date: May 03, 2021

Here's a a handsome old double-weave Jacquard coverlet in all its flowery glory,
right there on our very own bed. Extraordinarily decorative, is it not?  Cotton
and wool, and generous with the well-saturated indigo dye. State-of-the-art hand
weaving.

I especially prize this particular coverlet because of its history. It was woven
for Charity Maria Laws in 1835, as is plainly evident from the inscription on
its "summer" side. I wish the weaver had identified himself as well as his
client, but he hasn't.

Who is Charity Maria Laws?  She was a native of a part of Long Island (New
York) with which I'm very familiar and where I spent the best three summers
of my childhood. She was born in 1822 in Ridge and died in Northport in 1894.
Makamah Beach, home to as much fair seed-time for the soul as I experienced,
is located within the Northport precincts. Charity Maria was presented with
this coverlet when she was thirteen years old -- to keep her warm a' nights,
no doubt, but also, as was the custom, to serve as the centerpiece of her
trousseau. The coverlet worked its magic because in 1848 Charity Maria was
wooed and won by John Gardiner Lewis of neighboring Crab Meadow and bore five
children, all of them born in Northport or adjacent Huntington. I have no idea
where the coverlet hid out between Maria's death until it made its re-appearance
on ebay last year, but I'm happy to say that it was treated  very well during
that time -- it's in splendid shape for a textile that's pushing two hundred.

Imagine my surprise, when, a few days ago, a Jacquard coverlet in an identical
style appeared on ebay. When I glanced at the pictures, I said, out loud but
to no one in particular, I bet that one also hails from my part of Suffolk. It
didn't take an S. Holmes to confirm my speculation.The evidence is as plain as
the nose on your face: the exact same lettering, but this time, it's Harriet
Sophia Overton.

This coverlet is not only inscribed -- It's dated, too. December 1, 1845.
Harriet Sophia Overton herself is not easy to identify. There was a Harriet
Sophia in the village or hamlet of Coram, in Suffolk, just a few miles from
Northport, but she was born in 1815 and died in 1821 and therefore can't
possibly be the recipient of a coverlet woven in 1845. There must be a second
Harriet Sophia. And truly, so there is. The first Harriet Sophia had an older
brother, Sheldon Roe Overton, who fathered a girl named after the departed six-
year-old. Harriet Sophia Overton II was born in 1850 and died, unmarried, in
1868. Another dead end, alas, because HSO the second was born five years after
the coverlet was woven.

I am forced to speculate that there was still a third Harriet Sophia Overton who
was born on December 1, 1845 and didn't live long enough to get a mention in the
story or even earn a gravestone. Harriet Sophia Overton was an unlucky name.
Hardly compensated for by the long-lived coverlet.

Despite my love of Northport and environs -- of course I mean the Northport of
my memory, the Northport of the 1940s -- I didn't bid on the Overton coverlet.
But I would love to know its story, which I suspect to be one of great sadness.

Source: 2021/05/jimperry

Title: About James Perry Jr.
Date: May 07, 2021

From our part of Vermont comes some ghastly news. In a paranoid fit, James Perry
Jr. shot and killed Karina, his 38-year-old daughter.

According to the Vermont Digger, our internet newspaper, Perry had been holing
up in his home, convinced that "bad guys with guns" were after him. Here's part
of the newspaper account: "Perry said he shot his daughter... as she stood on
a landing outside his residence. He told police he was concerned that unknown
people were playing 'gun games' with him and he asked his daughter not to come
to his residence.... He was concerned Karina was being used as a “ploy”
by unknown individuals.... For the past couple weeks he has been unable to
sleep.... He was sitting on his couch when he saw his daughter at the door. He
picked up his 12-gauge shotgun, and could see Karina holding cookies, waving,
and trying to open the locked door. ‘I’m just so nervous… and I didn’t
want her to come in, and I didn’t want the cookies. I ordered her to stop, and
I just, I guess I, pulled the trigger. And then I pulled it more, and then I cut
her neck.'" Perry said he believed he used a pocket knife to stab her.

Could there be a more horrific tragedy? A man goes crazy and kills his own
daughter.

But yet there's worse -- in the details that don't appear in the newspaper.
Karina, Jim's older daughter by his second wife, Phyllis, is divorced and is
the mother of four children, who are now left motherless. And Phyllis, Karina's
mother, is ill with a very bad cancer -- so she had to learn, in this last phase
of her life, that her ex-husband shot and killed one of their children.

Here's a picture of James Perry Jr. as it appeared in the Digger. He looks like
a guy who's just been cast as a maniac in a chainsaw massacre movie.

He certainly does not look at all like the Jimmy Perry whom I've known for 45
years. Except for the bright blue eyes, he's unrecognizable.

I remember Jim when he was in his twenties -- a normal guy. Actually he was
quite handsome, strong, energetic, well-liked, already skilled with wood and
bricks and stones. He built the chimney in our new house and he was a more-than-
competent carpenter.

How could the Jimmy Perry that I knew and admired in the 1970s turn into a man
who shoots and kills his own daughter?

Even back then, he drank too much. And used too much marijuana. Sometime in the
1980s, he worked in Wyoming as a roustabout on oil rigs. One day he fell into a
vat of what he called "mud" but was a container for the strong chemicals used
in the oil drilling process. He was burned neck to ankle and spent close to a
year, if I remember correctly, in a hospital -- in severe pain for much of the
time. I don't think he ever fully recovered. His body was a mass of scars. I'm
sure that the beer and the drugs and the pain, and possibly the isolation caused
by the pandemic, contributed to his derangement. But nothing explains what is
fundamentally inexplicable.

I didn't see much of Jim in the last few years. I'd run into him in Hannaford's
occasionally. He appeared to be many years older than his true age. He was
emaciated, sickly-looking. Clearly someone who'd had a hard life. He told me
that he didn't know how long he could continue "crawling on roofs." The last
time I caught sight of him, I confess, I avoided him. I could see even from a
distance that he was "off" and I didn't want to engage with him.

I don't mean to excuse Jim. What he did was the worst. I wish that he hadn't
had a shotgun in the house. If he had to be armed, I would have preferred that
he shot himself. That would have been bad enough. I hope that he doesn't regain
his sanity, because if he does so, he'll have to reckon with what he's done. The
guilt will kill him twenty times over.

Jim was an ordinary man, not an evil one. The picture above doesn't tell the
whole story. He was unlucky, and crazed, and something went horribly wrong in
his brain. Those of us who are lucky and sane should thank our good fortune,
because all of us are vulnerable.

Jim did a lot of work for me in 1978. In the summer of 1979, he came to visit
and said that he had gone over his books and discovered that I had overpaid him
for about a week of work. News to me -- I had no idea. He said that he couldn't
reimburse the money he owed me, but he would take a few days and build me a nice
stone wall -- even then, he was famous for his classy stonework. So together and
with the help of my kids we poached a dozen truckloads of stone from some of our
many crumbling walls. We picked out a site and he built us about fifty feet of
handsome drystone. It's still there, an ornament to the property. The maker of
that wall is the Jimmy Perry, an honest craftsman and a reliable friend, that I
prefer to remember, even while I mourn the death of his daughter and regret the
abysmal woe that he caused his family.

Source: 2021/05/words-of-my-life-slouch

Title: Words of my Life: Slouch
Date: May 10, 2021

When I was a boy, I was regularly reprimanded with these words (or some
variation of them): "Don't slouch." "You're slouching! "You're slouching again!"
"Why are you slouching?"

Apparently I was a natural sloucher.

It was a difficult criticism to absorb or to counter. I wasn't entirely sure
what the word "slouch" meant but I sure knew that it wasn't anything good. In my
mother's eyes, I believe, "slouching" was not only a physical but a moral lapse.
But to be accused of something of which my body, not me in my own person as I
knew myself, was guilty -- well, that was surely puzzling.

To slouch is to "sit or stand in a casual, lazy, drooping, or improper posture."
"Lazy?" -- I was definitely lazy. "Improper? -- I'm not so sure. Nor do I know
why being repeatedly accused of "slouching" was going to turn me into an upright
proper person.

The most famous sloucher in literature is the villainous Orlick in Great
Expectations, who was "always slouching. He never even seemed to come
to his work on purpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident... 
and when he went ...away at night, he would slouch out.... He lodged at a
sluice-keeper's out on the marshes, and on working-days would come slouching
from his hermitage." Slouching is unquestionably a marker of evil for Dickens.
Was it so for my mom?

Then there's Yeats' "rough beast... slouching toward Bethlehem to be born." A
second coming of sorts, and not at all a good one.

So there you have three slouchers: the "rough beast," Orlick, and me.

Source: 2021/05/our-visit-to-beardstown-illinois

Title: Our Visit to Beardstown, Illinois
Date: May 23, 2021

We visited Beardstown, in southwestern Illinois, because it was the birthplace,
in 1845, of one of Lynn's maternal great-grandmothers, Mary St. John DeHaven.
Even though it is Lincoln country, we had no idea what to expect, the AAA entry
being so scant, but we soon discovered that Beardstown is a place that had
its moment of glory sometime in the nineteenth century, but which has allowed
history to pass it by. While it's not entirely derelict, it's not even slightly
prosperous -- nor has it achieved quaintness. The industry of note nowadays is
the JBS meat-packing plant out on the Arenzville Road; most of its employees
come from south of the border, which is why the only indication that Beardstown
might someday be rejuvenated is the dozen or so new downtown taquerias and
iglesias.

Our first stop in Beardstown was a decaying, rather pathetic 200-foot long
peeling boardwalk along the sandy Illinois River, a waterway which in the years
before the Civil War had been a thriving commercial thoroughfare. There we
watched a solitary tug struggle to free a barge that had somehow run itself
aground. Perhaps the boardwalk had once welcomed visitors and tourists, but
during our stay the only spectator beside ourselves was a very frayed out-of-
work fellow who arrived on a beaten-up bicycle, and who seemed entirely out of
his depth when we asked if there was a place in Beardstown to purchase a cup of
coffee. To me, he seemed addled; I suspected meth or opioids.

After gazing at the sluggish river for half an hour (remembering Abraham
Lincoln's enthusiasm for river transport), we toured the few blocks of the old
downtown, in which fewer storefronts were occupied than were vacant. We looked
in at an antique store -- actually less "antique" than "junque" (unless a flashy
bejewelled Elvis Presley doll was a revered artifact of a prior civilization).
Lynn purchased an owl-decorated piece of blue porcelain for $5.00. We inquired
of the proprietor, Mrs. White, if there were a coffee shop in Beardstown.
Patricia White, we soon learned, was a recently retired public school music
teacher and a lively lady knowledgeable about all things Beardstownian. I asked
her about the intriguing storefront adjacent to hers, which proclaimed itself
to be a Grand Opera House. I was skeptical that any sort of grandeur could be
found in such dreary town, but I was wrong. Mrs. White generously offered us a
tour of the old theater. She warned us that it was in deep disrepair but she
said that she and others, led by the local chiropractor, were working diligently
towards its restoration. So up a flight of dark stairs we went, and there, lo
and behold, was revealed to us the picturesque ruins of what had once been a
remarkable structure. Here's a photograph of the remains of its ornate frescoed
ceiling and 20-foot-high windows:

The theatre had a well-proportioned stage and had once (before the balcony was
pulled down) been able to seat several hundred people. In the littered backstage
were the remnants of nineteenth-century traveling shows, including a large
painted backdrop of Venetian gondolas, left behind by a company from St. Louis.
But the building, though its bones were good, was a wreck: leaks in the roof had
caused the ceiling to deteriorate. The auditorium itself had served as a storage
area for the overflow merchandise of decades of store owners. It would take a
dozen roll-offs and weeks of work just to remove the trash and find the floor.
Nevertheless, the Grand Opera House offered us an insight into what Beardstown
had been when it was a thriving community. I was so impressed by the theater
that I decided to donate my bit to its reconstruction. I had determined on $100
until I noticed that Mrs. White had donned a red white and blue Trump 2020 face
mask. And so arose a moral dilemma: I want to support the arts, and I would love
to help return the Grand Opera House to its former glory. Opera and music should
be beyond politics -- but yet I was deeply repelled by Mrs. White's Trumpism. So
I split the difference and donated $60 to the cause. A sensible compromise to a
vexing problem?? I don't know. But it's what I did. I wanted to ask Mrs. White
what Donald Trump's ignorance, bigotry, authoritarian predilections and corrupt,
vacant life had to offer to a cheerful retired teacher in a decaying midwestern
town, but I saw no reason to provoke a controversy.

Afterward, we found some lunch up the street at Sally's Bistro. The bistro did
not live up to "bistro" expectations, and could more honestly be called Sally's
Diner, but it did make a good BLT and almost-decent coffee. We did not try the
"alligator bits" for which it is famous, even though Sally assured us that
the bits were much better than the usual alligator tail. (Beardstown has an
alligator farm but we didn't tour it.)

Mrs. White had also told us about the "old cemetery" so on a lark we went off
to investigate. We wandered about, not expecting much, until we stumbled upon
a gravestone which revealed that the late Henry Foster married the late Mary
McKeever DeHaven. Lynn doesn't know precisely who these people are, but there
are so many of her family names on the marker -- that of her grandfather, George
Foster Massey, her uncle, McKeever Massey, her second cousin, Katherine DeHaven
Milligan -- that they must  be long-departed members of her extended ancestry.
Certainly cousins of some degree.

We googled Henry T. (for True) Foster and found that he was a pillar of the
frontier community of Beardstown. He had immigrated from Maine; Mary from
Philadelphia. We were gratified by this unexpected find.

On the return trip from Beardstown to Jacksonville, we stopped at Griggsville,
which, we were astonished to discover, is the "purple martin capitol of the
nation" and the location of the world's largest purple martin skyscraper.
Skeptical?  Here's the proof:

So altogether a most rewarding day.

Source: 2021/05/fly-swatter-2

Title: Fly Swatters
Date: May 31, 2021

For many years, we've had to make do with this inferior fly-swatter:

It's made of molded plastic and extruded metal wire. It's not handsome -- a
ghastly inappropriate pink-purple color for the flapper and a small gauge
white- coated wire for the handle. Is there a name for this  styleless style,
other than dime-store cheap. Mid-century modern in its least attractive
manifestation. Not only unbeautiful, it leaves much to be desired in function.
The flapper is inflexible and rigid, which makes it difficult to kill the fly
without splattering it. Moreover, the wire handle lacks integrity and offers an
uncomfortable grip.

Now feast your eyes on this newly-acquired fly-swatter. It's a thing of beauty.

Notice the turned hardwood handle (maple, I believe, or possibly birch),
perfectly suited to the human hand. The heavy gauge shaft leading to a genuine
metal screen flapper. It's a fly-swatter to savor;  a classic. Many a graceful
swat in it.

An anniversary or a birthday in the offing? Nothing says "I love you" more than
a fly-swatter of distinction. It's also unsurpassed as a wedding present. If
you're in a generous mood, "his" and "hers" fly swatters will get that marriage
off to a great start.

Source: 2021/06/birches-mutability

Title: Birches White and Yellow;  Mutability
Date: June 21, 2021

It may not be immediately obvious or dramatic, but the large tree in the middle
of the picture is a white birch. It towers over the red maple and the beeches
that are to its left. White birches do not often attain such size, nor are they
long-lived, at least in our part of the world. This particular white birch is
old and imposing and thriving and healthy.

Yet a few years ago this birch appeared to be at death's door. It sported only a
handful of yellow leaves on its thin senescent crown.

Inasmuch as it was an old tree (as measured in white-birch years) we all assumed
that it had come to the end of its natural days. There was a vigorous family
debate on whether it should be submitted to the chain saw before it fell over --
perhaps dangerously -- of its own accord. The consensus was to give it another
year. It was a good decision -- as can be plainly seen.

I have no idea why the birch sprang from its hospital bed. Was it a victim of
some nameless illness that it had overcome? Had it been merely listless and
depressed? Had its local environment altered?  Perhaps some noxious insect pest
had arrived, gone for a kill, failed,  and then decamped. I have no theory --
it's a total mystery, as is so much in life. Nevertheless, I'm happy to welcome
the birch back into our community. May it have many more happy years.

Meanwhile, just steps away, was a young vigorous yellow birch. Yellow birches
are not as striking or famous as their white-barked cousins, but to my mind they
are by far the better tree. They are, at least in our neck of the woods, larger,
better shaped, longer-lived, and their wood is superior for either furniture or
flooring or fuel. Their bark is a splendid glistening yellow gold. A tree to
prize.

But, alas, not this particular yellow birch. Last summer it was a burgeoning
adolescent, adding more than 18 inches of growth a season. This year, I'm sorry
to report, dead as a doornail.

Not a single leaf. Not the slightest sign of life. This is an ex tree.

The yellow birch was in a perfect position and was one that I had counted on to
live for at least a hundred years, perhaps two hundred.  A tree that should
have lasted centuries and been an ornament to the property and a delight to
grandchildren and great-grandchildren -- under whose spreading boughs picnics
and  other rural pleasures would have been enacted far into the future.

But that's the inconstancy of life on earth. One tree, supposedly a short-lived
one, springs to life while another, with a grand future, suddenly and
inexplicably succumbs to the fate that awaits us all.

Mutability, they used to call it. Precarious, I'd say. "All is flux."

We are grateful that we had the yellow birch for as long as it lasted, and
grateful also that the white birch has decided to stick around -- perhaps for
another couple of decades.

Source: 2021/06/red-pines

Title: Red Pines
Date: June 22, 2021

Our stand of magnificent trees is composed of red pines, pinus resinosa.

Each tree is between 60 and 65 feet tall and they are all exactly 51 years old.
How can I be so sure about height and age?

Height is easy to determine with the Calloway 300 Pro Laser Range Finder. Age? 
Here's the history. In 1970, some friend or acquaintance, I can't remember
exactly who, acquired a hundred red pine seedlings for a forestry project. He
couldn't make use of all of them and so he gave us ten -- each one perhaps 4-6
inches long and the sum of their stems no thicker than a #2 pencil. I didn't
know exactly what to do with these treasures, so i planted them in a row in the
vegetable garden. Which is where they sat until 1972, when I decided to plant
them on the dike of the newly constructed pond, where they remain.

In doing so i acted in defiance of the local wisdom, which is, never plant a
tree on the dike. Why? Because the tree will eventually die, and the "water will
follow the roots" and weaken the dam. I judged this reasoning to be faulty.
In the first place, red pines, like all conifers, are shallow-rooted. The
surface of the dike is fifteen feet above the level of the water in the pond,
so when the pine eventually dies, its rootball will still be above water level.
Moreover, red pines are reported to live for centuries (some say three hundred
years), and I just can't bring myself to worry about what's going to happen to
a dike in the far distant future when, no doubt, the pond will long since have
reverted to the thick swamp that it was before we dug it out.

But why red pines rather than the white (pinus strobus) which is generally
considered to be the much superior species? Because a), I owned these red
pine seedlings and b) because at that time many of the white pines in our
neighborhood were suffering from a insect-borne disease that killed the leader
shoot and therefore deformed the tree (leader shoot disease seems to be a
thing of the past and now our young white pines are again growing up tall and
straight).  And red pines as consistently healthy.

For their first decade, the red pines made scarcely any impression on the
landscape. Now they dominate. When I sit in their shade, I am pleased to recall
their entire history, which allows me to tell them, proudly, "I knew you when
you were just a sprout!"

Source: 2021/06/genuine-unedited-unimproved-excerpt-from-a-conversation-with-my-brother

Title: Genuine, Unedited, Unimproved Excerpt from a Conversation with my Brother
Date: June 27, 2021

He:  Did you know that they are now playing seven-inning games?

Me:  Yeah, double-headers.  And that they're starting a runner on second base
in extra inning games?

He:  Good thing Dad didn't know about this. It would have killed him on the
spot.

Me: Yeah, sure would have. DH rule took a couple of years off his life.

Source: 2021/07/trees-old-and-new

Title: Trees Old and New
Date: July 03, 2021

When we arrived here 54 years ago, the land was heavily forested but with a
limited pallet of northern conifers and deciduous trees. In the first category
were pines both red and white, three kinds of spruce, balsam fir, larch and
hemlock. Among the hardwoods were sugar maples and red maples, ash, beech, red
oak, black cherry, white, yellow and gray birch, quaking and big tooth aspen,
and alas butternut and elms, which have both now succumbed to plagues. Common
in the area but absent from our particular property were red cedar, cottonwood,
basswood, walnut, and black locust. In the 70s of the last millennium, I planted
cedars and cottonwoods; they are now mature and replicating themselves. The
walnut that I planted fifteen years ago is now 25 feet tall and very handsome.
I have only one basswood, which I found as a seedling and transplanted to to a
prominent place;  I've been waiting all these years for its descendants. The
black locusts that I grew from seeds harvested in Colorado are now starting to
make an impression on the landscape. I've also added some trees that might be
able to survive our warmer winters: a hickory (growing very nicely), a swamp
white oak, a bur oak (and its lone offspring) and a sycamore (which has survived
two winters).  I've also experimented and failed with some trees that grow just
a bit south of us: catalpa, horse chestnut, "Crimson King" maple, little-leaved
linden, and ginkgo. Perhaps I'll try again now that the weather has warmed. One
of my neighbors has successfully reared a metasequoia; it's tempting to try but
I think on the whole I'd rather stay with north American trees. On the other
hand, we'll need some new trees to take the place of the ash, which are soon to
be decimated.

Source: 2021/08/revelatory-dream

Title: Revelatory Dream?
Date: August 31, 2021

I entered a gloomy, dark, building, perhaps a derelict church. An older woman
was sitting there, not exactly in a pew but in a large wooden chair. She said to
me, "We help dying people."  Was she a nurse or a nun  of some sort?  I said,
"Like hospice." She was adamant. "No, not at all like hospice." I said, "Can you
help me?" When I said those words I realized that I had frightened her. "Do you
plan to murder me," she askewd.  I assured her that I was not a murderer. To
make her more comfortable, I said, "Why don't we go outside where you will feel
safer." But just as we opened the heavy wooden door, a very large, threatening
man appeared. I strangled him without a weapon, with my bare hands. So I was a
murderer after all. The woman whom I was trying to protect, said, "Now I know
you're planning to murder me." I objected: "I'll prove to you I'm not a habitual
murderer. Go directly to your car and get in it and drive away. She did so (it
was a blue Ford Focus). That's when the dream ended.

In real life, I'm a peaceful person. In my dream world, I'm occasionally (not
often, but often enough) a killer. Why?  Is it some deeply suppressed inner
anger that works its way to the surface during the night?  Or I am simply a
member of a species (homo sapiens) that has a million year habit of violence?

Or perhaps the dreams are meaningless? Just the flotsam of badly-wired synapses?
If so, I wish they'd give it a rest.

Source: 2021/09/cishet

Title: Cishet
Date: September 18, 2021

We watched a Netflix series called Feel Good. I suppose that the series title
must be taken ironically, because throughout the first two seasons, not
one character seemed to feel even slightly positive or healthy. Just about
everyone was miserable -- their unhappiness usually linked to romantic or more
specifically sexual dissatisfaction. The program introduced many more eccentric
varieties of coupling and frustration than I, a vanilla heterosexual, would have
imagined. The main character, Mae Martin, played by Mae Martin, is a boyish
lesbian; her on-again, off-again affair with a womanly young lady is the focus
of the story. Lots of obstacles both personal and social stand between the two
women and the achievement of genuine happiness. Let's hope that they can figure
it all out and find love at long last -- or at least by the end of Season 3.

There was one scene that I found to be particularly curious and troublesome. A
group of teachers assemble for a meeting, but before taking up business, every
one of the participants reveals or defines his or her own sexuality. One young
woman, surely the least glamorous of the set, refers to herself as "cishet." I
didn't catch the word as spoken but fortunately we had the subtitles engaged and
I was able to read the word, although in reading I pronounced it to myself as if
the sh were a digraph for the lingual palatal fricative as in shut or shun. But
I investigated the new word "cishet" -- and sure enough it exists and has become
a feature of our contemporary culture. It's "cis" as opposed to "trans" which
means not "across" but "this side" -- as the Romans referred to Gaul as either
cisalpine and transalpine. In this coinage, "cis" refer to a person who accepts
the gender designation assigned at birth by the appearance of one's genitals.
"Het" is simply a truncation of heterosexual." "Cishet" therefore means someone
who is unambiguously either male or female and is attracted to persons of the
opposite sex.

Wow, that's me. After all these years of just thinking I was an ordinary guy,
I now discover that I have a designation. I have a community, a tribe, perhaps
even an interest group. Hey, I belong,

But I think that it's mighty odd and even oppressive that members of a school
community, or any community, would feel that it is necessary or advisable to
announce their gender classification before getting down to the business of the
day. Shouldn't such information be allowed to remain private. If I want to be
cishet, it's nobody's business but my own. But perhaps such formal revelations
don't happen in real life -- only in satirical TV series. I sure hope so.

Not so for Mae Martin, the first paragraph of whose biography reads "Mae Martin
is a Canadian-born comedian, actor, and writer based in England. They wrote
and starred in the Netflix comedy series Feel Good." So it appears that "she"
is a "they" which in current modish jargon doesn't mean that she's plural but
signifies that she feels inadequately represented by the simple and specific
feminine pronoun. I can understand her motive, but frankly "they" confuses me
and sticks in my ear. I appreciate its value as a statement of resistance to
the "hetoro-normative" -- but by golly "they" sure throws a spanner into the
grammatico-normative works. It would be good if English had a set of singular
pronouns that are as gender indistinct as "they," but it doesn't, and to hijack
the plural "they" and turn it into a singular is an awkward and I hope ephemeral
innovation.

Sometimes I receive communications from people who are much more up to date than
dear old dad -- letters that are signed in the traditional way but to which is
subjoined, "My pronouns -- "he his," or "she her hers" (or "they them their").
This habit, I suppose, clears the air and perhaps forestalls some embarrassing
or awkward moments, but again, seems unnecessarily revelatory. It's limiting and
partial. It seems to me to declare that such guys and gals were acting in the
parochial interest of their own tribe or constituency -- much as if everyone
appended to his or her name his own religion or nationality. I'm not happy
with this innovation. Although it might seem progressive, it is in my opinion
ultimately dangerously reactionary.

Therefore I am not so current that I would include my pronouns on any letters
that I write. But I would like to append my adjectives,

Yours very sincerely,

Vivian de St. Vrain

(My adjectives:  "wise, upstanding, formerly debonair.")

Source: 2021/09/sore-loser

Title: Sore Loser
Date: September 30, 2021

I learned what was wrong and bad in the P S 217 schoolyard. At our corner of
the world, where Coney Island Avenue crossed Newkirk, the guy at the bottom of
the moral barrel was the "sore loser." He was the guy who, when he missed an
easy layup, always claimed, against the evidence, that he had been fouled. And
when he lost a game, he picked up his basketball and took it home -- in order to
prevent the rest of us from continuing to play. He was always whining, always
complaining, always wronged. An unpleasant member of the community, disliked by
most, hated by some, loathed by a few. A disruptive presence, only tolerated
because he was rich enough to own the basketball or the baseball bat.

No question but that the greatest sore loser in the history of the planet is our
former president. What a pathetic whiner! He lost fair and square but he can't
admit it, so instead he claims a nonexistent foul, or a series of fouls. He's
out to change the rules to give himself the advantage. And he's willing to mess
up the entire game if he doesn't get his way.

He wouldn't have gotten the least smidgeon of respect in 217 schoolyard.

What's wrong with the people who still support him? What are they thinking? How
come they can't recognize him for what he is?

Sore Loser.

Source: 2021/10/best-garden-advice

Title: Best Garden Advice
Date: October 01, 2021

I read a story in an "art of gardening" book many years ago that I will repeat
here. A famous Japanese gardener, a "national treasure," was asked, "What's the
secret of making a garden as beautiful as yours?" He didn't answer in words but
lifted his arms and made a shearing or lopping motion.

Many years ago, I asked Roy Huse, who had a most wonderful vegetable garden at
the foot of South Road how he did it.  He said, and I quote verbatim, "you
really got to put the shit to it."

And from my father: "it's all about preparing the bed before you plant."

So, don't skimp on getting the bed ready, add plenty of manure, and be ruthless
about cutting things out.

And o yes, you'll need sun and water.

Source: 2021/10/baseball-vocabulary

Title: Baseball Vocabulary
Date: October 22, 2021

I grew up in a baseball-saturated world. The radio voices of Red Barber and
Connie Desmond were the water in which I and my family and my neighbors swum.
It was therefore natural that I early absorbed the vocabulary of baseball and
that many words carried baseball meaning to me long before I recognized their
alternative and larger existence.

For example, as a boy, I encountered the word "mound." It signified, and
signified only, a pitcher's mound -- the ten inches of sand and clay from which
a pitcher throws a ball. I had no idea that mounds could exist in nature or
indeed, could exist anywhere outside of a stadium, there being no mounds on
Coney Island Avenue, or, at least, none that I recognized as such.

And then there was the word "pitcher." If someone had said to me, in the 1940s,
that "little pitchers had big ears," I might have thought of Preacher Roe, but I
would have had no idea that there was such an object as a pitcher for water or
other liquid. A pitcher was not jug, ewer, or crock -- it was a man standing on
a rubber fooling a batter with a slow curve.

Standing on a "rubber?" Yet another word that had a specific baseball meaning,
years before it became an eraser or a galosh or a condom.

Similarly, a "streak" was not a gash of color until many years after it was a
winning streak or a losing streak or batting streak. A "dugout" was not a canoe,
not in my corner of the universe.  Nor was a "rally" a political meeting or
protest. A rally would never have led to a "strike" -- a word which I knew only
as one of the allotted three. "Battery?" A team of pitcher and catcher, not
something of military or electrical storage interest.

And then there were the plethora, the fountain of lovely words peculiar to
baseball, like "shortstop" and "blooper."

Inning was exclusively a baseballism. Not so "outing" which was in my childhood
a pitcher's stint on the mound, and which only later became a picnic (or, even
later, an involuntary revelation of someone's sexual inclinations).

October 24:  How could I fail to include "pennant." When did I learn that a
pennant was a kind of triangular flag?  Not in the 1940s (or even 50s).

Source: 2021/10/whats-on-my-mind-

Title: What's On My Mind
Date: October 23, 2021

Disease, dying and death, I'm afraid. During the last month or so, the cohort of
friends with whom I've gone through life has been suffering major losses. BD, a
friend of more than forty years standing, has just breathed his last. AM, whom I
know from the PS 217 schoolyard, is suffering from cancer of the esophagus, now
described as terminal. M has ALS and can no longer move or speak. LW suffered
a bad stroke some while ago and is now in "assisted living." JP has gone from
robust to frail in a few months and has been moved to a "memory care" unit. And
others.

I've taken to reading the obits. Every week the name of a former colleague or a
friend of a friend shows up. Inevitable, you say. But distressing nevertheless.

I'm healthy, but I'm old, long past my expiration date. I know that one of these
days it will be my turn with the doctors and the hospitals. Too bad, because
after some difficult years, I'm enjoying life to the full once again.

My grandmother, then in her upper 80s, said to youthful me, "I don't like being
old. But what are my choices?"

Source: 2021/10/trophy-homes-vanity

Title: Trophy Homes
Date: October 25, 2021

Among my circle of friends, it is a shameful thing to be called "house proud."
It's a term to be avoided, even shunned. It's competitive and flaunts the
wrong values. Conspicuous consumption. Vanity. "I own a bigger house than you,
and therefore I'm a better person than you."  "House pride" is a very badddd
feeling of the human heart. So therefore I was astonished when I opened a new
edition of Luxury Home Magazine (which should be called Conspicuous Consumption
Quarterly) to discover that in this publication shameless vanity is now not
implied, hinted at, or disguised, but flaunted. The magazine's reiterated theme:
"Make your friends envy your trophy home." It says so in so many words!  Gasp!

And indeed, from the pictures and descriptions of these homes, it's clear that
the advertised trophies are not designed o live in, but rather to let their
owners wow their friends and demonstrate how wealthy (and wasteful) they can be.

Does anyone actually require a 15,000 square feet house with three kitchens,
even if one of them is outdoors. "Main kitchen boasts two islands, multiple
refrigerators, freezers and sinks." And a wine cooler (in addition to the
wine cellar). "Five beds, eight baths, seven fireplaces?" "Massive vaulted
ceilings with a towering three sided stone chimney?" Also, a "luxurious soaking
tub, double-headed shower, and makeup vanity?" Two "indoor-outdoor pools?" An
elevator from the basement to the widow's walk?  "Large tiered media room."
Game room. Basketball court. A putting green. Five oversized garages with 20
foot windows?

Also, "breathability," whatever that is.

I'm embarrassed that I'm on the Luxury Homes' mailing list and I'm embarrassed,
once again, to be a member of the species homo sapiens.

My advice to readers whose mouths water when they yearn for a trophy home:
"enough is as good as a feast."

Source: 2021/10/hands-evolution

Title: In Praise of Hands
Date: October 31, 2021

A few weeks ago, I found myself absentmindedly working in the perennial garden.
I had wandered nearby and noted some weeds that needed emergency extirpation.
I had therefore arrived without my usual trine of implements -- the dandelion
puller, the hand shovel, and the Felco #2. Too lazy to fetch them, I began to
tend to the plants toollessly and at the same time to muse upon effectiveness of
hands alone. (Weeding often leads to musing, as every weeder knows.)  Is it not
the case that the best tool of all is the human hand?  Because my garden soil
is so friable, I was able to dig into the earth with my unaided index finger,
grasp the roots of weeds and pull them. I wondered how the hand had come to so
sensitive to small changes in soil temperature or soil moisture. Sensitive also,
to the texture of things, so that I could identify the roots of witch grass, and
remove them, while leaving untouched the very similar but different roots of the
day lilies. For no good reason, my wayward mind wandered to the Houyhnhnms whom
Gulliver outrageously claimed could grasp a needle between fetlock and pastern
in order to sew garments. Amusing but impossible. The hooves of horses are
wonderfully evolved for galloping but not for tatting or crocheting. Besides,
why would a horse want to darn a sock?

Our hands are superior implements  There's not another animal on the planet
that can tie its own shoelaces.

I've just read a fascinating book by paleontologist Madelaine Bohme called
Ancient Bones. Bohme is concerned to argue that the "out of Africa" hypothesis
needs modification. I am not knowledgeable enough to accept or deny her thesis,
but I much appreciate her effort to bring me up to date about the evolution of
our species, which is much more complicated -- infinitely more complicated --
than the story we were told just a generation ago.

Bohme includes a couple of speculative pages about the evolution of the hand.
First came bipedalism, freeing the hands for a variety of new tasks. Bohme
thinks that the development of stone tools and the development of hands went, so
to speak, hand in hand. The need to hold the tool meant that the hand evolved to
hold it properly -- with an opposable thumb of course. More sensitive fingers
conferred an evolutionary advantage. More information from the fingers caused
the somatosensory cortex, which controls the hands, to enlarge and process more
sensations.

So now we can play the piano, thread a needle, throw a ball, type a letter,
weed a garden, and perform a thousand other tasks that even chimpanzees, who
apparently do not have great sensory input from their fingers, cannot do.

Bohme does not discuss the role of hands in human communication, either everyday
or erotic.  A topic for another book, perhaps.

Source: 2021/11/max-oeschger-1938-2021

Title: Max Oeschger (1938-2021)
Date: November 11, 2021

Max had a long love affair with New Orleans, and he loved to initiate his
friends into the city's splendors and secrets. We were beneficiaries of his
generosity. It was because of "mad Max" that we enjoyed a series of winter
visits to the crescent city. He was a splendid enthusiastic guide as well as a
great character, with a touch of Falstaff about him: charm, flaws, girth.

For me, it was a late-onset friendship, but Lynn had known Max from the 60s,
from her Baltimore days, when Max was a doctoral student in biology at Hopkins.
The two of them reconnected five years ago when Max invited Lynn (and me) to
stay for a month in an apartment in his rental house in the Garden District.
How could we decline such an offer? His house, alas, turned out to be virtually
uninhabitable, with holes in the walls and floors that let in the light, the
wind and rain, and the critters. There was a pungent smell of decay and a tilted
bathroom that seemed about to plunge deep into the earth. Lynn was not fazed: "I
lived in Africa."  Max was only mildly apologetic. We made do.

In subsequent trips to New Orleans we took the precaution of renting a BNB.

But we often visited Max at his place in an apartment house on St. Charles.
Max owned two adjacent apartments. He connected them by busting through the
wallboard with a sledge hammer. Two kitchens, therefore, both, shall we say, far
from immaculate.

A serious and knowledgeable cinephile, Max sponsored a monthly film series
in his home. His screen had to be angled sharply to find a place amidst the
clutter, distributed among which was an exquisite collection of contemporary
American pottery. (Max was a widower; his sometime ladyfriend was a very
accomplished potter).

Max squired us about town, introducing us to both famous and out-of-the-way
restaurants. He was quite a sight, squeezing his 5' 4" and 300 pound frame
into a small sports car. He loved Adolfo's, right across the street from Snug,
because the food was excellent and the portions were enormous.

As much as he loved his dinner, he also loved the south Louisiana vegetation; a
walk with Max was a learned lecture on the local plant life.

Would we have discovered either Angelo Brocato's or the Creole Creamery without
his guidance?

I don't know what eventually killed him last August.  It could have been any
one of his many ailments; he was not healthy and was often in pain. We'll miss
him.

Max and I shared a birthday; he was exactly one year older than I. So his death
is another memento mori. As if I needed another reminder.

Source: 2021/11/when-im-eighty-four

Title: When I'm Ninety-Four
Date: November 23, 2021

When I get older losing my mindJust a few years from nowWill you still b       e
sending me a ValentineBirthday greetings bottle of win                         e

Source: 2021/11/riobravo-deanmartin-rickynelson

Title: Rio Bravo, Total Embarrassment or Great Triumph?
Date: November 25, 2021

We watched the 1969 western, Rio Bravo, and were crushed with disappointment.
How could a film with such famous actors, directed by Howard Hawks (Red River
1948), amount to such piffle?  We could not restrain ourselves from jeering
at its flagrant, grotesque failings. A thin, cliched plot, pieced out with
obvious meaningless padding. Incoherent, contradictory notions and "themes." An
unconscionable reveling in mass slaughter -- the bodies of Nathan Burdette's
gang falling as thickly as the leaves in Vallombrosa. We adjudicated what seemed
like a contest: who is a worse actor, Dean Martin or Ricky Nelson?  (Martin
plays a drunken former gunfighter (named Dude!!) whose shaky hands can only be
stilled when the Mexican band plays his favorite tune!!! Honest to goodness!!)
Nelson is a ridiculously young hotshot gunslinger who would have been better off
staying home drinking his afternoon milk and cookies under the supervision of
Ozzie and Harriet.

We hooted, I'm sorry to say, when impassive reluctant John Wayne kissed Angie
Dickinson with all the passion of a man sucking on moldy lemons. We were
offended by the racist caricatures of the Mexican innkeepers. And we guffawed
when the film allowed both Dean Martin and Ricky Nelson to burst into song --
utterly violating their screen characters but perhaps throwing a sorry bone to
the ticket-buying audience. (Allow me to confess that we fast-forwarded through
the musical interlude.) The irrelevant crooning lost the film any remaining
pretense or shred of integrity.

In short, here was a film that had no reason for being, or so we thought. A
travesty, a mere catchpenny.

Baffled, we turned to the internet for the story. Because there had to be a
story.

And now comes the surprise. Rio Bravo was the second highest ranking western
in the 2012 Sight and Sound critics' poll. Robin Wood, a generally trustworthy
critic and the man who wrote the book on Howard Hawks, rated it as his top
film of all time. What's going on here? We though the film was ludicrous and
embarrassing; others think very differently. Are we completely out of touch? Are
we nuts, intolerant. Has our taste been vitiated by age and mental decay? Are
there beauties hidden the film that are sufficiently subtle that our grosser
intellects could not detect them?  Or does this would-be emperor of a film
lack clothes and the critics and journals and the tomatoes are all blinded and
deceived.

And now comes some more internet info, which may or may not explain the opposing
views of us and them.

"The film was made as a response to High Noon," says Wikipedia. Why? Because
High Noon was thought to be a leftist movie, an allegory for Hollywood
blacklisting, as well as a critique of McCarthyism. John Wayne called High Noon
"un-American." (I've always thought of it as quintessentially American;  what
could possibly be more American than a Quaker's turn to violence, as when Amy
Kane picks us a rifle and shoots one of Frank MIller's kin. And especially when
that turn to violence is portrayed as a step toward a higher morality.

I'm wondering whether the folks who praise Rio Bravo like it not for aesthetic
but for political reasons. I'm suspicious.

Next step: get my hands on Robin Wood's book on Howard Hawks. Stay tuned,
Metablogians.

Source: 2021/12/spatchcock

Title: Words of my Life: Spatchcock
Date: December 01, 2021

I first heard the word "spatchcock" at a Thanksgiving celebration some four
or five years ago. The turkey, I was told, had been "spatchcocked." To be
absolutely honest, I thought someone was pulling my leg. To my pure and
undefiled ears, the word "spatchcock" sounded more than a little obscene.
Certainly not something that a civilized person would do to a turkey. Or even to
a fellow human being. I admit that I was puzzled: what sort of perverse activity
is implied by "spatchcock." And just who would be the spatchcocker and who the
spatchcockee?

But further investigation revealed that "spatchcock" is not a dirty joke nor
even a slangy neologism. The word has an eighteenth-century origin and it's not
sexual but culinary: "to cut poultry along the spine and spread the halves apart
for more even cooking when grilled." Moreover, the word "spatchcock," believe
it or not, has a sibling of its own: "spitchcock": "to split an eel along the
back and then broil it." So spatchcock and spitchcock, yet as far as I know, no
"spotchcock" or "sputchcock"-- but why not?  Lots of other land and sea beasts
out there to de-spine and roast over an open fire. Spatchcocking, the process,
probably dates back to the neolithic, after the taming of fire and long before
anyone thought to call it by such a silly name.

Etymology?  Though there are theories, I'm going to stick with "origin
unknown." The common answer is that the word is "shorthand  for 'dispatching
the cock.'" An undocumented, out-of-left-field guess, in my opinion. If I were
to propose a theory, I would say that the "cock" must be a version of  "cook."
I'm not prepared to venture a guess about the spatch. A mystery, unrecoverable.
Perhaps a humorous coinage?

I'd hypothesize that "cock" might be related to the second part of common
surnames such as Hancock, Adcock, Babcock, Hitchcock or Wilcox. Some say that
the cock in these names is a hypocoristic suffix "applied to a young lad who
strutted proudly like a cock." I'm skeptical. More credible, once again, is
"cook." Hancock is Johan the cook, Adcock is Adam the cook, Hitchcock is Richard
(Rich, Hich) the cook, and so on.

The ever-unpredictable Urban Dictionary provides another meaning for
"spatchcock": "when you intentionally rub your backpack on a nearby stranger's
genitals in an effort to sexually arouse them." What can I say?  Only that I've
lived a long life and have never given a single thought to the erotic potential
of the backpack. Nor have I ever been spatchcocked either in the traditional
culinary nor the speculative contemporary sexual sense of the word (thanks be to
all the gods in the pantheon!)

Other words of my life:

slouch,

cishet,

yips

ramps

jot and tittle

worship

mucilage.

Source: 2021/12/a-cinematic-dream

Title: A Cinematic Dream
Date: December 06, 2021

I was in the midst of the usual noir "can't-find-my-way" dream when all at once,
without warning, the scene and the genre changed. Suddenly I was in technicolor
John Ford territory, holding on for dear life to the cow-catcher of an 1880s
railroad engine. Three central-casting bad guys -- all whiskers and black hats
--were shooting at me with their pistols. Familiar with what's expected such
films, I responded by drawing my own Colt 45-- and plugged two of them. But the
third kept coming, zombie-style, even though I nailed him several times. I was
scared.

Apparently I was rattling around, because just as I decided that I'd better
shoot him between the eyes and be done with it, my faithful bedmate woke me
up.  End of dream; what a relief.

I must be watching too many Westerns.

It's fascinating that the material of this dream is not drawn from the events
of my "real life," but rather from fiction (in this case, the movies). Have I
incorporated such fictions into the deepest layers of my unconscious, from which
dreams are supposedly drawn?

On the other hand, my watching and absorbing a film is a "real life" event.

I can't remember any film in which a character clings to the cow-catcher. Did I
invent such an event?  Or just extrapolate it from various western films?

I should mention that I experienced the dream not in ordinary colors but in the
brilliant artificial color of old-fashioned garish Technicolor.

Source: 2021/12/thomas-massie

Title: "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord."
Date: December 15, 2021

Here's a Christmas-themed picture posted by United States Representative Thomas
Massie of Kentucky. Note the cheerfully decorated tree behind them. Note also
that each member of the shit-eating-grin faced members of the Massie family
is sporting a military weapon. Massie himself, as befits the father of such a
family, carries the piece of artillery that is by far the most threatening. He's
so proud.

I must be out of the military-Kentucky loop, because when my friends send me
Christmas cards, they will characteristically include a message such as "peace
on Earth, good will toward men, or perhaps something about "joy" or "blessings."
Massie's card says, "Please Santa, send ammo," which is not, I believe, a
traditional holiday greeting.

Massie's card is deliberately provocative. It's designed to piss off the libs.
In your face, pinkos! But it's so blasphemous and misjudged that it might also
offend mainline Christians. Goodness gracious, I hope so. Though frankly, I
haven't heard much of an outcry from the pulpits.

But now it has come to pass that it's not just blue-staters that are offended.
Massie has gone and pissed off the Lord himself -- who has retaliated with a
series of tornadoes which have swept through Massie's home state. Can there
be any doubt, any possible probable shadow of doubt, that the Ancient of Days
has responded to the Massie family Christmas card with lightning and thunder?
Vengeance is mine, I shall repay, saith the Lord. It's obvious -- although I am
shocked to observe that I have not yet heard any megachurch preacher draw the
undeniable conclusion. I'm waiting.

When I first set astonished eyes on the card, I guessed that Massie, though an
important office holder, must be what I have heard called in Vermont a "local
yokel." Trash. A rube. An exterminator or mortician or gun-toting bar owner who
lucked into Congress because no more respectable person chose to run. Because
what person of intelligence, sensitivity, experience, or a modicum of education
honors the spirit of Christmas with a display of assault weaponry?  Imagine my
surprise when I looked up Massie and discovered that he has a raft of degrees
and extraordinary prizes from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He's
clearly brilliant (in a MIT kind of way). But even if he were a pure pocket-
calculator I-don't-give-a-shit-about-anyone-but-myself libertarian nerds,
shouldn't he have been exposed, in New England, to enough human beings of all
sorts to recognize that his Christmas greeting is monumentally offensive not
only to his fellows and (as we have seen) to the Lord of Hosts Himself?

Or perhaps he knows that our tearful country is so riven that an irreligious
display of such a sort will amuse and motivate his allies and torment his
opposition. And will strike gold with political donors.

Source: 2021/12/books-2021

Title: What I Read: 2021
Date: December 16, 2021

I decided to keep a record of the books that I read this past 2021. It's in
roughly chronological order, starting just about a year ago. It's an eclectic
bunch; after years of being forced to be a specialist I've reverted to my
natural dilettantism. I've probably forgotten some books, both my record-keeping
and my memory not so good as before.

Here they come (long drumroll):  three novels by Lewis Grassic Gibbon: Sunset
Song, Cloud Howe, and Grey Granite (the first is a masterpiece); Derek
Wilson,  Charlemagne: a Biography; Park Honan, Christopher Marlowe, Poet
and Spy; John Heisey, A Checklist of American Coverlet Weavers; H. L. Allen,
American Coverlets of the Nineteenth Century (taught me a lot about Jacquard
coverlets); Eric Sloane, Museum of Early American Tools and A Reverence for
Wood; Rinker Buck, The Oregon Trail, Edna O'Brien, In the Forest (a forceful
novel); Evelyn Piper, Bunny Lake is Missing (which I read because I was curious
about the film of the same name); Patrick Svensson, The Book of Eels; Isabel
Wilkerson, The Warmth of Other Suns (a long important book which would have
been even better if it had been edited to 2/3's its size); Benjamin Kilham,
In the Company of Bears (a fascinating book set just south of us in Lyme,
NH); James Essinger, Jacquard's Web, Steven Vogel, Why the Wheel is Round
(which it isn't; it's circular); Elizabeth Barber, Women's Work, the First
20,000 Years; J D Schein, Coverlets and the Spirit of America; Anne Tyler, A
Spool of Blue Thread (by one of the most reliable of contemporary novelists);
Elizabeth Barber, Prehistoric Textiles (a fascinating story); Thomas Stumpf,
South St. Louis Boy, v. ii, by my graduate school classmate and friend; William
Dean Howells, The Rise of Silas Lapham, Andy Horowitz, Katrina (sad story of
governmental and bureaucratic incompetence in New Orleans); Sarah M. Broom,
The Yellow House; George Eliot, Middlemarch (what, fifth time?  or sixth?);
Kathryn Hughes, George Eliot, the Last Victorian; Shakespeare, The Winter's
Tale; Charles Dickens, Great Expectations (another perennial favorite); John
Le Carre, The Mission Song; Jane Austen, Persuasion;  Klyza and Trombulak, The
Story of Vermont (summer reading); Harry Reed, Harry, Scenes from my Life
(another autobiography by a friend); Shaun O'Connell, Assembled Pieces, Selected
Writings; Alice Munro, Carried Away; David Lee, Chainsaws, A History; Seymour
Gitin, The Road Taken (reminiscences of one of Lynn's relatives-in-law); Louis
Menand, Cold War (all 800 pages!); Lisa Genova, Remember;  Mark Harris, Mike
Nichols; H. L. Gates, The Black Church; Thomas Hardy, The Woodlanders (twice);
Madalaine Bohme, Ancient Bones; Simon Schama, The Story of the Jews (to 1492);
John McWhorter, Nine Nasty Words; two remarkable novels by Shirley Hazzard: The
Transit of Venus, and The Great Fire (read twice); Valerie Trouet, Tree Story;
James Shapiro, Shakespeare in a Divided America; Betty Smith, A Tree Grows
in Brooklyn; Joshua Hammer, The Bad-Ass Librarians of Timbuktu; Jacqueline
Woodson, Another Brooklyn; Paule Marshall, Brown Girl, Brownstones; Paula
Fox, Desperate Characters.

I've started on a reading project for 2022: books about Brooklyn. Will I
persist? The crowd is in an uproar, waiting to see how it goes. Look for a
report same time, same station, next year.

Source: 2021/12/betty-smith-brooklyn

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  A Tree Grows in Brooklyn
Date: December 23, 2021

My new reading project: novels set in Brooklyn. There are, I've already
discovered, tons of them. I wonder how long I will last at this endeavor. Will
it be a sterile or a fruitful exercise?

How is it that I never read, until this very week, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn? 
It's certainly the best known novel with the noun "Brooklyn" in its title. I've
known about it all my life and just never got around to looking at a single
page. Did my parents, always tentative about sex, warn me off because the novel
has a few frank passages. Or was it anti-Brooklyn snobbery?  As a young person,
I wanted to read about far off places -- Pitcairn Island, nomadic central Asia,
and the Africa of Rider Haggard, -- certainly not familiar grimy Brooklyn. At
the McDonald Avenue branch of the public library, there were many well-worn
copies of of A Tree Grows in Brooklyn sitting on the shelf -- which I ignored
and, if I remember correctly, disdained.

What did I miss?  Tree is not much in the way of a fiction. There's nothing
like a plot, only a series of loosely-related episodes, and except for the
central figure, not much character development. It's a barely-disguised
autobiography. Francie Nolan, tracked from birth through her escape to, believe
it or not, Michigan!!, comes from a grindingly poor family ("food insecure"
before the term was invented). Much of the first few hundred pages is the
barebones account of the struggle for sustenance (and lodging). There is so much
emphasis on overcoming lack that Tree almost seems to fetishize or celebrate
poverty.

So much scrabbling for the next meal is hard to bear, painful to read. It's
especially painful for me, because Betty Smith, born in 1896 in Williamsburg,
preceded my father, also a native of Williamsburg (born in 1904) by only a few
years. He came from an immigrant family as poor as poor can be, and some of the
stories that he told me about the impoverishment of his youth echo and sometimes
exceed Smith's. The essence, therefore, of this "novel," is familiar to me,
perhaps entirely too familiar.

One blot upon the novel is its casual bigotry. Irish characters sometimes go
to "Jewtown" for clothes or food. Jewish characters are gross stereotypes.
But what can be expected from a popular novel of the 1940s, when the radio
offered us, day after day,  large doses of Amos and Andy, Life with Luigi, The
Goldbergs. How we guffawed at ethnic "humor" in those unenlightened days!

Nor was I happy about the novel's Brooklyn chauvinism. For example:

""There's no other place like it," Francie said.

"Like what?"

"Brooklyn. It's a magic city."

"It's just like any other place."

"It isn't. It's mysterious here in Brooklyn. It's like -- yes -- a dream. The
houses and streets don't seem real. Neither do the people."

I wish the novel offered some corroboration for the claim of Brooklyn's magic
and mystery. If it was there, I didn't find it in this grim novel, nor at the
corner of Newkirk and Coney Island Avenues where I first came to awareness.

The "tree that grows in Brooklyn" is the so-called 'tree of heaven," ailanthus
altissima. Smith has chosen it as a symbol of resilience, for the tree of heaven
can thrive under the most inauspicious circumstances. I, for one, can remember
playing on the roof of one of those six story apartment houses so common in
our neighborhood, and noticing an ailanthus growing right out of the asphalt.
I was astonished. But I wish that Betty Smith had chosen a different tree to
invest with meaning, because the ailanthus is, frankly, a "trash tree."  It's
generally considered a noxious weed, an invasive species. It grows rapidly
but is short- lived. Its wood is soft and useless. It suckers vigorously and
eternally, pours forth strong alleopathic chemicals upon its neighbors, invades
subterranean sewers and pipes, is extremely fecund, and stinks. It is known to
gardeners and foresters not as the "tree of heaven" but as the "tree of hell."
It's not a tree that often finds itself celebrated in fiction. Nor in pastoral.
Brooklyn, my Brooklyn, was a city of magnificent oaks, maples, sycamores and
elms. My people, my fellow Brooklynites, deserve a more distinguished avatar
than the tree of of so-called heaven.

Some will remember that T. S. Eliot once referred to the tree that grows in
Brooklyn as the "rank ailanthus."

Source: 2021/12/woodson-brooklyn

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  Another Brooklyn
Date: December 27, 2021

I read, first with irritation but eventually with appreciation, Another
Brooklyn, by Jacqueline Woodson. If I had purchased the book, rather than
borrowing it from the Boulder Public, I'd be peeved, because it's more of a
novella or long short story than a fully-grown novel. Only 165 pages of minibook
size(8" x 5"), with spacious margins, large font, and double or triple spacing
between frequent one-sentence "paragraphs." The whole could be compressed into
30 normal book size pages. I felt cheated because I want my words worth. But
quality should not be measured by quantity, or Mrs. Trollope would be twenty
times as good a writer as Jane Austen. Jacqueline Woodson is apparently a
very famous novelist, but you wouldn't know it by me, for I had never heard
of her, so out-of-date I am. It's a poetic, I think, novel, about "growing up
girl in Brooklyn" (white flight Bushwick to be precise) in the 1970s. It's
not dense with detail, so each incident has to do a lot of work. It concerns
four young girls, each frustrated by the surroundings. The narrator says,
"Brooklyn felt like a stone in my throat," but I don't think the novel makes
good on that stuck-in-the-craw assertion. It's not, in my opinion, a regional
novel; it's a coming of age story with a perennial theme: how do we get out of
this constricting space: "Everywhere we looked, we saw people trying to dream
themselves out. As though there was something other than this place. As though
there was another Brooklyn."

A paragraph that resonated with me, for as an adolescent I myself know only one
thing: "I need to get out of here."

Source: 2021/12/run-etc

Title: Octogenarian Locomotion
Date: December 29, 2021

Source: 2022/01/paule-marshall

Title: Novels about Brooklyn: Brown Girl, Brownstones (1959)
Date: January 01, 2022

Well, one might ask, how goes the reading-Brooklyn-novels project?

I've been taken by surprise. Solely by the luck of the draw, just because the
books were available at the public library, and without planning or intention on
my part, my first three novels all had the same focus: coming-of-age-as-a-girl-
in-Brooklyn. First, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (TGB) about a Irish-German girl in
the period around WWI, then Another Brooklyn (AB) about a Black or African-
American girl in 1970s Bushwick, and yesterday, Brown Girl, Brownstones (BG,B)
by Paule Marshall, written in 1959 but neglected and then rediscovered during
the 1970s. BG,B focuses on young Selina Boyce, daughter of immigrants from
Barbados, who was raised in a West Indian neighborhood somewhere between Fulton
Avenue and Crown Heights.

The three novels, and their three heroines, share common concerns. In all three,
an intelligent young girl, a reader, tries to achieve selfhood in a challenging
environment. The young girls come from families that are led by strong mothers
and are compromised by weak, failing fathers. Religions (Catholicism in TGB,
Nation of Islam in AB, and a dictatorial new religion led by "Father Peace,"
whom I take to be Father Divine, in BG,B) are unhelpful and damaging.

Today's novel, Brown Girl, Brownstones is the most detailed, informative, and
moving of the trio. It's a substantial, rich, highly-detailed, and I would say
old-fashioned novel about self-discovery. It used to be said that "every modern
writer's first novel should be titled "my horrible adolescence.'" But BG,B is
more complicated than the stereotype. It's an "immigration novel" about the
conflicts between the foreign-born parents and the Brooklyn-born daughter. It's
also a story of regional interest, very strong in depicting the peculiarities of
Brooklyn culture.

Barbadian-Americans are depicted as an entrepreneurial class, upwardly mobile,
anxious to get ahead. The first step is to acquire a brownstone and become a
landlord rather than a tenant. And yet young Selina rejects her aspiring mother,
whom she sees as hopelessly materialistic. She fears the success of a move to
the boring suburbs -- a familiar 1950s theme.

BG,B is a novel about race, and, in my opinion, hits its stride in the last few
chapters when Paule Marshall analyzes bigotry. There are a few pages that either
anticipate or follow the powerful critiques of James Baldwin and Frantz Fanon.
And Richard Wright. I suspect that it's such pages that helped bring deserved
attention to Brown Girl, Brownstones.

Source: 2022/01/paula-fox

Title: Novels Set in Brooklyn:  Desperate Characters (1970)
Date: January 06, 2022

Paula Fox's Desperate Characters feels to me less like a novel than a short
story, or perhaps a set of short stories sutured together. It's comprised of a
series of incidents that concern a married couple and like many fictions in the
short story genre, resists closure or resolution. Though it's a miniature of a
novel, it's still a gem.

The principal characters, Otto and Sophie, come to the end of the story just
about where they started -- not miserable but not happy either. They are
immigrants to an incompletely gentrified, downtown Brooklyn neighborhood.
Their house -- all pocket doors, cedar floors, highly polished Victorian
furniture even a Meissen cat dish -- as well as the houses of their neighbors
are vulnerable to violation. Otto and Sophie, and their friends, are attacked
by the sort of intrusions that are familiar from horror films -- the bite of a
stray cat, a threatening phone call, a stone thrown through a window, unwanted
visitors, vicious inexplicable vandalism, mysterious goings-on in the house next
door. These attacks on the home are intermittent but unending; in fact, the last
image in the book is of a self-inflicted wound -- an interior wall splotched and
stained by the black ink of a thrown inkwell. Stasis, not progress.

Should I have been surprised that the Brooklyn novels that I have now read are
so concerned with the acquisition, improvement, integrity, and preservation of
the homestead?

To tell truth, I have been a bit startled -- but I should not have been.
Brooklyn has always been the most mutable and fluid of cities. Outsiders --
Irish, Italians and Jews in my part of Flatbush, as well as southern Blacks
searching for the warmth of other suns, West Indians, Russians, Hispanics from
central and south Americas, Asians of all varieties, and nowadays midWesterners
-- arrive and alter the neighborhood. For the worse, according to the prior
inhabitants, and for the better, according to the new arrivals. It's a repeated
and perpetual dance -- and certainly one that was a feature of my own family
history.

My immigrant grandparents never had the resources even to imagine the purchase
of a home. They were renters of a cold-water sixth-floor walkup in Williamsburg.
Nor had they owned property in the old country, where they were even poorer.
I imagine that when my parents purchased the house in which I was raised (in
1936, for $4500) they were the first in my ancestry dating back to the spear and
atalatl eons ever to own a piece of real estate.

Re-reading these Brooklyn books has reminded me how important that home on
East 9 Street in heart of  Flatbush was to my parents. And why my father, in
his last years, solitary, crippled by arthritis, but intransigent refused to
leave it though it would have been much more sensible and convenient to live
elsewhere. He was determined to die in his own precious home, and he did so.

Here's a picture of 539 East 9 Street, a big old undistinguished Victorian,
taken sometime around the 1939, the year of my birth. The second and third
stories were rented; we lived on the ground floor. The house, long since
demolished, lives on in my memory.

Especially in my nightmares, where at least once a month, I defend myself
against the savage bows and arrows, the cavalry rifles, and wild dogs that
attack the property.  And wake up in a sweaty terror.

Source: 2022/01/elephant-paintings

Title: Art, Elephants
Date: January 09, 2022

Here's a photograph of a "work of art" that has adorned the lobby of the
condominium in which I've lived since 2009. It is unsigned -- the creator hasn't
been courageous enough to inscribe his/her name. I think it's a ridiculously
ugly smear, and In the privacy of my aggrieved mind, I attribute it to a
painter-of-my-imagination whom I call Fango Nero (Italian for "black mud"). I
conceive Fango Nero to be an innovator in the sense that he employs not brush
or palette knife but rather a standard Home Depot 6" paint roller. I don't
find fault with Signore Nero for leaving his painting unnamed and unsigned.
It's a wise choice on his part. After all, the set of smudges is a patently
disgraceful, reprehensible piece of trash that has no business masquerading
as art or being affixed to anyone's walls, let alone mine. I don't know what
prompted the architects or the contractors of this building to purchase this
thing and hang it in my lobby. Perhaps it was bequeathed to them, or possibly
they were supporting a needy uncle.

So many accomplished artists in this world and I must be afflicted with these
splotches! What a waste of space!

That's what used to think, these last twelve years --  until I had a sudden
epiphany.

This painting is not the work of my imaginary painter Fango Nero, or any human
being. No, not at all. It's got to be the production of a talented elephant.

Some of my readers will have seen videos of elephants painting. If the professor
of art or the mahout offers an artistically-inclined elephant paint and brush,
by golly, he or she will grasp the brush handle with the ever-useful trunk and
create you something in the abstract impressionist line.

Here is a genuine pachydermal production.  (I'm not aware of the name of the
particular artisit.)

It's quite a bit more interesting than my black and white paint roller job, is
it not? I like the cheerful interplay of the two well-chosen colors and the way
that the long pink lines, almost imprisoned by the green, suggest both freedom
and delight. A superior production! It would be a greater pleasure by far to
encounter this canvas several times a day than the muddy black one that ambushes
me every time I pass through the lobby.

The bottom line: Fango bad, Dumbo good.

Source: 2022/01/daniel-fuchs-1

Title: More Brooklyn Novels: Summer in Williamsburg (1934)
Date: January 13, 2022

Daniel Fuchs was known to me only as the writer of the screenplay of Criss-
Cross, a noir that epitomizes "gritty."  Or perhaps grimy. I was not aware
that Fuchs  began his writing career with three Brooklyn novels, the first of
which is Summer in Williamsburg. It's a novel that hits home, because Fuchs was
born in 1909 and grew up in exactly the same part of Brooklyn, and in the same
circumstances, as did my father, who was born there in 1904.

The novel comprises a single summer of tenement life and it's not optimistic
or cheerful: "people in tenements lived in a circle without significance, one
day the duplicate of the next until the end, which occurred without meaning but
accidentally." Fuchs' Williamsburg is filled to the brim with anomie, petty
criminals, violent teen gangs, multiple suicides, harridan wives and unfaithful
husbands, ungratified sexual longings, business failures and consequent poverty.
Even a fatal fire. In some Brooklyn novels, it is through books and reading
that a character stumbles upon a clue to another and better world; not in this
one. Fuchs' tenement world is claustrophobic and imprisoning. And yet, Fuchs
occasionally offers a touch of poetic language -- sometimes even breaking the
novel's "fourth wall" and intruding a bit of inventive authorial charm into the
narrative. Redeeming moments, for the most part, but few and far between.

Other elements that might offer hope to a hopeless world: athletics, either
participatory or spectator; religion, not a shred, even though almost all of the
characters are Jewish; music; any sort of aesthetic concern. No beauty in Fuchs'
Williamsburg.

I wonder how my father managed to survive his many Williamsburg summers without
bitterness and with such a cheerful, optimistic demeanor.  Why was he not
soured and jaded by his grim environment?  Or perhaps Williamsburg had its
particular glories while Fuchs had an eye only for nastiness.

Yesterday, while reading this book, my browser took me, by chance, to a travel
site that advertised a stay at a 4-star hotel in Williamsburg, "New York's
coolest neighborhood." Fuchs (and my father) would have been flabbergasted. 
"Coolest neighborhood."

And so, it appears, the whirligig of time continues its whimsical way.

Source: 2022/01/hubert-selby-jr

Title: Another Brooklyn Novel:  Last Exit to Brooklyn (1964)
Date: January 14, 2022

I read the first fifty pages of Hubert Selby's Last Exit to Brooklyn and then
decided, No More. It's an ugly, brutal book, not one that's going to offer me
either instruction or pleasure. I read two chapters -- the first about the
murderous gang wars and the second the transsexual who dies of an overdose of
benzedrine. Then I looked up the wiki article and realized that I was about
to come face to face with "the novel's most notorious scene, in which a young
prostitute is brutally gang-raped after a night of heavy drinking and is left
for dead in a vacant lot." Sorry, not for me.

Not much about Brooklyn either in this grim novel; no local color, though the
story is reputed to be set in Sunset Park or Red Hook.

Selby crosses William Burroughs (whom I also can't read) with Jack Kerouac. Plus
innovative grammar, confusing punctuation, and inventive orthography.

Not my cup of tea. Sorry, life is too short,

Source: 2022/01/jonathan-lethem

Title: Still Another Brooklyn Novel:  Motherless Brooklyn (1999)
Date: January 17, 2022

Jonathan Lethem nominally sets Motherless Brooklyn in downtown Brooklyn, but
it's more accurate to say that it takes place in the world of Dashiell Hammett
and Raymond Chandler and Elmore Leonard. Or, to be even more precise, in the
Land of Noir. It's a textbook example of superior detective fiction, with all
the trappings: a clever gumshoe (who, of course, gets himself bopped on the
head), a bad girl, two (count 'em two) car chases; a mysterious international
crime cartel (on loan from Ian Fleming), a scary assassin, seedy all-night
joints, endless stakeouts, even a police detective who's always just a step
behind our guy. It's so self-consciously, unapologetically derivative -- less
plagiary than homage. One character even quotes Sam Spade: "When a man's partner
is killed, he's supposed to do something about it." The novel is suspenseful,
clever, and occasionally witty.  It kept me engaged and guessing, so I have no
complaints. Of course I couldn't follow the intricacies of the betrayals and
counter-betrayals, but then, I never can.

It's a Brooklyn novel in the sense that it recognizes the astonishing
provinciality of the borough. Lionel Essrog, our detective, thinks of New Jersey
and Connecticut as exotic territories. Most of the action is specifically
located in downtown Brooklyn, which happens to be a neighborhood that I know
rather well. The investigators have their office on Court Street, where I often
visited my father's law offices, first at 125 Court and later on the 13th floor
of a tall building at 66 Court (the floor was listed, believe it or not, as 12A,
so as not to alarm the triskaidekaphobic). Also mentioned is Joralemon Street,
where Dr Irving Pollack, my smooth-faced orthodontist, painfully tightened
the metal braces on my teeth every other week for the entire duration of my
childhood and youth.

Motherless Brooklyn seems to be designed for the big screen. In 2017 a version
appeared that was written and directed by the rather brilliant actor Edward
Norton, who also plays Lionel Essrog. On a whim, we rented and watched the film
last night. It's an engaging film, very handsomely rendered. I watched it, I'm
afraid, with a chip on my shoulder, because I came to it with the novel fresh
in my mind and resented the liberties the film takes with the novel. In fact,
after just a few introductory scenes, Norton left the novel behind. Instead,
he crossed it with the Towne-Polanski Chinatown. It's a mistake, but not a
bad one, because if your intention is to imitate a film, you might as well
imitate an excellent one. Into the film, Norton imports a series of elements
that are utterly foreign to the novel. There's a dictatorial character who is
modeled on Noah Cross, a child of mysterious origin similar to the daughter of
Evelyn Mulwray ("she's my sister and my daughter") and a contrived plot device
that brings us deep into impenetrable Harlem. I'm sorry to say that Motherless
Brooklyn, the film, doesn't escape the gravitational pull of Chinatown.

Source: 2022/01/another-brooklyn-novel-by-daniel-fuchs-homage-to-blenholt-1936

Title: A Second Brooklyn Novel by Daniel Fuchs:  Homage to Blenholt (1936)
Date: January 20, 2022

Of the ten or so novels that I've read since I began this project, Homage to
Blenholt is certainly the most regional and the most "Jewish." It is positively
marinated in local color. Even in the first few paragraphs, we encounter the
"dirty cobbled streets" of Williamsburg, a milkman's plodding horse, the
subway and the trolley, "gutters," "seltzer," and a "stoop."  Kids play
Johnnie-on-the- pony, punchball, and ringolevio. There's a pickle man and a hot
corn man and a peddler selling imitation pearls. Even when characters are not
kvetching outright, they speak in a thick dialect that ladles English words onto
Yiddish structures and inflections.

The thin but adequate plot concerns young Max Balkan, who yearns for a more
glamorous, more powerful life. -- but every reader soon realizes that despite
his ambitions he's doomed to a life of slicing pastrami behind the counter of
someone else's delicatessen. Max admires Blenholt, a corrupt politician whose
graft has earned him a shiny suit and an extravagant funeral, -- but in his more
romantic moments he dreams of being an Alexander, a Caesar, or, his favorite
role model, Christopher Marlowe's Tamburlaine the Great, the Scythian shepherd
who rose from poverty to become the scourge of God and conqueror of Persia.

In the novel's finest phrase, poor Max's unromantic mother dismisses her son's
fantasies: "Tamburlaine, Schmamburlaine."

The bell of nostalgia rang most powerfully with the appearance of a word, well
known to me but no doubt unfamiliar to most readers. The word is "Forverts." It
was my task, on Sunday mornings, to buy and deliver a copy of the Jewish Daily
Forward to my Yiddish-speaking grandparents, who lived around the corner on
Coney Island Avenue. So with 50 cents in hand, I purchased the Times and the
Eagle for my parents and for my grandparents, the "Forverts." Until Homage to
Blenholt, I had not seen or heard that strange foreign word in 65 or 70 years.
My thanks to Daniel Fuchs.

I should add that, like Balkan, youthful me was dazzled by Tamburlaine. Marlowe
-- a young man's poet -- was my first serious literary love. He offered me
romantic escapism of a high order. But I was far too unimaginative to see myself
as the conqueror of the known world. For me, it was quite enough to appreciate
Marlowe's exotic landscape and still unsurpassed poetry.

Source: 2022/01/lj-davis-meaningful-lfe

Title: Another Brooklyn Novel:  A Meaningful Life (1971)
Date: January 25, 2022

I had never heard of L. J. Davis until I searched out his black-comic novel, A
Meaningful Life.  It's about a young man named Lowell Lake from Boise, Idaho
who moves to Brooklyn (as did the author himself) and buys a decrepit mansion
in a newly gentrifying section of Bedford-Stuyvesant that was eventually
to be dignified and upgraded into Boerum Hill. In his endeavor to repair
the building, everything that could go wrong, goes wrong -- and does so in
inventive, unpredictable ways.

If it's a satire, as it's sometimes called, A Meaningful Life is not gentle,
Menippean or Horatian, but, rather, far beyond the outer limits of Juvenelian.
It's nasty, and sometimes falls into just plain ugly.  It reads less like a
novel than as an extended turn by a stand-up monologist or comedian. Plot and
character are regularly sacrificed to jokes. It has the saddest ending of any
novel I can recall reading

Lowell Lake is afraid of "Negroes" and doesn't much like Puerto Ricans or Jews
or gays (whom he calls "fruits," and "fags") or old people, and he, and the
author, indulge themselves in brutal stereotyping.

It's one of the bleakest books I've ever read, and, if you hold your nose, one
of the funniest.

Source: 2022/01/ajrich-amyhempel-jillciment

Title: Not Another Brooklyn Novel:  The Hand that Feeds You (2015)
Date: January 28, 2022

I was steered to A J Rich's The Hand that Feeds You by a pair of websites that
listed books set in Brooklyn, but I'm sad to say that there's almost nothing of
Brooklyn in the novel -- a considerable disappointment to expectant me. It's a
murder mystery in which various places in and around Brooklyn are mentioned, but
in fact the novel takes place in a cliched fictional city in which murders are
committed, red herrings are liberally strewn, police are not very bright, and
the actual perp is lo and behold revealed in the last chapter.

I'm not a great reader of crime fiction, but I found this one "suspenseful" and
"gripping." Against my better judgment, I swallowed it in one gulp.

I would have liked it even more if I had any affection or even interest in
dogs, because in The Hand that Feeds You, the mystery is whether it was
Morgan Prager's or Billie Badgirl-Richbitch's dogs who ripped out scamming
boyfriend Bennett's throat. The novel might also have been more up my alley if
protagonist-narrator Prager had been able to form warmer bonds with humans than
with canines. The novel concludes with Prager receiving a chaste peck from her
human crush and a sensual roll in the grass with her devoted doggy. Borderline
perverse, in my opinion. But what can be expected of a novel in which dangerous
"pitbulls" are re-branded as "pitties."

It's odd and something of a curiosity that scenes in the novel are located
in Rangeley and Oquossoc, the only towns in rural Maine with which I'm even
remotely familiar.

Source: 2022/01/fear-of-clowns-coulrophobia

Title: Coulrophobia
Date: January 29, 2022

My bedmate informed that last night, in the wee hours, I uttered the strange
words, "fear of clowns."

Thanks to her I then remembered doing so (I had forgotten). But why those words?
I had no context. Was I in the throes of some sort of clownish nightmare       ?

Or was it merely a vocabulary exercise?  Perhaps, in my dream, I searched for
the English word for "fear of clowns." I know there is such a word, and in the
morning, I tried to recall it, but without success. I then tried to re-invent a
word, but the best I could do was "bozophobia," which is clearly an undignified
and inadequate invention. The existing and correct word, I soon discovered, is
coulrophobia, a curious modern coinage, dating only to the 1990s. Coulrophobia
is, for some mysterious reason, derived from the Greek word for "stilt-walker."
(There's a modern Greek word for clown, κλόουν, transliterated as klóoun,
which I suspect to be a recent borrowing from American English.)

Coulrophobia can be a serious affliction. According to the Cleveland Clinic,
coulrophobia can lead to hyperhidrosis. I myself am neither coulrophobic nor
hyperhidrosic.

The nighttime mystery remains. Why in the world would a semi-normal guy blurt
out the words "fear of clowns" at 2 am in the morning. In the long history of
human sleeping and dreaming, has such a thing ever happened before? Or will it
again?

Truly, I am a fascinating individual. Especially during the night. During the
waking hours, not so much.

Source: 2022/02/fortress-of-solitude-

Title: One More Brooklyn Novel:  Fortress of Solitude (2003)
Date: February 02, 2022

I grow all weak-in-the-knees sentimental when novelists write about such icons
of my childhood as spaldeens and stoopball.

Such delights abound in the first half of Jonathan Lethem's novel Fortress
of Solitude. The novel's Boerem Hill (newly upscaled from Gowanus) in the
1970s was as rich in such street games as my Flatbush in the 1940s and 50s.
Nevertheless, it' can't be said that these elements of nostalgia redeem Lethem's
huge undisciplined sprawling novel. Fortress of Solitude is crazily inventive,
profuse, uncontrolled. I have rarely read a novel by a respectable author so
in need of a dictatorial editor. Surely, there's enough material here for four
or five fine novels, each of which would deliver more bounce and impact than
this door-stopper. If Fortress of Solitude were a building, it would be called
overdecorated; if it were a piece of music or a film, it would be overproduced.

Some of my Flatbush cohort like to think that 1950s Brooklyn was a paradise for
children. I am not of that opinion. To me, Brooklyn was frequently menacing
when it wasn't just plain boring. The so-called "melting pot" was a cauldron
a racial animosities. But it wasn't all bad -- there were the Dodgers and the
camaraderie of the schoolyard. The public schools were crowded and disorderly,
but there were great teachers and enthusiastic students. Not so in dystopian
Fortress, a lord-of-the-flies world of vicious adolescents, incompetent adults,
and dysfunctional government. Far worse than I remember; and worse, I think,
than the reality.

The author of Motherless Brooklyn, a much finer novel, presents us this time
with two motherless youngsters, one white and one black, who through thick and
thin maintain a deep abiding friendship. But alas the novel veers into territory
that some might call magic realism, but to me was neither realistic nor magical
nor even remotely credible no matter how much disbelief I tried to suspend. To
read the last embarrassing third of the novel was a sad chore.

I don't think that I have ever read a substantial and ambitious novel that paid
so little attention to female characters. Where are the ladies of Boerum Hill? 
Not only are the mothers missing, but the occasional inadvertent woman who
wanders unto the page remains an unrealized cipher, a nothing.

Source: 2022/02/offill-speculation

Title: Brooklyn Novel??
Date: February 06, 2022

Re: Jenny Offill, Department of Speculation (2014). "Shimmering."
"Breathtaking."  "Radiant, sparkling with sunlight and sorrow." "Powerful."
"Glitters with different emotional colors."  "Each line a dazzling perfectly
chiseled arrowhead aimed at your heart."

That's what they say. How about "undisciplined," "faux-poetic," "self-
indulgent", "unreadable." Which is what I say.

Whatever happened to my gritty Brooklyn?  When did it become so absurdly
soft?  During gentrification, when the corner candy store turned into chi-chi
fern bar?

It appears that Offill is from North Carolina and lived in Brooklyn for "a
while." Not long enough to make an impact.

The "chiseled arrowheads" may have been aimed for my heart, but they missed
their target by at least a sewer and a half.

Source: 2022/02/predictions-2022

Title: Predictions for 2022
Date: February 07, 2022

It's been six years since Dr. Metablog (aka Vivian de St. Vrain, aka The Modern
Nostradamus) issued a set of predictions. His last collection, from 2016, earned
a score of 100% correct, when every single one of his dazzling glimpses into
futurity proved to be exactly accurate. An astonishing performance!!  Which is
why The Modern Nostradamus once again won the Lifetime Platinum Award from the
International Prophecy Society. Now, after a brief but pregnant retirement, Dr M
returns to the prophecy lists and offers the following. Read and be dazzled, fit
audience though few. Here's what's going to happen!

1)   there will be unusual weather patterns in North America;

2)   there will be a forest fire in one or more western American states;

3)   a famous Hollywood actress will sue for divorce; moreover, another (or
possibly the same) star will become pregnant; another (or possibly the same)
actress will gain or lose a great deal of weight;

4)   a politician will be accused of dishonesty;

5)   there will be either a monsoon, an airplane crash, or a capsized ferry in
Asia;

6)   there will be fluctuations in the stock market;

7)  there will be turmoil in the Middle East;

8)  a religious leader will be involved in either a financial or a sex
scandal.  Or perhaps both;

9)  Mitch McConnell will continue to be a colossal asshole.

You read it here first. Loyal readers: check back at the end of the year. 
Let's see whether a senior but world-class professional augur still has enough
on the oracle ball to foretell the future one more time.

Source: 2022/02/kazin-walker-in-the-city

Title: Love
Date: February 08, 2022

Some years ago, I wrote about meetings of the E & L Chafetz Family Circle, a
biennial gathering of my immigrant grandmother's family and also of her many
cousins, spouses and descendants. I recalled that Youthful Me objected to being
dragooned into attending these sessions. I also confessed that I hadn't a
glimmer of understanding of what those meetings meant. Here's what I wrote:

What I didn't know, and is so obvious to me now, was that I was much more
important to them than they were to me. That I was "doing well in school" were
words that they dearly wanted to hear. It was for my generation and for me that
they had braved the Cossacks, sold the farm, deserted from the Russian army,
left backward White Russia  or the Ukraine behind, endured the miseries of
steerage, slept four to a bed for years and half-acclimated themselves to a new
and utterly foreign world. For me. They had sacrificed themselves to invest in
me. So that I could "do well in school," get an education, live a better life. I
was their emissary to America, to the future.

It is still painful to admit how little I had appreciated these diminutive and
ancient but very brave people.

As it happens, I was not the only person to come to the same conclusion.

In A Walker in the City (the city is the Brownsville section of Brooklyn), the
distinguished man of letters Alfred Kazin had long ago (1951)made the identical
point:

My [immigrant] father and mother worked in a rage to put us above their level;
they had married to make us possible. We were the only conceivable end to all
their striving; we were their America.

Kazin proceeded to analyze his parents' marriage (he's a generation older than
I so his words are relevant not to my parents, but to my grandparents and those
of their Chafetz generation). "Love" became his subject. As I type his words, I
think of Joseph and Sonia, Isaiah and Etta:

Our parents, whatever affection might offhandedly be expressed between them,
always had the look of being committed to something deeper than mere love. Their
marriages were neither happy nor unhappy.; they were arrangements.

Powerful words, I think. Their marriages were "arrangements" -- certainly not
the touches of sweet harmony.

Not "love." Love was not for such as his parents (or, to continue the argument,
my grandparents).

I am perfectly sure that in my parents' mind, love was something exotic and
not wholly legitimate, reserved for "educated" people like their children, who
were the sole end of their existence. So far as I knew, love was not an element
admissible in my parents' experience. Any open talk of it between themselves
would have seemed ridiculous. It would have suggested a wicked self-indulgence,
a preposterous attention to one's own feelings.... They looked on themselves
only as instruments toward the ideal "American" future that would be lived by
their children.

I have the same sense about my forebears. I never heard any of them use the word
"love" and I don't think it would have been a comprehensible value for them.
To fall in love, to be in love, was not their expectation. Their aim was more
elemental: simply, to survive.

Moreover, not only did they not recognize romantic love, they also, as far as I
can remember, attached little importance to "happiness."

What an oddity!  They had left the dark backward of eastern Europe, lands of
dearth and pogroms and cholera, and traveled to a country in which the "pursuit
of happiness" was inscribed in its founding documents. But their aim, I am
absolutely sure, was not to achieve ephemeral happiness; their aim was to put a
roof over their heads and put food on the family table.

Life and liberty, yes; the pursuit of happiness -- an utterly alien concept.

Source: 2022/02/emily-gould-friendship

Title: A Contemporary Brooklyn Novel by Emily Gould:  Friendship (2014)
Date: February 14, 2022

Friendship is definitely an urban novel, but there's little in it that
is particular to Brooklyn. Certainly not to my Brooklyn. It's a modern,
contemporary coming-of-age novel, but, unlike prior-century works, adolescence
is delayed or postponed, because the two thirtyish women about whom it revolves
would have solved their problems when they were a decade younger if they
weren't so rich and spoiled. It's healthy that they try to maintain a profound
friendship in a world of meaningless temp jobs, bad boyfriends, inchoate
ambitions, voluntary poverty, and impulsive and irresponsible sex.

It's an amusing novel, well-plotted but written without much in the way of flair
or style. Not weighty. Perhaps I was a little put off by the indulgences of
first world difficulties.

For one of the characters, Williamsburg was a "hotbed of youth and culture." For
another, it was a "hotbed of European tourists and restaurants with thirty-five
dollar entrees." Wow, Williamsburg is two distinct hotbeds. It's hard to imagine
how Daniel Fuchs would have reacted. Is there another part of the U. S. so
fundamentally altered in a couple of generations?

Source: 2022/02/amnesia-on-film-the-right-of-way-1931

Title: Amnesia on Film: The Right of Way (1931)
Date: February 17, 2022

Amnesia is perfunctory in this "pre-Code" melodrama. Comes and goes without much
stress.

Rich snotbucket monocle-wearing attorney Charlie "Beauty" Steele is beaten,
thrown into a river and presumed dead. He is rescued and wakes up without a
glimmer of memory but is otherwise entirely functional. In his new, raccoon-
skin-hat personality he falls in love with shopkeeper Rosalie Eventural (played
by 18-year-old Loretta Young). Eventually it comes to light that he has left a
wife behind. His memory returns in flash and in a flashback, and things go from
bad to worse. Bigamy and all that.

The Right of Way has not aged well. It's a silent film with words. Conrad Nagel,
acting in a superseded tradition, is all exaggerated gestures, eye rolls, and
heavy lipstick. Loretta Young is so young that she hasn't even started to look
like Loretta Young.

Astonishing to think that the film is now pushing a hundred years old and that
amnesia was there right from the start. Before the start, actually, because
there were two silent Right of Ways (or Rights of Way) before this all-talkie
version.

Source: 2022/02/astonishing-dream-idea-for-a-new-technology

Title: Astonishing Dream; Idea for a New Technology
Date: February 19, 2022

Another long troubled night, another astonishing dream. This time, I found
myself lurking in a primitive cabin inhabited, it seemed, by a big happy family.
There were a bunch of kids and a cheerful be-aproned matriarch cooking on an old
wood stove what looked to me like a cauldron of soup. Immediately, the scene
shifted to a hall or a church basement. There were eight or ten long tables at
which a couple of dozen unfamiliar but clearly delineated folks were seated,
waiting for their dinner. But first, some singing. An unidentifiable patriotic
song, and then, a hymn. I recognized it as a hymn because it included the line,
"He died in vain." Still in the midst of the dream, I said to myself, I have to
remember this verse, so I took out pen and paper, and wrote down these words:
"he died in vain." As I did so, a large, bearded, slightly threatening man
accused me of "making fun" of the proceedings. He demanded to inspect what I
had written. I showed him my writing and explained to him that I thought "he
died in vain" was theologically wrong, because according to the usual Christian
interpretation, Jesus did not die "in vain."

End of dream.

In the morning, awake, I did some research to see if "he died in vain" appears
in any familiar or remote hymn. Just as I anticipate, no soap. However, I
discovered that the most frequently cited use of the phrase comes not from a
hymn or from the Bible but from the Gettysburg Address: that "we here highly
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain." Why should my dreamatorium
think to quote Abraham Lincoln? But why not, especially since there's been a
lot of Lincoln talk in our household this last while what with Lynn reading a
biography and also Team of Rivals. Then I wondered, could the cabin in the first
part of the dream be a reference to Kentucky log cabin in which Lincoln was
reputedly born. A long shot, but not impossible. Anyway, it's my dream; I can
interpret it as I want.

These mysterious dreams inspire in me an idea for a stunning new technology.
I think it would be very helpful if someone would devise a recording device
for dreams -- so that they could be saved and then played back on the TV
screen. It would be fascinating, I think, to see not only the fragments that
one remembers but the whole multi-hour experience laid out there in full
color and stereophonic sound. What a boon to mankind! What a convenience for
psychoanalysts!

I imagine something like an applewatch with an app for recording a month or so
of all-nighters. I know I'd buy one.

Impossible, you say?  Well, did they not laugh at the Wright brothers?

I think I need to present this idea to Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos. Bill Gates.
Someone with imagination and a history of achievement. Someone who would know
how to monetize so brilliant a conception. I myself am willing to invest my
entire income tax refund, however large it turns out to be.

Source: 2022/02/poor

Title: "Give Me Your Tired, Your People Who are Experiencing Poverty"
Date: February 21, 2022

At lunch yesterday, a friend of long standing mentioned that the conglomerate
that now publishes his American politics textbook has hired a new employee, a
vice-president for diversity and inclusion. It's a well-intended decision, I
am sure, but it carries a potential downside. The new v-p has instructed my
friend to make some changes to his prose. For example, he will no longer be
allowed to report that Lyndon Johnson got his way by "arm-twisting" recalcitrant
legislators. The metaphor, though commonly used back in the LBJ era, and still
picturesque, is disrespectful to people who suffer from broken or withered arms
and is especially discourteous to those who are missing one or both upper limbs.
No more arm-twisting, therefore. My friend was also told that it is no longer
permissible to say that in the U. S., "the poor tend to vote at lower levels of
participation than the general population." The new v-p insists that the phrase,
"the poor" denigrates various people by reducing them to a mere category. "The
poor" should therefore be updated and altered to "'people experiencing poverty."

In our peaceful and prosperous midWestern town, we've had a continuing and
difficult debate about homelessness. Some while ago, our extremely correct local
newspaper ceased to denominate those without regular domiciliary appointments as
"the homeless" and began to call them "people experiencing homelessness."

Such a circumlocution, I believe, though well-intended, misses the mark. The
word "homeless" has a poignancy and immediacy that the bloodless bureaucratic
euphemism "people experiencing homelessness" lacks. Rather than making
homelessness more palatable; it makes it more painful.

Let us thank all the gods in the pantheon that Emma Lazarus did not write,
"Give me your people experiencing lassitude, give me your people experiencing
poverty."

I wonder what the v-p for inclusion would say about Jesus, who famously advised
that "when thou makest a dinner or a supper, invite not thy friends, nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; lest they also bid thee
again, and a recompence be made thee. But when thou makest a feast, invite the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind." Such a forceful series of evocative
nouns! But would "the maimed," "the lame," "the blind," overleap the diversity
and inclusion barrier and enter a 21st century textbook? I think not.

Although Jesus may have had some good ideas, he was definitely not "woke."

Source: 2022/02/amnesia-on-film-whirlpool-1950

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Whirlpool (1950)
Date: February 22, 2022

Just when I was beginning to think that the Hollywood memory-loss well had run
dry, along comes Whirlpool and another variant of the world's most flexible
mental affliction. This time: loss of memory by hypnosis.

It could have been a good film: Ben Hecht, Otto Preminger, Gene Tierney, Jose
Ferrer. But it's gimmicky and the psychology is vulgar pseudo-Freudianism.

Malignant David Korvo (Ferrer) hypnotizes poor Ann Sutton (Tierney) into
imagining that she's committed a murder. Will she recover her memory in time
for the true murderer (Korvo himself) to be discovered? Yes, she will. The
film turns into something like a police procedural but might better be called
a psychoanalytical procedural. Richard Conte plays the Tierney's husband, and
he's the psychoanalyst, but frankly he's so surprisingly dense that he's an
embarrassment to his entire profession. The audience is led through a series of
melodramatic twists and turns, many requiring wholesale suspension of disbelief,
before all turns out well, or pretty well, because poor Ann Sutton (Tierney) is
reunited to her doltish husband.

Here's a picture of Iago-like hypnotist Jose Ferrer staring into the deer-in-
the-headlights eyes of luminous Gene Tierney.

Source: 2022/02/ex-wife-divorcee-ursula-lindesay-parrott

Title: Ex-Wife (1928); Divorcee (1930)
Date: February 22, 2022

Through the continuing miracle of TCM, we watched Divorcee, a 1930 "pre-Code"
drama of marriage and adultery. It's a film that was shocking in its own time
and still carries a bit of an edge. Jerry Martin (Norma Shearer) and Ted Martin
(Chester Morris) attempt to create a marriage of perfect equals, but Ted strays.
There's a great understated scene in which Jerry, the betrayed wife, cold-
bloodedly tells her unfaithful husband, that "I've balanced our accounts."
Ted, though he has proclaimed a commitment to equality, does not, let us say,
handle the revelation of his wife's adultery with grace. The marriage comes to
a disastrous end. But alas after an hour or so of travail and weeping, Jerry
loses her nerve, succumbs to propriety, pursues her erring husband to Paris, and
promises to be true. The assertion of equity has turned out to be just so much
blather. The double standard has been tested but has held firm. The film flirts
with radicalism but reverts to a Hollywood ending in which love conquers all and
an adventurous woman accepts her subordinate place.

I was sufficiently intrigued by the film to investigate its background. The
source is a novel called Ex-Wife (1928) by Ursula Parrott, which sold 100,000
copies and was a sensation in its day. I confess that although I'm supposed to
know something about literature, I had never heard of this scandalous piece of
fiction. Ex-Wife sunk like a stone and has been out of print for many years, but
our interlibrary loan department managed to locate a 80s reprint in Fort Lewis,
Colorado. (Thanks, Interlibrary Loan!).

Ex-Wife is an inartistic piece of writing -- hectic, repetitive, padded, but
one that obviously struck a nerve. In this novel, a young divorced woman does
not just pine for her wandering husband. Instead, she enjoys her independence,
and "sleeps with more men than [I] can count." She then she falls deeply in love
with the wrong man, and finally opportunistically marries a third fellow whom
she doesn't love but to whom she promises to be faithful (we are skeptical).
The novel is marinated in speakeasy bootleg liquor and easy morality. Much
wilder than the rather tame film version, it is also more challenging and
revolutionary.

In the course of the novel, our heroine has a baby (who conveniently dies) and
also an abortion. The babies are important to the larger backstory. In 1922, the
then Katherine Ursula Towle, a recent Radcliffe graduate, married Lindesay Marc
Parrott, a young reporter for The New York Times.

They had a son named Lindesay Marc Parrott Jr. two years later. However, his
existence was kept a secret from Ursula's husband, as he never wanted to have
a son. So, Ursula left the child in the custody of her father and sister and
returned to Lindesay, still not speaking a word about the son. It was not until
1926 that Lindesay found out that he was a father. As a result, he immediately
divorced Ursula, rejected the existence of his son, and never once went to see
him.

It's an astonishing revelation that certainly does not speak well for Lindesay
Parrott, but adds some autobiographical interest to the plot of Ursula Parrott's
Ex-Wife. Suddenly, the deceased child and the abortion make a certain kind of
sense.

I should add that Lindesay Parrott was a name well known to me in the days of my
youth. I was then a diligent reader of The New York Times and Lindesay Parrott
covered the Korean War, so I encountered his name every single day from 1949 to
1955. And then in the 70s, I learned that Lindesay Parrott had retired from the
Times and had purchased a small farm on Kidder Road in Bradford, Vermont, a bit
more than a mile, as the crow flies, from where we lived on Hackett Hill Road. I
gave thought to knocking on his door, but I heard through the local gossip chain
that Parrott was a recluse and a terrible alcoholic. Whether true or not I don't
know. Of course I had no idea that Lindesay Parrott had once been married to a
notorious novelist.

As for Ursula, after her divorce from Lindesay Parrott, she married three
more times, and was also rumored to have had affairs with F. Scott Fitzgerald
and Sinclair Lewis. She died in 1957 "in the charity ward of a New York City
hospital."

Here's Ursula Parrott's Radcliffe graduation picture:

Source: 2022/02/adelle-waldman-love-affairs-of-nathaniel-p

Title: A Contemporary Brooklyn Novel:  Adelle Waldman, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P. (2013)
Date: February 24, 2022

This curiously named novel, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P. (no relation, thank
goodness), concerns a 30-year-old Baltimorean become Brooklynite who drifts from
bed to bed but is incapable of achieving lasting love.

Adelle Waldman takes a scalpel to Nathaniel P[iven] and also to his various
lady friends. Her analyses are sharp, incisive and sometimes painfully close
to the bone. She is not above devoting paragraphs, even pages, to dissecting a
minor event or brief conversation. Sometimes the intricacy of her observations
resembles those of Henry James, though I can't remember The Master ever
discussing either the scrotum or the anus of any of his characters. Waldman
put me in mind of a sentence with which Horatio admonishes Hamlet: '"'twere to
consider too curiously to consider so."

Reading this novel, I was relieved that I am not a 30-year-old on the hunt --
and that I never was. There's lots of sex, some of it precipitous, but not much
discussion or examples of genuine intimacy. Waldman's landscape is unfamiliar to
me -- a foreign culture or, rather, an alien civilization.

Set in Brooklyn, almost all the action takes place in Williamsburg or environs,
certainly within sight of the Manhattan skyline -- although I remember that once
or twice characters may have ventured into the Brooklyn hinterland for a pizza.

The author is amusingly aware of the way the new Brooklyn has superseded the
old:

the two groups (i.e. older residents and newcomers) might have existed on
different layers of the earth's atmosphere that only from a distance appear to
be on the same plane. A store called National Wines & Liquors, Inc, where both
liquor and cashier were enclosed behind bulletproof glass, was not actually a
competitor to the much newer Tangled Vine, which specialized in organic and
local wines and exhibited the work of area artists at its Thursday-evening
tastings.

Which reminds me that I started to read but failed to comprehend a novel called
Class (2014) by Francesco Pacifico in which Williamsburg was regularly referred
to as "Willy." Again, I ask, what would Daniel Fuchs think?

The more of these novels I read, the more Brooklyn seems like a multiply layered
palimpsest -- one culture imposed upon another, generation after generation. 
My own Flatbush neighborhood, now upgraded to "Kensington," was farmland right
through to the end of the 19th century, then a suburb for prosperous old
Protestant families, next a haven for Irish, Italian and Jewish immigrants and
now an ethnic stew of Hasids, Turks, Arabs, Russians, and South and Central
Americans of all kinds but also with an strong admixture of Tangled Vine dinks,
yuppies and midWestern computer geeks. It's a complex piece of urban Americana
-- one facet of which is well-illustrated by the story of unhappy Nathaniel P.

Source: 2022/03/toibin-brooklyn-auster-follies

Title: Two Very Fine Brooklyn Novels
Date: March 01, 2022

I liked Paul Auster's The Brooklyn Follies (2006) so much that I read it
twice. It was even better the second time. Even though it begins scary ("I
was looking for a quiet place to die. Someone recommended Brooklyn..."), it's
a cheerful and warm-hearted novel. Auster's gift is to make barely credible
events seem commonplace and normal. So Follies packs in a mute nine-year-old
girl who journeys many miles to find her uncle, and then a forger of paintings,
a noir-y blackmail scheme, a wacky pseudo-Christian religious cult, a Jamaican
transvestite who mouths "Can't Help Loving that Man" at a sad funeral, and so
on.

The Brooklyn Follies is a comedy not because it labors at one-liners but because
everyone who should get married or at least find a mate, manages to do so by the
last page. Plus it's rich in Park Slope locations and lore.

I also enjoyed Colm Toibin's Brooklyn (2009), which is another version of
the immigration novel. It's set back in the 1950s but the 50s might as well
be the '20s as far as oppressive social customs are concerned. Although the
central figure, Eilis, travels to Brooklyn, she never quite frees herself from
provincial Ireland or the interventions of transatlantic priest Father Flood.
Young, inexperienced, she falls hard for a boy of Italian extraction -- and her
doing so turns out to be more of a problem that it needs to be. Eilis must make
some important, life-determining decisions, but whether she makes the right
choices is left to the reader to decide (I myself think she loses her bearings).
It's a lovely, understated, carefully wrought and admirable novel.

Source: 2022/03/boulder-mall-dogs-music

Title: On the Mall
Date: March 04, 2022

On our prosperous Boulder Mall, where all the men are handsome, all the women
are good-looking, and all the mendicants take Venmo, there are 44 separate and
distinct signs that declare, No Pets. Such clear instructions do not inhibit our
infatuated dog owners, who can't bring themselves to believe that the injunction
applies to their particular o-so-lovable canine. They cannot fathom that not
every recreational mall-walker is in love with Bowser. As a result, the No Pets
law is widely and defiantly flouted.

There's a second mall rule: no amplified music. Acoustic guitars, string
quartets, bluegrass bands, accordionists, and singers are all allowed and
encouraged. But every once in a while, some itinerant assembles an appallingly
large apparatus on our otherwise peaceful Mall and produces sounds that can be
heard for half a mile. Rude, ear-shattering noises.

Canines and amplifiers are everyday commonplace violations. But yesterday,
walking on the mall, we observed a remarkable and unprecedented novelty. Along
comes a nondescript scruffy guy walking an oversized nondescript dog, and lo and
behold, onto the beast is strapped a boombox. Honest to Pete, I'm not making
this up! The attached mechanism is a powerful one and it generates an extremely
loud noise. Unidentifiable sounds, possibly though not certainly some sort of
music.

A woofer with a woofer, so to speak.

The man and his faithful friend proceed shamelessly along the mall, bass notes
vibrating the shop windows and oscillating my pancreas.

I was floored, frankly. One dog, one amplifier; two concurrent violations.

And then I watched in amazement as the big ol' dog dropped a big ol' deuce. A
double deuce, actually. Two long brown glistening, smoking turds. Lurking right
there on the bricks, preparing to ambush the pretty white shoes of the next
three-year-old princess-in-a-pink-tutu to come tripping by.

In our town, it's the inviolable custom that every dog owner carries a plastic
bag and politely disposes of his pet's droppings. Not this guy. He just kept
on walking, pretending that he didn't know what was going on at the end of his
leash -- which was, as a I have said, 1) a pooch, 2) an attached amplifier, and
3) pooch poop. A jackpot -- a perfect trifecta.

Do I have a theory to account for such contemptible misbehavior?  Well, I've
been thinking and mulling and contemplating, and I'm aware of the talk of the
breakdown of civil society, but all I can come up with is this: some people are
royal jerks.

Source: 2022/03/girl-in-translation-2010

Title: Yet Another Brooklyn Novel: Jean Kwok, Girl in Translation (2010)
Date: March 08, 2022

Girl in Translation is the story of a young, impoverished immigrant from Hong
Kong. I may be wrong, but it reads as if it were less a novel than a barely
fictionalized autobiography (Jean Kwok, the author, made her way from an
unheated tenement to Harvard; Kimberley Chang, the central figure, escaped
to Yale.) Mutatis mutandis, and all that. It's a familiar kind of work:
a bildungsroman, of course, but also an immigrant novel, a coming-of-age
adventure, and thanks to an inartistic tacked-on ending, an H. Alger rags-to-
riches saga. Sometimes I felt that I was reading a century-later re-imagining of
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, things Irish replaced with things Chinese -- except
that there is not a single tree in this novel's bleak landscape, not even a
symbolic one. Plus ca change, plus de meme chose.

While it's not original or innovative, nor written with any particular flair,
Girl in Translation is nevertheless valuable for the world it opens up to us.
Plus it's on the whole uplifting, even if there are some unfortunate moments in
which "triumphant" shades over into "triumphalist."

There's not much to admire about the Brooklyn of this novel; it's an unpleasant
place. Manhattan's Chinatown, where much of the action takes place, is no
better.

Source: 2022/03/luckman-cortelyou-flatbush

Title: Sid Luckman's Cortelyou Road Childhood Home
Date: March 11, 2022

Of course everyone knew that Sid Luckman was from Brooklyn and that he had
attended Erasmus Hall High School and Columbia University before becoming one
of the first superstars of the National Football League. To football fans, he
was as renowned a home-town boy as Sandy Koufax was to followers of baseball.
But until I read R.D. Rosen's new biography of Sid, called Tough Luck, I didn't
know that football's first T-formation quarterback was a neighborhood guy, and
that his modest childhood home was just four blocks off the route that Stephen
Lewin and I took every morning for four years to EHHS. And that his house was
just around the corner from the Sears department store where I spent the summer
of 1957 pulling down $1.25 large an hour.

The above is a modern picture, drawn from googlemaps. I suspect that the house
is not much changed from the way it appeared in the 1930s but that the bars on
the windows and front door are later additions. According to Zillow, the House
of Sid is 1664 sq. ft. and is now priced at c. $750,000. I'd bet $2500 was the
number in the 1930s, when the Luckman family was in residence.

Shouldn't there be a bronze plaque on the property?

It's a measure of the chanciness of the old neighborhood that Sid's father was
convicted and imprisoned for a gangland murder and that he died in Sing Sing.

Source: 2022/03/eleanor-roosevelt-brooklyn-539east9

Title: When Eleanor Roosevelt Visited 539 East 9 Street
Date: March 14, 2022

It should be remembered and recorded that in October of 1960, Eleanor Roosevelt
herself visited the home of my parents --my childhood home (539 East 9 Street in
the Flatbush section of Brooklyn).

I myself missed the occasion, alas. I was then living in Massachusetts,
undergoing the first disorienting days of graduate school. But I know the story.

During the 1960 presidential campaign (John F. Kennedy versus "Tricky Dick"
Nixon), JFK's Catholicism emerged as a divisive issue. It's hard to believe what
a fuss was made about his religion, especially nowadays, when no one bothers
themselves that Joseph Biden is not only a Roman Catholic, but a serious one at
that (JFK's personal commitment to his religion was, let's say, nominal).

Among Jewish voters, some of whom had grown up in Brownsville or Williamsburg or
the Lower East side where Jewish-Irish conflict was a fact of life, there was
a great deal of resistance to voting for JFK. And other Jewish voters, harking
back to the old country, remembered Catholics as their antagonists and were hard
put to vote for a candidate of that persuasion.

It fell to the task of Mrs. Roosevelt to persuade these reluctant voters that
they could and should cast a ballot for Kennedy. At the time, there was no one
in America who had more credibility with Jewish populations than she. It was
well known that Mrs. Roosevelt had lobbied her hesitant husband for more lenient
policies toward "displaced" Jews

I don't know how it came about that our living room was chosen as a site for
Mrs. Roosevelt to meet with voters. I suspect that it was through my mother's
extensive contacts with members of the League of Women Voters, an organization
of which she was a stalwart volunteer. I know that my mother assembled 50 or so
voters, almost all Jewish women, and seated or stood them in our very crowded
second floor living room. Mrs. Roosevelt arrived, and as my father said to me
later, she "dragged her ass" up two flights of stairs, spoke for 20 minutes,
presumably in that upper-class nasal twang for which she was famous, answered a
couple of respectful questions, and then limped back down to her car. And went
on to the next venue. And the next. (She was 76 at the time, and not in great
health.) Apparently she followed this same arduous routine for months.

That's how elections are won.

Eleanor Roosevelt died two years later, in 1962.

Source: 2022/03/erasmus-basketball-1951

Title: A Heart-of-Flatbush Novel: Big Man (1966), by Jay Neugeboren
Date: March 30, 2022

Of the many Brooklyn novels that I've read this last while, Big Man, by Jay
Neugeboren, comes closest to home. Neugeboren was newborn in 1938, just a
year before me, and he attended fabled Erasmus Hall High School, most likely
graduating with the class of 1955 (I was '56). It's a mark of my ignorance of
modern American letters that I had no idea that my near-classmate was the author
of 24 books, most of them novels. Big Man was Neugeboren's first novel.

Close to home? Here are couple of sentences that will shiver the nostalgia
timbers of wistful ex-Erasmians.

I walk down Church Avenue, past the Kenmore Theater. Across the street the
old church, used to cut classes and sit in the graveyard....  In front of
Garfields's Cafeteria all the guys hanging out with their broads and their
puffed hair.... Guys with Erasmus jackets on. I keep walking. Past the firehouse
and the Holy Cross schoolyard.

Wow, it's a guided tour of the old neighborhood as it was in the 1950s. Who from
Erasmus hasn't sprawled on the steps of the Dutch Reformed Church?

The novel revolves around the 1951 basketball scandals, which were world-shaking
news at the time. A number of New York City college players (CCNY, St. Johns,
Fordham, LIU) fell into the clutches of shady gamblers and were paid to shave
points.  A few were indicted and convicted. I wrote a few melancholy and
disillusioned paragraphs about the scandals some years ago -- here.

In Big Man, Neugeboren tells the story through the eyes and mouth of a
character named Mack Davis, who had been an upcoming star but is now, because
he missed a couple of baskets, stuck in a dead-end job at an automated carwash.
It's an ambitious conceit and a promising plot. Big Man, I regret to say, is
not a very artistic piece of work, but what the heck! Neugeboren was only 25 or
26 when he wrote it and had had only a few years to recover from uninspiring
Erasmus Hall English classes.

I confess that I was uncomfortable that Neugeboren wrote the novel in a black
voice. I don't object in theory, because there's no earthly reason why a
white novelist can't impersonate a black person, any more than male novelist
can't speak as a female (or vice versa), or a young writer speak in the voice
of an old. So wny was I troubled? I think it was because the voice that the
novelist invented didn't seem genuine. It seemed "literary" -- as though the
Davis character had been heisted out of a  blaxploitation film. Occasional
inadvertent lapses in the dialect were particularly painful to my ever-sensitive
ears.

Big Man reminds me how central basketball was to my adolescent life. I think
if I had spent as much time and effort on my schoolwork as I did practicing my
foul shots I might have been somebody. But I think I learned as much about life
from basketball and its scandals as I did from any other 1950s phenomenon (such
as the antics of "Tailgunner Joe" McCarthy). I'm grateful to Jay Neugeboren for
preserving an important piece of my history and especially for bringing the old
neighborhood right to the forefront.

Source: 2022/04/mature-romance

Title: Senior Romance
Date: April 02, 2022

Young 'uns, I don't know that you entirely grasp the glamor and mystery of
maturity (which in some jaded circles is called "old age.")  Let me tell you,
the golden years are just chockablock full of sensual romance of a kind that you
might not now appreciate.

Just the other day, for example, we were both instructed to make another visit
to the phlebotomist (it seems hardly a month goes by that some specialist or
other doesn't need to inspect a sample of our personal sanguineous fluids).

Being economical people, we scheduled our appointments for the same time, same
place.

Her blood draw was in anticipation of a knee replacement; mine for routine
monitoring of my half-a-dozen annoying senior conditions.

So there we were, side by side, in adjacent cubicles, stripping our sleeves for
the venipuncture.

I ask you, is there anything on earth more romantic than a senior couple
experiencing simultaneous blood draws. Rapture, rapture! Joy and jollity!

In a merrier world, the instant of venipuncture would have been accompanied
with an orchestra of swelling music, perhaps Brahms. And there would have been
candles; next time this happens, we'll surround ourselves with a whole Liberace
of candelabras. Dozens of long stem red roses. Beakers of Veuve Cliquot '42. 
An applauding audience of family and friends.

It would have been even more thrilling if my technician hadn't taken three tries
to hit the mark. "Your vein rolled," she said accusingly, compromising ever so
slightly the transcendent moment.

Source: 2022/04/what-i-wore-to-the-oscars-2022

Title: What I Wore to the Oscars, 2022
Date: April 02, 2022

Friends and relations have been clamoring to know what I wore to the Oscar
ceremony this year.  So here goes:

Source: 2022/04/henry-james-portrait-of-a-lady-1963-2022

Title: Henry James, Portrait of a Lady (1963-2022)
Date: April 20, 2022

I read James' Portrait of a Lady in 1963 but never again until last week,
so there has been a hiatus of almost three score years. During the interim,
glaciers have melted, continents have subducted and conventional notions about
what constitutes a "lady" have shifted quite marvelously.

After such an interval, it's not disgraceful for me to confess that I remembered
very little of the novel and that even major plot points came as a shock and
surprise. Moreover, I re-read the novel with a bit of prejudice, because I had
recently learned that Theodore Roosevelt once met James and dismissed him as "a
miserable little snob." Even if I hadn't been alerted by Roosevelt's back-of-
the-hand slap, I would have recognized that Portrait of a Lady generates enough
snobbery to power a nineteenth-century locomotive from Rome to Florence even
while hauling the book's entire cast of frequent travelers. It's a class-ridden
novel in which lesser sophisticates are out-snobbed by superior sophisticates.
Despite this unfortunate failing, Portrait of a Lady is a rather wonderful piece
of writing.

Let me further confess that I brought a second and more deeply-rooted prejudice
to my re-reading. In the early 1960s, when I was a graduate student of "English
and American Language and Literature" at a New England university, Henry James
was at the apex of his critical reputation. He was "the Master." In fact, an
appreciation (or devotion) to James became a sort of ticket of admission to
the coterie of the literary elite. A touchstone. If you (that is, me) were
able to appreciate and adore James's extraordinarily subtle judgements and
discriminations and his sustained and intricate analyses of the velleities
of social interactions, why then, you were one of the elect. But if you were
baffled by his niceties and sometimes could not divine what the heck he was
going on and on about, why then you weren't what James calls in Portrait "a
person of sensibility." And if you weren't a person of sensibility, why in
tarnation were you studying literary history at a university that had been home
to establishment sophisticates since 1636?

Not a James devotee, I managed to slip through the system without the
disgraceful lacunae in my preparation coming to anyone's attention. And until
this past week, I managed to keep my distance from Mr. Henry James.

But I may have made a mistake to have done so. I'd still say that Portrait of a
Lady isn't up there in the stratosphere with Bleak House and Middlemarch, but
it's still a darn good novel. It's not conventionally exciting; in fact, it's
talky and static in the extreme. Nothing much happens. Isabel Archer talks with
Henrietta and HJ analyses the conversation. Then someone goes to Gardencourt and
has a long conversation with Lord Warburton. Then Lord W meets Countess C in
Rome and they talk. Then Madame Merle, who, we are told, was born in Brooklyn
and therefore ought to have known better, has a long conversation with Isabel
Archer. Then someone meets someone else in a museum or a train station or a
restaurant and they have a long conversation -- once again dissected by HJ. Then
they ride the rails to Florence and talk. Meanwhile Ralph Touchett is slowly
dying and will continue die (and talk) for another five hundred pages. These
various conversations are often oblique, with the most important points omitted
or merely implied (to be grasped only by persons of subtlety and sensibility).
It's all so slow that I sometimes felt myself yearning for a good solid knife
fight or at least a lengthy car chase. When Isabel finally tells enigmatic
villainess Madame Merle that she doesn't want to see her ever again, I longed
for her to spit it out with a a good round "fuck off" -- but no such luck.

And yet as mysteries are revealed in the last third of the novel, Portrait
becomes undeniably exciting. Much is familiar; it seems as though James
recapitulates the marriage of Dorothea Brooke and Eddie Casaubon in the
misalliance of Isabel Archer and the "sterile dilettante" Gilbert Osmond. And
also borrows the Pansy plot from the story of Honoria Dedlock. But I came to
these insights, if they are insights, only in retrospect; while reading the
novel, I was surprised and intrigued.

I strongly object to the ending of the novel, which seemed to violate the
trajectory of the plot. Surely Isabel has earned her freedom. To me, her
continued bondage to propriety seems cruel to both the character and also to
hopeful (but deceived) readers. Wicked, in fact, to the point of sadism. No
doubt the conclusion tests a reader's sophistication, and no doubt if I read the
voluminous commentary that the novel has engendered, the apparent cruelty of the
conclusion would be be explained and justified. But I won't read the commentary.
I'm obviously not a "person of sensibility" and I prefer to remain unimproved,
unenlightened, and pissed.

Source: 2022/04/neugeboren-imagining-robert-lefferts

Title: A Brooklyn Memoir
Date: April 23, 2022

I read Imagining Robert, My Brother, Madness, and Survival by Jay Neugeboren for
neighborhood and neighborly reasons. Its author is a 1955 graduate of fabled
Erasmus Hall High School (I was class of 1956). Much of the story takes place
in the area of Brooklyn now called Lefferts Gardens. Walkable, or at least
bicyclable, from East 9 Street.

It's a sad tale. Younger brother Robert went seriously off the psychological
rails in his late teen years. Older brother Jay relentlessly chronicles his
brother's lifetime of struggles. It becomes clear that modern medicine does not
offer any remedy or hope to people with Robert's illnesses. The system relies
on  ineffective drugs and ineffective therapies and what amounts to involuntary
imprisonment. It's a painful, discouraging history.

And it's also a good and moving book. Very sincere and very emotional. I confess
to dropping an occasional tear.

And yet I don't know whether it's right to expose a loved one to such public
scrutiny. I myself wouldn't have made that choice. But I empathize with
Neugeboren's tale, inasmuch as I know from personal experience that therapies
for some forms of mental decay are no better now than they were during the
Darkest Ages.

Source: 2022/05/ukraine-shtetl

Title: Starokonstantinov
Date: May 05, 2022

Ukraine has been invaded and whole cities have been obliterated by the Putin
dictatorship. It's tragic. Once again, I'm overwhelmingly grateful that my
grandparents chose to pack up and leave the blighted Ukraine. It's a decision
that has looked better and better with each passing year.

My father's family came from a Ukrainian "shtetl" called Starokonstantinov,
or Alt Konstantin ("old Constantine"). As a youth, I overheard but did not
understand conversations in Yiddish about a place that my grandparents called
(phonetically) Xusantine-gebernia, where the X stands for a non-English deep
guttural fricative. Seventy years ago I paid little attention to my eastern
European ancestry. Now I'm fascinated.

Where is Starokonstantinov?  What is a "shtetl?"

I've just read Yohanan Petrovsky-Shtern's new (2014) and highly pertinent
history, The Golden Age Shtetl (an oxymoronic title if there ever was one). Y
P-S defines a shtetl as "an East European market town in private possession of
a Polish magnate, inhabited mostly but not exclusively by Jews, and subject
to Russian bureaucracy." Starokonstantinov, he claims, was a "quintessential
shtetl." "My" ancestral shtetl lies in the western part of Ukraine, about 50
miles south of a line drawn between Lviv and Kyiv. Nowadays, it has a population
of about 30,000 souls.

I know that my grandfather's people lived in Starokonstantinov from the middle
of the nineteenth century, but I have no idea when they first arrived -- it
might have been years or centuries before. The town itself is not an ancient
foundation. It enters history only in the late 16th century when a Polish noble
named Konstanty Ostrogski built himself a castle (which still survives) and took
ownership of the surrounding area. Starokonstantinov was a "private town" --
meaning that it was owned by the Ostrogski family for several hundred years. In
its first years, Starokonstantinov was included in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
In 1569 it became part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In 1793, and for
many years, even after my ancestors had struck out for the new world, it was
a possession of the Russian Empire. Now it's in the independent Ukraine, and
hoping to remain so.

The history of Starokonstantinov is marked by a series of tragedies prior to
the one now in progress. An early disaster was the Battle of Starokonstantinov
in 1648, which was a key event in the Chmielnicki Massacres of 1648-49. Eastern
rite Cossacks broke into the fortified town and killed all of its 130 Jewish
families and as many Polish Roman Catholics as they could find. During the early
part of the 18th century, the Haidamack massacre of Uman by Cossacks spilled
over into other Ukrainian shtetls, including "mine." And then beginning in 1881
came the series of pogroms -- anti-Jewish peasant riots provoked and tacitly
supported by the Russian officialdom. In Starokonstantinov, there were 6611 Jews
in 1847 and 9212 (61% of the total population) in 1897. (There would have been
two more if my grandparents hadn't seen the light in 1895). During the Nazi
occupation in 1942, virtually all the remaining Jewish population (6731 in 1939)
was murdered. It's a troubled, tragic history.

I'm not sure what it means to say that a town was wholly owned by Polish
nobility. Did the Ostrogskis own all the land, or the land and some of the
buildings? Did they administer the public works? The churches? Did they possess
the surrounding farms?  Did they own, until they were freed in 1861, the
serfs?  Most likely, each shtetl had its own particular form of ownership (the
late medieval world was anything but standardized). Y P-S does not explain;
perhaps he assumes it's common knowledge.

Starokonstantinov occasionally makes an appearance in The Golden Age Shtetl.

I had not realized how active my ancestors might have been in the vodka trade.
"In Starokonstantinov, the possession of Countess Rzewuska, about fifty [Jewish-
owned] inns and taverns yielded 67 percent of the town revenues." (Query:
how and when did the shtetl pass from the Ostrogskis to the Rzewuskis, who
were a very prominent and wealthy Polish family)? As far as I can tell, the
"town revenues" went directly into the hands of the Polish overlords. In 1827,
"Starokonstantinov Jews realized the that their efforts to prevent the draft of
men for twenty to twenty five year terms in the Russian army [had failed], and
the Jewish populace turned against their own kahal elders and attacked their
houses." "Local police had to summon an additional army unit to suppress the
outburst." (The "kahal" was a committee of prominent Jewish citizens who were
the nominal governors [under Polish supervision] of the Jewish population.)
In the first half of the nineteenth century, the divorce rate among Jewish
couples in Starokonstantinov, was 16 percent. In larger cities, it was even
higher (in Letichev it was 47 percent). Y P-S attributes the surprisingly
high rate of failed marriages to the relative freedom of Jewish women and
to the breakdown of traditional constraints as the Jewish population became
increasingly urbanized. A major fire in Starokonstantinov in 1835 hastened the
shtetl's decline. Russian travelers found Starokonstantinov and especially its
roads deplorable. "A Russian army officer observed that Starokonstantinov is
dirty beyond any measure: but 'if we bother ourselves to learn the reasons for
this situation, we would perhaps find out that even the Jews, whom are usually
blamed, have nothing to do with it.... To drive through the streets of the
town is a real challenge, as there is no pavement. Stones once paving the road
have long sunk into the soils. When it is raining, they do nothing but prevent
movement.'" Mud season in Starokonstantinov must have been an annual challenge.
Nevertheless, Starokonstantinovites were readers: a merchant estimated that in
the shtetl there were "about 20,000 books, mostly prayer books, bible and bible
commentaries, tractates on the Talmud and the Kabbalah." Y P-S thinks that this
number must be a great exaggeration. But it's on the record that a merchant
named Pinhas Yosef Bromberg from Starokonstantinov brought twenty Hebrew books
with him while traveling on business to St Petersburg.

My great-grandfather was a participant in the commerce of Starokonstantinov.
According to my father, he was a "factor."  A "faktor" (Yiddish from German)
was essentially a middleman. My ancestor had a horse and a wagon (perhaps, I
allow myself to fantasize in a moment of self-aggrandizement, two horses and two
wagons). According to tradition, he mostly dealt in grain, but factors such as
he bought and sold whatever was available: wood, coal, ribbons, calico, mirrors,
bolts and screws, vodka and wine. They did much of their business at fairs and
Starokonstantinov was famous for its very prominent fair.

Source: 2022/05/errol-flynn-olivia-de-havilland

Title: Dodge City Nincompoops
Date: May 06, 2022

The rip-roaring conclusion to Dodge City (1939), is marvelously dumb. The bad
guys, led by really nasty villain Jeff Surrett (Bruce Cabot) have jumped out
of the burning railroad car and onto their horses. They are going to make a
getaway, we assume. But for some reason, the six schmegeggees don't ride away
from the railroad tracks. Instead, they continue exactly parallel to the tracks,
allowing Wade Hatton (Errol Flynn) to get out his rifle and pick them off, one
after another.

All that the black hats needed to do was to hang a right and ride off into the
brush, or just rein up, and let the train go by. The train is on a railroad
track.  But no. Not these guys. They keep on riding alongside the train until
they're all shot. End of movie, but not the end to my astonishment. I'm baffled
that the director, Michael Curtiz of all people, allowed such a brainless
ending.

Also: Errol Flynn, with his anachronistic 1930s mustache and condescending
smile, was so goody-goody and upstanding that I felt a strong urge to piss on
his leg.

Source: 2022/05/emma-straub-modern-lovers-cortelyou-road

Title: A "Ditmas Park" Novel
Date: May 09, 2022

From my birth in 1939 until I fled to Ithaca in 1956, I lived on East 9th
Street, in a section of Brooklyn that had no other name than "Flatbush." But
all is flux, as Heraclitus said in a very different context, and now the
undistinguished neighborhood of my youth has been upgraded to pretentious
"Kensington."  Moreover, the adjacent section of Flatbush through which I early
morning shambled to fabled Erasmus Hall H. S., consisting of a large stock of
handsome old Victorian homes, has also been re-christened. It's now "Ditmas
Park."

Ditmas Park is where Emma Straub's novel, Modern Lovers (2016) situates itself.
It is, she claims, "the only neighborhood in New York City that felt like the
suburbs."  A sentence of praise or an instance of wicked irony, one might ask?

Suburb or not, Modern Lovers does not take place in the Flatbush of my youth.
Yes, streets retain their familiar names (Rugby, Argyle, Stratford, Newkirk,
Ocean Avenue). In fact, one of the modern lovers, a fiftyish wife and mother,
works out of a real estate office at the corner of Cortelyou Road and East
16th Street, exactly where old Mr. Hart used to repair the fragile gears of
my three- speed. But all is yuppified. None of the children in this novel go
to PS 217 or PS 139 or Erasmus (in fact, these anchors of my old neighborhood
go unmentioned). Instead, the young 'uns attend expensive "Whitman," an elite
private academy. The young lady who is at the center of the story has both a
'mum" and a "mom" -- a circumstance that no doubt occurred 70 years ago, but no
one would have talked about it, at least openly. It's Flatbush, all right, but
where are the Italians and Irish and the Jews?  A decade ago I toured PS 217
and couldn't help being struck by the "diversity" of the student body -- Turks,
Syrians, Russians, central and south Americans, Asians both east and south, and
of course Afro-Americans. These folks don't appear in Modern Lovers. Nor do
the ubiquitous Hasids. No wonder Emma Straub likes the slice of Brooklyn that
she describes as suburban.  Here's a Brooklyn novel that's more Updyke-y than
Fuchs-y.

Modern Lovers tells a warm, approachable, sound, humorous-to-slightly-satirical
story. It's modern, in the sense that the lovers aren't young and aren't
searching for mates; instead, they're middle-aged and trying to repair troubled
marriages. I don't doubt that Modern Lovers hits some readers' bull's eyes -- 
even if it misses my tired old target. For me, it was a story of considerable
sociological interest -- an instance of how the decades have transmogrified my
Flatbush into hip Ditmas Park.

At the end of the novel, the entrepreurial ladies start a new restaurant, Hot
and Sweet, which bakes perfect apple turnovers and supersedes that old frayed 
Cortelyou Jewish deli.

Source: 2022/06/wood-products-ennos

Title: Wood Words
Date: June 02, 2022

I suspect that I know more about wood than most laymen, partly as a consequence
of Uncle Al owning and operating the sawmill for all those years. And then
there's my own independent enthusiasm for trees: planting and transplanting,
gathering and saving seeds. Nevertheless, The Age of Wood by Roland Ennos
presented amateur me with a truckload of brand new information. It's a book that
re-tells the history of civilization through the use of wood and wood products.
A very good book, well worth the perusal.

Moreover, Ennos introduced me to a number of savory new words -- words that no
doubt I should have known and which are probably known to true woodophiles but
that are novel to me.

For example: the newfangled word anisotropy, which is defined as the property of
a material that displays different traits along different axes, as for example
lumber, which is much easier to split along its grain than across it. Because
wood is anisotropic and so tough sideways, it has many uses that it wouldn't
have had if merely isotropic.

Anisotropy, as a collection of sounds, does not appeal to me as much as some
of Ennos's gritty, oldfangled words. I am happy to make the acquaintance of
the word bodger, which is a wood carver or turner, but specifically a person
who makes chairs out of beechwood. What a wonderful word, though, I confess,
difficult to work into the conversation. Also hard to insinuate into the daily
exchange is futtock, which is a curved piece of timber forming the lower part
of the frame of a wooden ship. Futtock should not be confused with its near-
neighbor puttock, which is a kind of kite, and a word which Shakespeare uses as
an insult. Both futtock and puttock sound vaguely naughty, perhaps because of
their proximity to buttock. I also like strake, which is a continuous band of
hull planking, and which sometimes sports a rove, which is "a groove along the
lower inside edge of each strake." I admit that I had never heard of nacelles,
which are the outer casing of an early wooden aircraft engine. I imagine that
nacelles are as obsolete as wooden airplanes, as is monocque, a type of
construction in which the outer skin carries a major part of the stresses. Who
knew?  I was familiar with the word sheave but I didn't know that it also is
the rotating wheel inside a pulley. A duogong is part of the network of wooden
supports in traditional Chinese wood-frame buildings.

A trullo is a traditional Apulian drystone hut with a conical roof.

Source: 2022/09/contradictory-assertions

Title: Contradictory Assertions
Date: September 05, 2022

We stayed at an inn in Lyme, New Hampshire called "Breakfast on the
Connecticut." Good location, decent accommodations -- but they don't serve
breakfast. Which reminded me of the famous sign in front of the Fairlee Diner on
Route 5 in Fairlee, Vermont: "Open Seven Days a Week. Closed Tuesday."

Source: 2022/09/baboon-spirituality

Title: Are Baboons "Spirtual'?
Date: September 11, 2022

A friend is intimately acquainted with a primatologist. She (the primatologist)
has spent many a year, almost a lifetime, studying baboons. She has lived with
them and claims to have been accepted as one of the troop. She travels with them
when she can. I'm impressed by her dedication. I wouldn't want to travel for
more than a couple of days with a group of human tourists, let alone energetic
lower primates. My one encounter with baboons, in a  rest area in South Africa,
was unpleasant. The baboons were noisy and aggressive. Sub-Yahoos.

The primatologist told my friend the following  story. She was accompanying
a troop of baboons on a trek from one feeding place to another. They came to
a river that they wanted to cross. They all stopped, sat down on the ground,
waited silently for about thirty minutes. Then they all arose as one and
proceeded to wade across the river.

My friend said, and I quote verbatim, "it was a spiritual moment."

To which I immediately responded, "I don't know exactly what you mean, but I
can tell you that never in a thousand years would I interpret such an event as
'spiritual'."

All of us around the table were polite, so the conversation moved on to more
fruitful topics and did not become contentious.

But later, I thought, what did he (and the primatologist) mean by the word
"spiritual."  And the best that I can come up with, is that they both deduced
that the baboons engaged in some sort of prayer--that they paused to solicit
divine intervention before setting out on a hazardous adventure.

I'm not even slightly sympathetic to that reading. In actual fact, just between
us, I think it's kind of dumb.

I can think of many a reason why a congregation of baboons might assemble
themselves and take a moment. Perhaps they were assessing the flow of the river.
Maybe they were waiting for the current to become less strong. Or perhaps they
were looking at the other bank to see if there were predators hiding in the
underbrush. Or, most likely, they were simply tired and were gathering their
strength.

I think that my friend wanted to believe that baboons are spiritual, because
it follows that if baboons can pray to a higher power, then there's something
natural and universal about belief in a deity, even if it's the Great Baboon in
the Sky. Conversely, I am just as convinced that baboons are smart enough to
look around carefully before taking the plunge. No supererogatory hypothesis
required.

To me, the natural and material explanation is completely obvious -- although I
must admit that the primatologist who offered the spiritual explanation and the
friend who repeated it are both scientists of considerable repute.

Source: 2022/09/wehmeier-complete-games-robin-roberts

Title: Herman Wehmeier; Pitching 1950-2022
Date: September 22, 2022

For three days last month we stayed in a BNB just across the Connecticut River
in New Hampshire. The place is owned (or perhaps only managed) by a family
bearing the surname Wehmeier. It's a rare name, but one not entirely unfamiliar
to me. Like any member of my baseball-obsessed generation, I was immediately
put in mind of the only other Wehmeier who's ever crossed my path. I refer of
course to Herman Wehmeier, of famous memory, the right-handed pitcher who played
fourteen seasons of major league ball, mostly for Cincinnati and the Phillies.
His career, from 1945 to 1958, coincided with the period of my greatest interest
and enthusiasm for baseball -- the years in which I studied Dodger box scores
with an assiduity that I never granted to algebra or Latin.

Herman Wehmeier was a solid pro, but not a Hall of Fame quality pitcher. His
lifetime W-L was 92-108 and his cumulative ERA was 4.80. He made it into the
record books because he led the league in Walks Allowed three times, in Wild
Pitches twice, and in Hit Batsmen and Earned Runs Allowed once apiece.

When looking over his stats, one particular number stands out. Herm started 240
games in his career and pitched an astonishing 79 complete games. He finished
one out of every three games that he started! A remarkable achievement from
the perspective of 2022, is it not?  A new world of "closers," "set-up men,"
"openers" and precipitous yankings.

Among active pitchers, Max Scherzer, who might be my nominee for pitcher of
the decade, has, in 14 seasons so far, pitched just 12 complete games. In his
best year, 2015, he had just 4. Jacob deGrom, who is as talented a pitcher
as baseball can boast, has started 207 games in his career so far, just 4 of
which he has completed. The present leaders in complete games are veterans Adam
Wainwright with 28 and Justin Verlander with 27.

Robin Roberts, one of the best pitchers of Wehmeier's era, once pitched 28
complete games in a row, one of them lasting 17 innings. Lifetime, Roberts
started 609 games and completed 310.

Source: 2022/09/ocellated-turkey

Title: The Ocellated Turkey
Date: September 25, 2022

Turkeys, I was recently surprised to learn, come in two distinct species. The
familiar one is the "wild turkey", Meleagris gallopavo, the big bird that in
broods of twenty or so, wanders around my house and garden, eating seeds,
insects, acorns and apples and occasionally leaving behind a fancy feather or
two.

They're new to the neighborhood. Until about twenty years ago, I had not seen a
single turkey; now, they're everywhere. And bold. Or perhaps just indifferent to
me.

And then there's the second kind of North American turkey. It's rare -- found,
nowadays, only in the Yucatan peninsula. It's the "ocellated turkey,"  and it's
one heck of a fancy bird.

Source: 2022/09/rah-rah-cornell-football

Title: Rah-Rah
Date: September 28, 2022

Promenading last Friday on the semi-famous Boulder Mall, we stumbled upon a
Certifiably Big Event.

Ours is a college town where the three major religions are marijuana, massage,
and football. On the evening that precedes a Saturday home game, the Mall is
turned over to a football rally--a gigantic and noisy one. Have any of my
regular readers or stray internet pilgrims ever been to such an event?  It's
quite an echt American experience: the uniformed marching band -- all epaulets
and brass and drums, the perky cheerleaders, a float featuring sports heroes
of yore, the hundred gladiators themselves (all much taller and thicker than
ordinary human beings) along with chants and rousing speeches. Tons of school
spirit and not a shred of irony.

The next day, despite the ginned-up enthusiasm, our team was blown out by UCLA,
45-17.

Rallies are not my kind of event. I'm constitutionally allergic to rah-rah and
for the last couple of decades I've been boycotting football.

Why no more football for me? In truth, football was never my passion. I hardly
ever played the game -- only a little "two-hand touch" in the schoolyard, so
I'm not surrendering much by proscribing a sport that is a danger to everyone's
physical well-being. There are too many dreadful injuries, especially head
injuries. Too many retired players afflicted with dementia. A few days ago,
surfing the channels, I accidentally glanced at a few minutes of a NFL contest.
Even in that brief stretch, a cornerback was badly battered and carried by
stretcher into an on-field ambulance. To me, it looked like it could be a broken
neck. I'm sorry that I paused to watch; it will be along time before I do so
again.

And I've always been resistant to Rah-Rah. Rubs me wrong; always has, right from
the start.

The local mall rally caused me to remember my first days at Cornell, 66 years
ago. I was a most naive freshman (now "freshperson" or "first-year") and had not
a glimmer of an idea about college life -- none of my family or friends ever
having enjoyed such an experience. Completely at sea. My peers in the freshman
dorm insisted, you have to go to the rally. I had no idea what a rally was but
if going to college meant going to rallies, then why not? I knew no better and
tagged along with my new acquaintances. So there it was, just like last night on
the mall. The band, the cheerleaders, the athletes, the rah-rah exhortations.
One after another the speakers (were they coaches?), told us how hard we were
going to cheer tomorrow for dear old Cornell and victory. We sang Cornell songs,
the lyrics to which were handed to us on a mimeographed sheets of paper. It was
far too enthusiastic for me -- too patriotic I guess one might say. I was not
true to my school. How could I love Cornell or think fondly of my alma mater.
I had just arrived, for goodness sake, and hadn't even finished unpacking. The
insisted-upon emotion seemed contrived and artificial and I resented the pseudo-
nostalgia. I don't like being subsumed into a crowd. I respond negatively when
I'm exhorted to cheer or wave or sing. It all seems dangerously close to the
unthinking obedience of nationalist politics.

And then, next day, came the game itself. Dutifully I trudged to Schoellkopf to
watch our guys encounter Princeton. I remember nothing about the contest, not
even who won or lost. But I can still feel the cold September drizzle -- and I
know that I caught a stiff cold. In my four years in Ithaca, it was my first and
only football game.

I soon learned that Cornell had much to offer beyond the rah-rah. It took a year
or so, but eventually I found my people.

Source: 2022/10/tyrannosaurus-ted-williams-mongols-anemoia-

Title: Anemoia
Date: October 10, 2022

The premise of Riley Black's The Last Days of the Dinosaurs (New York, 2022)
is a most splendid one. Imagine, she proposes, that it is 66 million years ago
and dinosaurs are the monarchs of the earth. What was it like, in that era, to
be alive in, say, the steamy forests where Wyoming now lies -- a world in which
club-tailed ankylosaurs were tracked by tyrannosaurs while primitive mammals
scuttled in the ferny underbrush. Rich and strange, certainly. And then, how
was it all transformed on "the worst day in the history of the planet" when the
Chicxulub asteroid plowed into the Yucatan? One fine day, the dinosaurs were
triumphant; and then in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the six-mile-wide
asteroid crash lands and everything goes all kablooey -- the sure and firm-set
earth shakes, the atmosphere turns furnace hot, and acid rain and smoke and fire
and tsunamis snuff out 80 per cent of our planet's animal species.

It's a fabulous idea for a masterpiece of science writing, and consequently
I'm grieved to report that The Last Days of the Dinosaurs is a disappointing
book. It is loose and melodramatic and outrageously padded -- a thirty page
essay turned into a swollen three hundred page opus. It's much too pop; it's
insufficiently serious and therefore leaves poor frustrated me craving data
and detail rather than reiteration. Who could believe that the high drama of
Chicxulub could become quite so tedious? I put the blame on Ms. Black's literary
agent, who, I have no shadow of doubt, advised her to "turn your idea into a
book, and keep it easy -- not too technical -- you'll sell a lot more copies."

What a shame, because Black is well-informed and writes with intermittent flair.
She loves her reptiles, and in particular displays genuine warmth, almost
reverence, for every young person's favorite dinosaur, the tyrannosaurus rex. An
infatuation that lingers from her childhood, I suspect. I myself, not similarly
transfixed, might have supposed that T. Rex had been expelled from the Terrible
Lizard Hall of Fame sometime in the 1990s, when it came to be gospel that
the 60-foot tall monster was not a top-of-the-food-chain predator but merely
a snuffling scavenger. Was it not revealed to us that the creature's meager
brain was dwarfed by its olfactory bulbs, so that it could effortlessly detect
decaying flesh over the unbounded western landscapes? And was it not also agreed
that its puny forelegs were useless for pursuit or attack? Black will have
nothing of such paleontological revisionism. Her T. Rex is a hunter, lurking in
ambush to pounce and to crunch with one powerful bite the enormous protuberant
osteoderms that protected the stegosaurus spine. To me, the idea that a beast
as gigantic as a tyrannosaurus could conceal itself behind bush or boulder and
sneakily lunge at its prey seems totally ludicrous.

Black, bless her kindly heart, firmly embraces the unrevised T. Rex. Her loyalty
is transcendent. In a burst of psychological overkill, she describes her crush
on the dinosaur as an example of anemoia. And what, readers rightly ask, is
anemoia?  It's an unfamiliar word that describes a baffling concept. Upon
investigation,"anemoia" turns out to be a recent coinage, a "fire-new" word
(as WS, in LLL, calls such innovations). It's "a nostalgia for a time one has
never known," such as Black seems to feel about the years and days that preceded
Chicxulub. And here I must once again reveal my want of imagination. Anemoia,
however hard I labor to grasp the idea, is too subtle for my downright brain.
Isn't it the case that "nostalgia" is by definition a cherishing of something
in one's own personal history, as such a one as I might remember with warmth a
concert or a wedding or that long ago glorious day in which I, batting leadoff,
started the game with a triple to right field.

I can't quite fathom a nostalgia for something I've not known in my own person.
The emotion that Black describes I would call simple curiosity. I'm as intrigued
as the next guy about the past and I can certainly summon a yearning to have
been present at some great historical event, but I wouldn't call it anemoia.
For example, I might wish that I had been at Fenway on September 30, 1960, the
day that Ted Williams blasted a home run on his very last time at bat -- but I
wasn't there and it would be a falsehood to claim otherwise. [Full disclosure: I
was in attendance, just behind third base, the previous day, September 29, and
therefore missed the moment by a scant twenty-four hours.] Unlike Black, I'm
not anemoiac about the dinosaur-dominated world of the K-P boundary, but I have
other anemoiac -- as I've now redefined the word -- yearnings.

My most pressing and immediate wish would be to have joined the crowd at a
performance at the Globe Theatre in London, perhaps of Hamlet in 1599 or
Macbeth in 1606. Why? Because even though Shakespeare's works have been studied
microscopically for more than 400 years, no one really knows how those plays
originally looked or sounded. My suspicion is that they were far more foreign,
more strange, less realistic and more primitive than scholars recognize.
After all, the most brilliant play ever written, King Lear, was performed in
daylight and the actors had to project their voices to a crowd of 2000 people,
many of them shuffling about, gossiping, and cracking hazelnuts. No sets, no
curtains, no lighting, and no scenery to speak of. I'd guess that the cast
employed a style of dramaturgy closer to its medieval inheritance of allegorical
representation than we like to admit. Furthermore, I am convinced that if I were
present there at the actual Globe, I would discover an endless series of unknown
unknowns. Unimaginable unknowns, that would knock our anemoiac socks off. The
past is another country; they do things a heck of a lot differently there.

But wait! My dormant anemoia, now aroused, yearns to experience in my own person
other events in the past. Where else to indulge my wants? Certainly in Athens,
at a performance of a play by Sophocles -- which I can guarantee to be a hundred
times stranger than anything London could possibly offer.

But why only the arts?  Now that I think of it, I would love to take a gander
at forested Manhattan Island when Henry Hudson's Half Moon made its first
landfall. I could have talked to the Lenapes; tried to warn them about the
dangers that were coming down the pike. And there's much more. Just prior to
struggling through The Last Days of the Dinosaurs, I read Marie Favereau's
The Horde (2021), a most fascinating history of the Mongol civilization that
conquered and controlled the area from Hungary in the west to Korea in the east
during the 13th century and the first half of the 14th. Favereau's depiction of
the Mongols was novel and disorienting, essentially because I'm accustomed to
think about great empires as centered on a dominant imperial city -- Athens,
Rome, London. I believe that I understand a little of what life might have
been like in Rome; after all, I've read some of the ancient historians and I
know a bit about cities. I've even toured Pompeii, for goodness sake! But the
Mongols did not live in cities; they were not particularly literate, they were
unabashedly polygamous, animist, and almost entirely nomadic. It's a challenge
to imagine a "city" of a hundred thousand people in constant migratory motion.
When Mongol men went to war, which they seemed to do often and always, they
brought along the women and children, the cattle-drawn carts and wagons and
the felt tents along with their horses, goats and sheep. To spend time with a
wandering horde, an entirely unfamiliar form of civilization, and to try to
understand their mental world, would certainly challenge and enlarge my (and
your) conception of what it means to be a human being.

Favereau doesn't dwell on such speculations (she is more concerned with military
history than social or psychological matters) but nevertheless the ways in which
the migrants related to each other and to their environment had to be entirely
foreign to us mostly urban, post Age of Reason moderns. What was it like to be a
Mongol? Perhaps I feel this question personally because a recent examination of
my DNA tells me that I'm 1% Asian by genetic inheritance. I assume, naturally,
that like approximately 16,000,000 other people, I'm directly descended from
Mongol leader Chinggis (formerly Genghiz) Khan through one of his seven wives
or his innumerable concubines. Is it anemoia, a recognition of my kinship to
Grandpa Genghiz, that has produced in me, this morning, such a wildness in the
blood? Or is it the caffeine?

In actual fact, although I'm most curious about Mongol life, I don't think
that I would have made a good nomad. In the first place, I suffer from serious
directional disabilities and would no doubt promptly misplace myself on the vast
and featureless Eurasian steppe; and secondly, I lack enthusiasm for subsisting
on kumis, the fermented mare's milk which was the staple of the Mongol diet.

Let me now admit that while I indulge some pseudo-anemoia for my distant Mongol
forebears, I feel much closer to my more recent Ukrainian shtetl ancestors. If
I could be plopped down in the western Ukraine, I might be able to absorb the
texture of life in Staroconstantinov in 1895, just before brave Isaiah and Eta
set out for America.  As things stand, I know almost nothing of any importance
about the lives of my eastern European ancestors. How did these resilient folks
survive centuries, millennia,  of dearth, disease and pogroms? What did they
eat? Where did they sleep? What, indeed, did they do for "fun," if they had
any conception of fun? What did they read? How did the sexes relate to each
other? How did they find privacy? And most significantly: how seriously did they
embrace that narrow, all-encompassing and demanding religion?

A nineteenth-century shtetl seems impossibly foreign and faraway, but in the
longer time frame, it's actually very recent. The most distant past that we can
readily imagine is when the archeological record begins to appear -- perhaps
five thousand year ago. But my and your fully human ancestors migrated from the
Olduvai Gorge some 60,000 years ago, which leaves approximately 55,000 years
without any data at all -- or at least nothing beyond the merest occasional
trace. For these many millennia our forbears lived in world where there were no
cities, no writing, no pottery, no weaving, no domesticated plants or animals,
no metals, no wheels and therefore no vehicles -- only stone hand axes and
later spears and much later still bows and arrows. Two thousand five hundred
precarious generations of foraging! I would like to see for myself how our
common ancestors managed to survive when the gigantic short-faced bear competed
for the cave and the terrifying European lion lurked in the shadows. I suspect
also that the most dangerous predator our g g g... grandfathers faced was the
tribe next door -- otherwise why would we have inherited such hostility to
people who look or act just slightly differently than ourselves. Wouldn't it be
profoundly anemoiac to join a family of our mutual forebears for a week or two
and participate with them as they went about their lives?

What a treasure-trove of unknown unknowns would we confront!

Source: 2022/10/insightful-comment

Title: Insightful Comment
Date: October 21, 2022

Before I forget, I would like to put on the record the most memorable student
sentence that I received during my entire 50+ years of teaching literature: 
"After Gregor Samsa was transformed into a large insect, his lifestyle changed."

Source: 2022/10/nostalgia-flatbush-shallow

Title: Nostalgia
Date: October 24, 2022

The word "nostalgia" has a curious history. It was coined in the late 17th
century by attaching Greek άλγος (algos - pain) to νόστος (nostos
-homecoming). Originally, nostalgia carried a strongly negative signification:
"intense homesickness" -- "the depressing symptoms...  that arise in persons
when they are seized with a longing to return to their home and friends." Then,
for reasons that are not on the record, sometime during the first part of the
last century, the meaning of nostalgia shifted and became much more positive.
It's now a good word: "a wistful yearning for the past." A useful word.

Nostalgia is a familiar phenomena that all can recognize: the savoring of a
pleasant memory from earlier in our lives. It seems that nostalgia contains
within it a bias toward or even a falsification of the past. It's implicit in
nostalgia that things were better "back then." For example: I am a member of
a Facebook group called My Flatbush House from Years Ago. Its contributors
routinely idealize their childhoods. Reading their posts, you'd think that
the Flatbush of our youth was if not the the classical Golden Age at least
the Garden of Eden. "I loved my Brooklyn childhood." "I wouldn’t trade my
childhood for anything." "I grew up in the 40s and 50s! We were so lucky to have
known those days." "Much simpler times, more real and human-sized." "There was
no fear, everybody felt safe; we played out in the streets, unsupervised, until
it was suppertime." "We walked to and from school in every weather." "Going out
meant playing games in the street." "I feel so blessed to have lived such a
wonderful free life." "The fragrance of roses was everywhere in July (why don't
roses have perfume anymore?)"

"Ou sont les neiges d'antan?"  "Those were the days, my friend,/ We thought
they'd never end." "Rocky Top you'll always be/ Home sweet home to me."

Of course I also remember the good times, but I can't embrace such unalloyed,
uncritical celebrations. Yes, I can savor some pleasant moments in my seventy-
years-ago life. But I also recall that the 1950s was the era of "juvenile
delinquents" and gang wars, back alley abortions, ethnic strife, "broken homes,"
heroin, segregation, overcrowded chaotic schools, imminent nuclear holocaust
and "take cover" drills, McCarthyism, polio, the Korean War, Stalin, and Walter
O'Malley.

It's fascinating that the English language does not have a word for an antonym
of nostalgia. One of my sources suggests "cynicism." But I'm not a cynic;  I'm
an intermittent and realistic anti-nostalgist.

And why, when I lie insomniac (as is my too-frequent custom), do I not savor the
odor of those ever-perfumed Coney Island Avenue hybrid tea roses but instead am
tormented by nightmares of fear, humiliation, awkwardness, embarrassment and
loneliness. My childhood was pretty good one, thanks to my attentive parents. So
why do I obsess about the bad times? Have I gone full curmudgeon? Or am I simply
more honest than my cohort of Flatbush contemporaries?

In The Second Part of Henry the Fourth, Shakespeare explores nostalgia and its
opposite. Two old guys, Shallow and Silence, reminisce.

SHALLOW: I was once of Clement's Inn, where I think they will talk of mad hallow
Syet.

SILENCE: You were called 'lusty Shallow" then, cousin...

SHALLOW: On that very same day did I fight with on Samson Stockfish, a
fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, jesu, the mad days that I have spent. And to
see how many of my old acquaintance are now dead.

SILENCE:  We shall all follow, cousin...

SHALLOW:  Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living yet?

SILENCE: Dead, sir.

SHALLOW: Jesu, jesu, dead. He drew a good bow; and dead. He shot a fine
shot...  And is Jane Nightwork alive?...  Nay, she must be old; she cannot
choose but be old; certain she's old, and had Robin Nightwork by old Nightwork
before I came to Clement's Inn.

SILENCE:  That's fifty-five years since.

And then comes the correction, the anti-nostalgist.

FALSTAFF:  Lord, lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This
same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of his
youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbull Street;  and every third word
a lie.... He was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey,... And
now is this vice's dagger become a squire and talks as familiarly of John o'
Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him, and I'll be sworn he never saw him
but once in the tilt-yard, and then he burst his head for crowding among the
marshal's men.

And on and on, at great amusing length.

Shallow and Silence indulge their nostalgia;  Falstaff sees thing differently,
but whether he is a realist, a cynic or a curmudgeon is open to interpretation.

Source: 2022/10/soccer-boulder

Title: Where My Grandchildren Play Soccer
Date: October 25, 2022

Stunning, is it not? Just at the west side of our fair city, set against
the first manifestations of the Front Range. Six well-tended fields, scores
of players and many, many parents and grandparents (among them me, on sunny
Saturday mornings). I can't imagine a more idyllic and peaceful scene.

Do Luke and Caleb and Asher appreciate the glory of their situation? Why should
they, after all? It's what they've always known; they take it for granted that
soccer should be played in such lovely and prosperous surroundings. Later on,
they'll come to know more about the circumstances of less fortunate people.

It's hard for me not to compare Foothills Community Park with the P S 217
schoolyard of my own childhood. Ours was a representative "playground," no
better or worse than would be found in any other middle-class or working class
neighborhood. No grass, just solid concrete from one chain-link fence to the
other. It was where we ran races, played "two-hand touch," flipped baseball
cards, played punchball, stickball, basketball, softball, boxball, box baseball,
handball, and any other game that could be improvised with a pink spaldeen.
There were, as I remember, four basketball backboards and rims, arranged as two
full courts. But one of the backboards was missing, the pole having disappeared
many years ago and never replaced. Another of the poles had been set in the
ground at an angle of perhaps 80 degrees and never corrected. It was useless.
And then the two other baskets, on the Newkirk Avenue side, were set in ground
that was not level, so that the basket was 9' 6" or so if you shot from the left
side and 10" 6" on the right. Maybe this was a benefit; it helped us master
trigonometry.

The P S 217 schoolyard was crowded. Various sports overlapped and shared the
fields. If you were playing basketball, you had to watch out for line drives off
the bat of one of the softball players. This taught us to be alert.

I did not feel at all deprived or "underprivileged" -- it was life as I knew it
-- but I'm mighty glad that my grandchildren enjoy the luxury of grass and space
and peace. In the words of the great Sophie Tucker, "I've been rich and I've
been poor, and, believe me, rich is better."

Source: 2022/11/amnesia-on-film-the-majestic-2001

Title: Amnesia on Film:  The Majestic (2001)
Date: November 02, 2022

Alas and alack, I've now known far too many folks who have endured serious
memory problems. As a consequence, I seem to have developed an interest in
amnesia not only in real life but also in fiction and film. There are many
many books on the subject and Wiki offers an astonishing list of 234 Hollywood
amnesia films -- some of which, judging by their titles, do not appeal to my
mature taste and which I promise never to view -- including such not doubt
remarkable productions such as Raft of the Dead, Zebraman 2: Attack on Zebra
City, and A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon.

I sometimes imagine that there are fewer actual cases of loss of memory than
there are films on the subject.

Literary amnesia is a recent obsession; while the ancients had their Lethe, the
river of forgetfulness, I can't recall amnesiacs wandering lost around Athens or
Rome. Shakespeare never wrote an amnesia play, though at one point Lear, who's
had a rough go of it, asks "Who is it that can tell me who I am?"

I suppose that we moderns put amnesia front and center because we are concerned
with the integrity and the continuity of the self. Loss of memory threatens us;
no memory, no identity. But let us not forget that amnesia is a cheap and easy
all-purpose convenient and superficial no sweat plot device. The formula: loss
of memory = mystery; restoration of memory =  anagnorisis. Very little thinking
required.

The Majestic is an eccentric unsatisfying fairy tale that provides the usual car
crashes but also lost love, the FBI, HUAC, and an art deco movie theater -- all
in the Capraesque context of small-town standards versus big-city corruption.
Pete Appleton, played by an uncharacteristically subdued and expressionless Jim
Carrey, falls into what is depicted as a total global amnesia. He lacks the
least glimmer of his past life. In "real life," any human forced to cope with
such an experience would suffer from anxiety, shock, disorientation, fear, and
worry -- but not so in this slice of hollywoodiana. Amnesiac Pete is calm and
patient, because he is rooted not in our communal vale of woe but in a movie
tradition where amnesia is ordinary and effortless. Don't worry, folks, he'll
recover his memory by the last reel. No big deal. And he does.

Once again, amnesia is a disease like none other.

Source: 2022/11/worlds-ugliest-building

Title: World's Ugliest Building
Date: November 04, 2022

The world's ugliest building, or at minimum a top competitor for the title, is
located just a block or so down the street from our present abode. Too damn
close, in fact, because it broadcasts its miasma of aesthetic gloom directly at
me. It's a large ungainly brick cube -- windowless, characterless, featureless,
probably designed by an untalented deadwood kind of guy who drew his inspiration
from a childhood of toying with Legos. "A doctor can bury his mistakes", said
Frank Lloyd Wright many years ago, "but an architect can only advise his clients
to plant vines." Vines is what this shameless structure needs -- thick ropes of
kudzu and lianas, whole Jurassic jungles of them -- but no such luck.

It's a CenturyLink building nowadays, but for what purpose it was originally
created is unknown to me. CenturyLink is an "internet provider." No doubt its
insides are more beautiful than its outside. How strange! Magnificent images and
lovely turns of phrase, unknown and invisible to its neighbors, portal in and
portal out!

I can't get a good picture of the entire building, but, please, take a good luck
at this street-side ornament:

Source: 2022/11/reading-obituaries

Title: Obits
Date: November 13, 2022

Like many of my peers, I've lately taken to reading the obituaries. When I was
a youthful fellow, I took pleasure in announcements of births and weddings and
anniversaries. No longer, alas; nowadays it's nothing but deaths. Reading about
the departed is not a habit of which I'm particularly proud. It's an unsavory
fixation upon the newly dead -- and is slightly ghoulish to boot. Yet daily
checking of the obits is not without a positive side: often it's exhilarating
to read about those amazing folks who have survived wars, dictatorships,
displacement, injury, and disease to live accomplished and joyful lives.
Obituaries are confusing.

It's not that I search out the obits -- they intrude upon me willy-nilly, like
it or not.

For one, there's the New York Times which every day memorializes a couple
or a dozen famous persons -- some of them people of my exact age cohort --
who have made a mark, for good or ill, in this our shared life. How does one
properly respond to such departures?  With empathy, certainly. But also, not
infrequently, with a touch of reluctant (and embarrassing) survivor-superiority.

I must admit that I'm frequently dazzled by these eminent people's list of
accomplishments, even if I haven't the least clue about exactly what they have
achieved. My own life has been, it would seem, so dominated by hearth and home,
so narrow and provincial that I cannot always appreciate the eulogized. Often
they have distinguished themselves in areas of expertise that have completely
passed me by: computer technologists who have created portals and platforms that
will always lie beyond my ken, physicists who have shed light (incomprehensible
to me) on dark mysteries, superstar rappers, mvp's in sports that I didn't know
existed, billionaire entrepreneurs with their 35,000 sq. ft. homes and their
stupendous megayachts, generals and spies, etc., etc., etc. It's astonishing how
little these famous folk have touched me; how little overlap there is between
their worlds and mine. Clearly, I've inhabited an impermeable bubble.

If so, why do I care, why do I read their obits, why do I bother to applaud or
(secretly and guiltily) pooh-pooh their contributions?

But hey, I can't blame it all on the Times. Every second month, I receive
an e-mail notice from the college that I attended, back there in the 50s,
that lists the recent deaths of my classmates. Only a few years ago, it was
a trickle, now it's a flood. While nothing forces me to open the electronic
envelope, nevertheless, I do so, "attracted" as David Copperfield once said
about Uriah Heep, "in very repulsion." Nor must I read the obituaries of members
of the graduate school through which I slipped, barely noticed, sixty-years ago.
Do I remember these people? Rarely, even despite occasional parallels in our
careers. In addition, I follow the obituaries in the local Daily Camera. People
I know, or, given my fifty-year residence in this fair city, those to whom I am
connected by a couple or three degrees of separation. Sometimes I am shocked
by the death of a person whom I hadn't heard was ill, or who died suddenly in
a bicycle crash or a fall from a step stool. Such revelations deeply disturb
a Sunday morning. And yet, is it so horribly wrong for me to congratulate
myself that it was not I but that other guy who was mowed down by a speeding
truck on Canyon Boulevard? (I had just crossed at that same spot a day before,
uneventfully. Luck of the draw!)

Does it matter that the obits that I read are not truly representative of
my contemporaries? They are accounts of people who have made something of
themselves, lived useful and noteworthy lives. I can't help thinking about the
others: the ones who slunk off the planet quietly -- those who were drunkards or
druggies, or who were seduced by some weird religious cult and disappeared into
the desert, or those who gave up the struggle and took their own lives, or those
who retreated. along with their six scrawny cats, to a dirty SRO on the upper
West Side (except when they venture to the street to harangue passers-by with
their idiosyncratic religious theories).

Even the obits that do come to my notice don't tell the whole story. They're
curricula vitae that 99% of the time are entirely laudatory. The ancient tag
"de mortuis nihil nisi bonum" is rigorously honored. The notices don't state
what everyone knows -- that the dearly departed was a notorious skinflint
who squeezed the last nickel from his tenants and his employees, stiffed his
partners, and regularly harassed his former friends with nuisance suits. They
fail to mention that an apparently upstanding citizen was also a neglectful
father who eventually ran off with his peroxided mistress and a Harley, or that
he was known to the neighbors as the guy who poisoned the Labrador retriever of
that nice elderly couple down the street. Or who was fired because he showed up
plastered once too often. Sometimes it's what's left out that's most revelatory.
Obits should be read with care; I don't always remember to do so.

But to tell truth it's not the obituaries themselves that bother me --it's my
own ambivalence and confusion. Why the fascination with obits? Is it the same
impulse that causes commuters to stop and stare at the wreck on the highway?
Could it be that I enjoy, genuinely enjoy, reading about the deaths of my fellow
creatures? And if I do so, what sort of morally defective person am I?  Do I
suffer from an incurable case of schadenfreude -- a delight in the misfortunes
of others? Or is it even worse -- mere undiluted gloating? For truly, I am
forced to admit, there is something almost triumphant about reading an obit.
"He's dead, but I'm alive." How pathetic and reprehensible a feeling -- and
how transitory!  When I am in a generous mood, I know that when I read an
obituary, I daren't gloat, but should rather mourn the common fate of all of us
poor fragile mortals. "Death is certain, sayeth the Psalmist." "No man is an
island entire of himself." Although I might gloat today, tomorrow I too will
be as dead as a doornail. Another bucket, mine, will be kicked. And yet I do
not always experience the fellow-feeling that I would like to admire in myself.
If I'm not a bad person, I'm certainly not always a good one. No question but
there's a chasm between what I feel and what I am convinced that I should feel.

Some obituaries present special problems. For example, I am immediately put
off when the the obituary begins with the foolish new age euphemism, "he
transitioned.... "  Such a phrase hardens my heart, I'm sorry to admit. Let's
face it; he didn't "transition." He died. But I'm equally saddened by the
obituary that announces that "he went to live with the Lord." Such pathetic
self-deception.

But the hardest moral problem for me occurs when I come upon the obituary of a
person I genuinely disliked. There aren't many of them; I'm not a hater. But
still, it's very difficult for me to find genuine empathy for someone I truly
loathed. It's wrong for me to rub my hands in triumphant glee because that nasty
s. o. b. is gone forever? I would prefer not to be the kind of person who dances
on graves.

Source: 2022/11/suicides

Title: My Suicides
Date: November 20, 2022

I seem to have plowed a path of destruction, suicide-wise, in my earlier years.

In 1958, I studied "intermediate algebra" with a cheerful, well-regarded
teacher named Ruth B. White. One Monday morning, she wrote her new name on the
blackboard; she was no longer Mrs. White; she was now Mrs. White-Green. Her
supportive students, I remember, applauded enthusiastically. But just as the
semester ended and we pupils moved on to trigonometry, newlywed Mrs. White-
Green, sadly and incomprehensibly, took her own life. What a shock and puzzle
for a gawky innocent Flatbush "yoot." Why, I asked myself, should re-marriage
lead so suddenly to suicide (if indeed the two events were at all related)? To
me, this tragic occurrence was an early indication that human psychology was a
heck of a lot more mysterious than cocooned me had imagined. And then, a few
years later, in the spring semester of my second year in college, I enrolled
for a course in medieval history with the very distinguished Professor Theodore
Maroon. Just a few months after the class concluded, Professor Maroon destroyed
himself. Moreover, the very next year, I surveyed early American literature in
a course taught by Professor Stephen Emerson Black, who, the following summer,
attached a hose to the car exhaust, shut the garage doors, and put an end to his
existence.

I need to reassure myself that it was only a few, not all, of my many teachers
who pulled the trigger after trying to educate me. Nevertheless, something of
a pattern emerged. The trajectory continued in 1960, when, two months after he
officiated at our wedding, cigar-chomping Rabbi Herschel Gray walked into Lake
Yahnundasis in order to drown himself. Why? I had nary a clue; still don't, in
fact.

Several other people with whom I've crossed paths have also chosen to leave life
behind. I remember dour Alfredo Naranja, a college acquaintance from Costa Rica
or perhaps Panama. He graduated from Cornell, returned home, and immediately
shot himself. I also remember handsome fair-haired Stanley Brown. He was a
classmate at EHHS; the two of us studied four years of Latin in the same half-
empty schoolrooms. He was not a close friend, though I clearly recall that we
occasionally trudged home from school together. Stanley went on to Columbia,
where, I was later informed, he graduated first in his class, which is no mean
achievement. I wasn't surprised -- he was smart and extremely serious about
schoolwork. Stanley then proceeded to Harvard Medical School. Cambridge was my
home at that time as well and although our paths had not crossed in four or
five years, Stanley telephoned me "out of the blue," as they say, and engaged
me in conversations that were longer than I wished. I realize now that I was
not as hospitable to him as I might have been. He was lonesome, I think. And
then came the news that he had killed himself. I now wish that I had been more
cordial -- but how was I to know that he was in such mortal pain? The story has
a coda: Stanley's grandparents owned a delicatessen on Ditmas Avenue between
East 7th and East 8th. Some years after the suicide, I stopped in at the store
for a salami sandwich (or something) and encountered the diminutive elderly
storekeepers -- a sad, crushed couple. I knew, or thought I knew, that they were
mourning the death of their promising grandchild. Was it my imagination, or was
my intuition correct?

And then in graduate school there was Arthur Blue. Arthur was a serious poet
and budding scholar. I was a close enough friend that I was invited to his
Episcopal wedding in, I think, Wellesley, Massachusetts, where, for the first
time in my life, ceremonious kneeling was required of me. Arthur and I kept up
an intermittent correspondence after I moved to New York and he to Seattle. I
remember congratulating him on the births of his two daughters. But then one
December, I received an end-of-the-year card from Barbara Scarlet-Blue, which
contained a most memorable sentence: "Of course you have heard of Arthur's
suicide." Well, no, I hadn't. I was later informed that Arthur had turned on
the gas at his summer house on Vachon Island, where he had been on a solitary
vacation. Barbara offered no theory to account for Arthur's act, but now,
fifty years later, I suspect, without evidence, that he had sexual identity
problems with which he could not cope. If so, he would be another casualty of
the commonplace bigotry of that era. Arthur's death is a suicide to which I am
not reconciled, and never will be.

And I must also remember Mary Crimson, wife of famous Shakespearean scholar
Reginald Crimson, who, depressed, slit her wrists in the bath. It was an
absolutely devastating act for Reg and his many friends and admirers.

And then there are the young people, the next generation, who made irreversible
decisions when they were far too young to do so. There's the horrible story of
Carol Pink, a daughter of friends, who jumped off a balcony in Lincoln Towers
in Manhattan and landed, twenty stories below, on the roof of a yellow taxi.
Apparently, she tried to grab her brother and pull him down with her, but
thankfully she did not succeed. And Alice Magenta, daughter of Hill neighbors,
who killed herself in her late teens, a disaster made more excruciating because
her elder half-brother had done the same deed few years before. Their parents
never recovered from the twin losses; but why should they?  Another young
person was twenty-two year old Francesca Crimson, the daughter of a pair of
famous artists and herself a promising photographer; another plunge from the
roof of a tall building. And also, the teen son of my longtime colleague Richard
Purple, who did himself in with drugs, though his religious family chose to
believe, against all the evidence, that it was an accidental overdose.

I respect suicides, even when I don't understand them, because I believe that
everyone has a right to do what they want with their own selves. But I am
saddened beyond ordinary sadness when very young people take their own lives.
If an adolescent or twenty-something boy or girl told me that they had suicidal
thoughts, I would say "almost everyone has a few bad years; almost everyone
is miserable during adolescence. But almost every one of these unhappy beings
turns out to live a productive, useful and essentially happy life. Give it a few
years; don't make a precipitous decision. Hold on; hang tough; trust me, it's
going to get better."

Source: 2022/11/trullo

Title: Another Astonishing Feat of Memory
Date: November 27, 2022

I've arrived at the age in which even a momentary lapse of memory is worrisome.
Have I at last begun the ineluctable descent into senility?

But then there's the contrary. When I happen to dredge up some bit of buried
knowledge, I experience a rush of triumph. I feel it as evidence that I've put
off the inevitable for another couple of weeks -- perhaps even months. And I
preen and strut shamelessly. I become unbearable.

At the Phillips, yesterday, we came upon a painting by Giuseppe De Nittis called
"Spring" (there's a pretty poor reproduction of it above). I glanced at the
picture, and in a flash, without hesitation, announced, "that's a trullo in the
left distance."  And I was correct -- my assertion confirmed by the scholarly
description on the accompanying wall plaque.

What is a trullo?  It's a building, obviously, a kind of drystone architecture,
common in Apulia, usually whitewashed and with a conical roof, often constructed
as a temporary shelter for shepherds and other agricultural workers and
occasionally for long term occupancy.

But how does a Flatbush yoot recognize and immediately name a trullo at first
glance?  I could be coy and say something like, "Oh, who doesn't know about
trulli?" and leave my friends baffled and dazzled by my prodigious memory.

But of course that would not be the full story.

Some seven or eight years ago, as turisti, we visited an Italian village called
Alberobello in Apulia in southern Italy. Here's a picture:

Source: 2022/12/young-philadelphians-paul-newman

Title: What We Read in the 1950s: The Philadelphian (1956)
Date: December 04, 2022

Richard Powell's novel The Philadelphian has not worn well. It was a best-seller
in 1956 and was made into a "blockbuster" film, starring Paul Newman, in 1959.
We watched the movie (called, for some reason, The Young Philadelphians) on TCM
and I was sufficiently intrigued that I ordered up the long-forgotten novel
through our blessedly-efficient Interlibrary Loan. Gosh, what a disappointment!
The Philadelphian is a pot-boiler, I'm afraid, very mid-century. It's got it all
-- three-generations of rags to riches, heroic army service, blighted romance
and cheesy sex, and a contrived climactic courtroom showdown. Powell's prose is
flat, unstylish, at its best "journalistic," but marred by flights of tough-guy
pseudo-Hammettian or Chandleresque prose: "He came slowly downstairs from the
bedroom, with the pulse of blood hammering inside his skull like a rivet gun";
"Her head felt like a boiling tea kettle, and her thoughts kept escaping from
it like steam"; "The applause had been a cheer for the underdog. Later it had
developed that a wolf was romping around in underdog's clothing". Frankly, I'm
surprised that the novel achieved such popularity in the years of my youth.
Sorry to say but it's a trashy piece of writing.

The film is a bit better; more honest and more disciplined, hugely reliant on
Paul Newman's youthful charisma.

Source: 2022/12/more-words-new-to-me

Title: More Words New to Me
Date: December 05, 2022

Calipash is the "gelatinous greenish material found underneath the upper half
of a turtle's shell." Perhaps this word is well known to turtle-fanciers, but
it's brand new to me. Calipash is "esteemed as a delicacy" but should not be
confused with calipee, which is a fatty gelatinous light-yellow substance
found immediately above the turtle's lower shell. Equally delectable, so say
connoisseurs. Here's a dish of mixed calipash and calipee. I confess that it
does not look delectable to me. Looks repellent, in fact, but each to his own.

Calipash could be served with pilaus, a Kenya spicey rice dish. One might, or
might not, add beeswing to the menu. Beeswing is the "filmy translucent crust"
that grows on port that has been bottle-aged.

Zenana is a word of Persian origin which refers to the part of a large house
reserved exclusively for women; it is therefore equivalent to harem.  Here's a
picture of a rich gentleman visiting a zenana.

Source: 2022/12/proverbs-for-a-latter-day

Title: Proverbs for a Latter Day
Date: December 05, 2022

You can take the boy out of Brooklyn, but you can't take the Brooklyn out of the
boy.  (Traditional)

The more you hold a baby in the first year, the less you have to hold it later
on. (Dr. Catherine Lodyjenski, pediatrician.)

Don't skate to where the puck is; skate to where it's going to be.  (Wayne
Gretzky)

Adolescence is not for sissies.  (EHP)

You can't coach seven feet. (Origin unknown)

Enough is as good as a feast.  (Traditional)

Enough is as good as a feast, and sometimes better.  (EHP)

"Both" is always an option.  (KM)

Everyone has a plan until I punch him in the mouth. (Mike Tyson)

Don't look back; someone might be gaining on you.  (Satchel Paige)

If you lose your man, go directly to the basket.  (Emanuel P.)

The only people who idealize the past are those who know nothing about it. 
(EHP)

The longer something has been believed by mankind, the less likely it is to be
true.  (EHP)

No one know what's going on between two people, even if you're one of them. 
(EHP)

What's sauce for the goose is not necessarily sauce for the gander.  (EHP)

The secret of life is to turn routines into rituals.  (Origin unknown)

Nothing ever happens until it happens.  (EHP)

Babies rewire the parental brain. (EHP)

Everything made of wood was once a tree. (Origin unknown)

Your father is an enigma who takes a lifetime to decipher. (Origin unknown)

Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed
to accept a favor from a friend.  (Emanuel P.)

Religion: my prince of peace can beat up your prince of peace.  (LERM)

No one owns anything;  the most you can say is that you have a lifetime
lease.  (Emanuel P.)

You should be at least as polite to a wife or husband as to a person you meet on
the street. (EHP)

Old age is not for sissies.  (Bette Davis)

You can't make old friends. (EHP)

You're immortal until the moment you die. (EHP)

There are no chocolate ice cream cones in the next world.  (LERM)

Source: 2022/12/words-kurgan-tarboosh

Title: A Few More Unusual Words New to Me
Date: December 07, 2022

A matamata is a species of turtle found in South America. It's odd looking, even
for a turtle.

Source: 2022/12/turtles-reincarnation

Title: Turtles and Metempsychosis
Date: December 13, 2022

I would not want to be reincarnated as a turtle. Not at all.

Should it happen that I were to be reincarnated, I would prefer to return as one
of those great sea birds -- the Wandering Albatross or the Great Frigatebird 
or the Northern Fulmar -- that cruise for hundreds of miles over the Pacific
-- soaring effortlessly, joyriding the thermals, blissfully savoring the salt
spray at dawn and dusk. It would be glorious -- although not entirely without
a downside, because if I were such a bird I would have to sustain myself on a
repulsive sushi diet of raw fish. Yeesh.

But to live the next or a subsequent life as a turtle -- what a grim unpleasant
prospect! Turtles do not soar; they're earthbound, and they move so slowly that
they're almost immobile. At very best, they slog or plod. It's not that they're
unsuccessful in their own way; after all, they've been around for 200 million
years. Generations, therefore, have plod, have plod, have plod. But is there a
creature on earth whose bodily configuration is more limiting, more dictatorial?
Turtles spend a lifetime schlepping carapace and plastron up and down hills or
over the desert sands. How can an animal constrained to eternally lug an outsize
ponderous shell experience any kind of freedom or joy?

Besides, turtles are ridiculously ugly.

Source: 2022/12/newkirk-theater-flatbush

Title: Neighborhood Movie Theaters
Date: December 19, 2022

When I was an unadventurous Flatbush "yoot" back there in the 1950s, there
were only two movie theaters that mattered: the Leader and the Kent, both
on Coney Island Avenue, and both within an easy walk. The Leader was closer
to my East 9 Street home and it was there that I spent many a rainy weekend
afternoon ostensibly watching a double feature while sprinting in the aisles,
hurling popcorn at the kids who were down in front, and dodging the "matron."
The Kent was more of an expedition but still less than a quarter of a mile
away. I once saw a show there with my father (Bad Day at Black Rock (1955)],
memorable because it was the only time I ever went to the movies with him -- he
was no frivolous moviegoer. In my childish innocence, I assumed that both the
Leader and the Kent had been in place since time immemorial and that moviegoing
began and ended with these two theaters. They were like mountains and rivers,
permanent features of the landscape (or, rather, cityscape). I was very wrong.
All is flux and movie theaters come and go. According to that most valuable
resource, Cinema Treasures, over 27,000 cinemas in the United States have been
closed or demolished, with many more endangered -- killed in the 1930s by the
Depression and then in my time by the TV and DVDs and discs and streaming and
covid. And also by self-inflicted wounds -- the studios and independents have
failed to produce a regular supply of films for grownups and instead fill the
shopping mall screens with CGI effects and infantile fantasies and "franchises."
Nevertheless, the Kent is still in business, as a small-screen "art" theater,
but the Leader long ago devolved into a bowling alley -- the Leader Lanes.
Later it became a pharmacy. I don't know what has become of it lately; probably
something dreadful.

There's much more to the story than the Leader and the Kent. In my youth, there
was also the Culver Theater, the outside appearance of which I knew very well
but never the interior. The Culver was located at the corner of 18th Avenue and
McDonald, just a block away from the McDonald Avenue branch of the Brooklyn
Public Library, where I shelved books for 75 cents an hour all through my
Erasmus Hall years.

The Culver was adjacent to and almost under the Culver Local, the "El" or
elevated subway, that ran along McDonald (formerly Gravesend) Avenue. ("Elevated
subway", by the way, is one of the most fabulous unappreciated oxymora of
our time). The Culver was a big spacious theatre that sat 1445 people. I
imagine that most of the paying customers had a tough time catching the dialog
when a train rumbled by. I wish I could identify what film was playing when
this picture was snapped, but alas the image is blurred. The styles of the
automobiles suggest a date in the late 1930s. The Culver has long disappeared
and nowadays the most prosperous commercial venture on its former block is the
Tashkent Supermarket.

Then there was the Beverly, located at the intersection of Church Avenue and
East 2 Street, just a few blocks from Erasmus Hall High School at Church and
Flatbush.

On the day of this photo, the Beverly was showing Away All Boats, a 1956 war
drama featuring Jeff Chandler, but as we all know, Jeff was in fact Erasmus
alumnus Ira Grossel. The movie in which he starred was playing just down the way
from his old high school -- a marvelous serendipitous coincidence. The Beverly's
second feature, Raw Edge, was a western with Rory Calhoun and Yvonne DeCarlo.
Did I plunk down my quarter to watch a war movie and a western? It was certainly
the kind of programming that would have attracted my seventeen-year-old self. I
have no recollection of either feature but I am able to bring to mind an image
of young lovely Yvonne DeCarlo. The Beverly operated from 1920 to 1981 and has
since, sadly, been transformed into a T-Mobile showroom.

There was also the Rialto

at the corner of Cortelyou Road and Flatbush Avenue. It was directly on my route
as I walked to Erasmus Hall High School with Steve Lewin five times a week
between 1952 to 1956. It was also a block or two from the Sears, Roebuck store,
where in the summer of 1956, I handed out parking tickets to drivers entering
the Sears lot. Their cars looked a lot like the ones in this picture. Last I
heard, the Rialto had transmogrified into the Cortelyou Road Church of God -- a
sorry fate.

In addition to the theaters that I attended or might have attended in the days
of my youth, there were another bunch that had already shut up shop. The most
prominent was the Newkirk Theater on East 16th Street -- and therefore only
five or six blocks from P S 217. It stood just across from Newkirk Plaza, the
shopping center that also housed an express stop on the BMT line. The Newkirk
started life as the TNF, named after the initials of its trio of builders. It
might have been, originally, a legitimate theater.

In 1928 it reopened as a cinema with a performance My Best Girl with Mary
Pickford (who lived for a while with Doug F. at 1320 Ditmas). It closed in
1940 and has since been demolished. It must have been quite an ornament to the
neighborhood, but I rode my bicycle on that street many times and never detected
the least sign that there had once been a handsome theater there. I wonder
also what became of the grand Robert Morton organ that accompanied the silent
films. Later the Newkirk acquired a proper movie marquee as can be seen in this
fragment of an image.

The Newkirk was gone for good in 1940.

Then there was the Dorchester, a the corner of Dorchester and Coney Island
Avenue. Here's how its building appeared a few years ago:

Source: 2022/12/what-i-read-2022

Title: Books I Read, 2022
Date: December 30, 2022

This year's list is incomplete. During the Vermont summer, I neglected to keep
good records. My porous brain can't bring to mind all I read in June, July,
August, and September. In addition, it's a list of books only, so no periodicals
(New Yorker, New York Review of Books), Northern Forests) or newspapers.

Abdulrazak Gurnah, The Last Gift; Daniel Fuchs, Williamsburg Summer; L. J.
Davis; A Meaningful Life;  Marc David Baer, The Ottomans, Jonathan Lethem,
Motherless Brooklyn; J.M. Quigley, Lolita in the Afterlife; Daniel Fuchs,
Homage to Blenholt; A J Rich, The Hand that Feeds You;  Alfred Kazin, Walker
in the City; Jonathan Lethem, Fortress of Solitude; Colm Toibin, Brooklyn; Paul
Auster, The Brooklyn Follies;  Emily Gould, Friendship; James Agee, Brooklyn
Is; Jenny Offill, Department of Speculation; Ursula Parrott, Ex-Wife; Kyle
Harper, Plagues Upon the Earth; Adelle Waldman, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel
P.; James McBride, The Color of Water; Jennifer Egan, Manhattan Beach; R. D.
Rosen, Tough Luck; David Crystal, The Story of English; Seth Lerer, Inventing
English; Paul Auster, Sunset Park; Richard Fortey, Fossils; Jay Neugeboren, Big
Man; Magocsi and Petrovsky-Shtern, Jews and Ukrainians; Henry James, Portrait
of a Lady; Yohanan Petrovsky-Shtern, The Golden Age Shtetl; Jay Neugeboren,
Imagining Robert; James Huneker, The New Cosmopolis; Roland Ennos, The Age of
Wood; Emily Bingham, My Old Kentucky Home; Marie Favereau, The Horde; John Dunn,
The Glitter in the Green; Mike Unwin, Around the World in 80 Birds; Douglas
Boyd, Plagues and Pandemics; David Abulafia, The Discovery of Mankind; Riley
Black, The Last Days of the Dinosaurs; William Shakespeare, The Second Part of
King Henry the IV; Pekka Hamaleinen, Comanche Empire; Thomas Doherty, Pre-Code
Hollywood; Julian Barnes, The Sense of an Ending; William Makepeace Thackeray,
Vanity Fair; An Italian Impressionist in France, Giuseppe De Nittis; Richard
Powell, The Philadelphians; Pekka Hamaleinen, Indigenous Continent; David
Anthony, The Horse, The Wheel and Language; Julian Barnes, Elizabeth Finch;
Jeffrey Lovich, Turtles of the World; Andy Borowitz, Profiles in Ignorance; Tim
Birkhead, Birds and Us; Julian Barnes, The Noise of Time; David Schiffman, Why
Sharks Matter.

Source: 2022/12/east-side-west-side

Title: East Side, West Side (1947)
Date: December 30, 2022

How should a person who is an enthusiast of classic cinema react when he finds
himself loving a film that has been panned, dismissed and ignored for seventy-
five years?

The movie in question is a Manhattan tale called East Side, West Side. It was
released in 1947 when I was a mere eight years and has sunk like a stone. It's
a domestic drama (or soap opera) for two-thirds of the way and then goes full
noir in its last thirty minutes. If East Side, West Side is remembered at all,
it's for squandering big-time talent: actors Barbara Stanwyck, James Mason,
Ava Gardner, Cyd Charisse and Van Heflin; writer Isobel Lennart and director
Mervyn LeRoy. I cannot remember a picture from that era that is studded with
more stars.

In The New York Times, Bosley Crowther, the grand khan of 1940s movie critics,
not only hated the film but was driven by it into a kind of moral uproar. "East
Side, West Side," he wrote, "just about hits the low-water mark of interest,
intelligence and urgency. And certainly nothing accomplished by the writers or
the actors of this film does anything to raise it into an even remotely vital
realm.... Frankly, we thought that films like this one had been put on the dud-
list years ago." Yikes. Even though Crowther almost popped an artery writing his
review, he was not explicit about what so offended him. Let me guess: "films
like this" focus on frank sexual desire and more specifically with adultery and
its consequences.

East Side West Side has rarely drawn much comment, but in 1991, when other
noir-y films of past eras were being re-evaluated and upgraded, this one was
still considered "static" and "lurid, unconvincing and artificially chic...." In
a word, "uninteresting melodrama trash."

And yet the two of us found it engaging and vital and not in any way lurid.

The plot is loaded with familiar post-War II elements. Brandon Bourne (James
Mason) is married to well-to-do Jessie Bourne (Barbara Stanwyck) and has
recently ended a too-public affair with ex-waitress Isabel Lorrison (Ava
Gardner). Isabel left town and Brandon returned to his forgiving wife, but now
the ex-"hash-slinger" is back in town and wants Brandon again. She gets him,
way too easily. Jessie puts up with her husband's shenanigans for a while but
eventually leaves him. Meanwhile, Mark Dwyer (played by the great underrated
actor Van Heflin), who is some sort of spy/journalist/all-around good guy,
returns from Europe and immediately falls in love with Jessie. At this point,
the movie suddenly veers from its domestic track. Isabel is murdered and Brandon
accused of the crime. Dwyer, turned detective, comes to his rescue.

It's an episodic but not unworthy plot. But there's more to the film than this
brief summary. Here on Walnut Street, we fans of TCM appreciated elements of
the film that Bosley Crowther, and many other viewers, had left curiously
unexamined.

ES, WS declares in its title that it's going to explore class tensions and
antagonisms. The well-known formula is that dwellers in the east side of
Manhattan are patrician, rich, and snotty, while the west side is inhabited by
down-to-earth working-class plebeians who are rough but joyful. The film both
elucidates and challenges the cliche. Brandon Bourne epitomizes what would
now be called "upper class privilege." He's rich (probably inherited money),
accustomed to servants and to getting his way. He carries himself as though he
was born in tux and tails. He loves his wife Jessie, he repeatedly claims, but
there's no warmth or snuggling or flirtation between the two of them, which is
the film's way of implying that she's cold and that he's not getting enough at
home. (That's the way things are on the Upper East Side, don't you know?) On the
other hand, there's ex-waitress Isobel Lorrison, who covets East Side wealth and
who is overtly sexual; she's an orgasm waiting to happen. She covets Brandon's
life of ease as much or more than he wants her passion. She has no compunction
about introducing her eager sexuality into the Bourne household, all the better
if it pollutes their establishment complacency and fancy dress.

Even though ES, WS gives us James Mason at his slimiest and Van Heflin at
his must buoyant and likable, it is a film that is dominated by its female
characters. It offers us five-count'em-five strong women, all of whom exhibit
gobs of what has lately come to be called "agency." Jessie (who finds her
strength only in the penultimate scene) and Isabel, of course, but also Rosa
Senta, played by Cyd Charisse, a young woman who makes a very good decision;
Jessie's mother (Gale Sondergaard), who has the best scene in the film, when she
tells Brandon to his face that he's a vain and a fraud; and also Felice Backett,
played by Beverly Michaels, a dame who is "built like the Empire State Building"
and who is not afraid to throw a punch. Some of the best dialog in the film (and
there's a lot of good stuff) is between women who are either the closest friends
or the most bitter antagonists. There is, for example, a striking confrontation
between mistress and wife:

Isabel Lorrison : Sorry I'm not more subtle. But, you must remember, I haven't
had your advantages. When your mother was busy being the Great Lady of the
theater, mine was in a burlesque show on 14th Street. And when your mother sent
you to Miss Cavanaugh's School for nice, young ladies, I was slingin' hash! Oh,
you learned how to pour tea properly and how to cross your legs at the ankles
only - and that plain pumps make you a lady, but, putting bows on them make you
something else. You learned how to make a good marriage. But, like all your
kind, you think by marrying a man, you've done enough. Well, there's one thing
that Miss Cavanaugh forgot to teach you. Something I learned: how to keep a man.
How to keep him wanting you!

Jessie Bourne : My husband doesn't want you. He's finished with you. He told
me so last night.

Isabel Lorrison : I'll call him and he'll come running.

That's classy writing.

The women are not the only vibrant and credible characters. There's also
Bourne himself, who is an exemplar of what would now, decades later, be called
"sexaholism." He wants to be faithful, or at least says he does, but he can't
help himself when Isabel Lorrison/Ava Gardner has a telephone in her hands.
Whether he's ill or just weak and pathetic is left to the audience to decide.

And by the way, the film was written by a woman (Isabel Lennart) who adapted
it from a novel by Marcia Davenport -- a writer well known in her day but long
forgotten. The novel has been out of print for decades, but Interlibrary Loan
has located a copy for me. It's now "in transit' and I'm waiting impatiently for
it to arrive.

Source: 2023/01/title-your-own-film-noir

Title: Title Your Own Film Noir
Date: January 03, 2023

Here's a game. I've compiled a list of essential "film noir" nouns and
adjectives. Your job is to assemble them into the titles of noir films.

Nouns: city, death, shadow, night, fear, heat, murder, crime, kiss, street, gun,
thief, window, sidewalk, body.  Adjectives:  naked, black, evil, strange,
wrong, lonely, raw, secret, violent, sudden.

Using an adjective and a noun is good: e.g. Dark Shadow, Strange Gun, Violent
Window, Raw Heat.

Three words is better: City of Naked Death, Shadow of Evil Night.

Four words is triumphant: Secret Shadow on Crime Street, Dark Kiss at a Strange
Window.

Beware, though. Some of the combinations you assemble might already have been
used (Body Heat) -- or previously parodied (Naked Gun).

[January 5. Pearl Maneli writes:  Vivian, how could you have forgotten "blood." 
Blood on the Sidewalk, Evil Blood; Murder by Blood, etc.]

[February 5.  Elio-Per Limano writes: How about Secret Fear?]

[February 6. Amber Bernstein writes: Crooked? How about crooked?

Source: 2023/01/marcia-davenport-isobel-lennart

Title: What We Read in the Fifties: East Side, West Side, by Marcia Davenport
Date: January 16, 2023

Two weeks ago, I wrote some admiring remarks  about a little-known post-WWII
film called East Side, West Side. I said then that I was sufficiently impressed
and intrigued by the film that I intended to read the novel upon which it is
based, but that since ES,WS has evaporated into the mists of time, I would have
to wait for Interlibrary Loan to dig up a copy for me. Well, the novel has
arrived, coming haste-post-haste from Laramie, Wyoming, the flyleaf inscribed,
"To Mrs Eccleston, from Anna." Gosh, I'd love to know who Mrs. E and Anna were,
and what they (and Laramie) made of this extremely Manhattan-y book.

East Side, West Side (published in 1947), I can now report, is a big hunking
doorstop of a novel. Not a very good one, I'm afraid. It is prosy, untidy,
and crammed with too many episodes and too many undifferentiated characters.
To transform its meanderings into an economical screenplay required great
intelligence and imagination. All praise to the screenwriter, Brooklyn's own
Isobel Lennart, who condensed characters, eliminated subplots, rationalized
excesses, and to some degree toned down the book's inherent snobbery.

ES,WS can be described as an old-fashioned "woman's novel," and not in a good
way. Its female characters are, almost uniformly passive victims. Plus there's
far too much chat about makeup, dinner parties, and "fittings." There's an old
--very old-- canard that an erotic novel for women consists of 400 pages of
courtship and foreplay  followed by a proposal of marriage. I'm afraid that
ES,WS fits this unfortunate formula. Jessie Bourne, wronged and soon-to-be-
divorced wife, is wooed by gentlemanly General Mark Dwyer but o so slowly. Sex
is teased and deferred for chapter after chapter. In Isobel Lennart's alert and
improved script, women are not afraid to take charge.

There's one episode in the novel that seriously rankled me. There's a murder.
The privileged East Side aristocrats do not turn the guilty party over to the
police; instead, they suppress evidence and suborn perjury in order to keep the
scandal out of the newspapers. They succeed, though their plot couldn't have
deceived the dullest precinct flatfoot. In the film, I'm glad to say, a killer
is brought to justice.

Toward the end of the novel, Marcia Davenport introduces a long embarrassing
digression in which the General, just returned from the European theater,
lectures on the post war situation in Eastern Europe. I'm sorry to say that he
praises Soviet aggression in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, etc. I suspect that
these tortured apologetics were written before Davenport lived in Prague and was
engaged to marry the Czech foreign minister Jan Masaryk, who in 1948 was thrown
out of a window by agents of the KGB.  I hope that Davenport would have changed
her position after the defenestration.

Source: 2023/01/remarriage-repartneringe

Title: "Re-Partnering"
Date: January 22, 2023

It's shocking, is it not, that 50% of American marriages end in divorce. "Fifty
per cent" is not just a statistic; it's a reality that stands for tons of
personal distress and suffering and remorse. Alas, the rate of divorce for
second marriages is even higher -- 60%; for third marriages, according to
many sources, as much as 75%. The fact that the percentage rises with age and
experience at first seems counter-intuitive. Shouldn't second and subsequent
marriages be happier, more peaceful?  Don't people learn and improve with
experience?  Should they not know themselves better and therefore choose a
mate more wisely?  Now that they are veterans, shouldn't they have grasped the
art of marriage ? Learned how to solve problems? Learned to make a stronger
and more sensible commitment to each other? After all, they've voluntarily and
optimistically decided to take another crack at marriage. Why not bend every
effort to succeed?

But the numbers don't lie. Many of the people who have been divorced one time,
say sociologists who study marriage and the family, bring negative attitudes
to the next. Instead of assuming that marriage is a lifelong commitment, they
regard it as a flexible arrangement that can be abandoned if things get tough.
They've already survived one or two divorces and are therefore less fazed by the
prospect of another. And inasmuch as the taboo against divorce has already been
shattered, such social inhibitions that remain are the more readily overcome.

There are even simpler explanation for the failure of subsequent marriages:
some people are marriageable by nature and some are marriageable-skittish. The
population of the marriageable-skittish increases as the natively marriageable
leave the pool. Who remains to be married among the population setting out on
second or third marriages? Only those people who are not intrinsically inclined
to prosper in long term relationships. As the pool shrinks to the less and less
marriageable, the percentage of failures inevitably rises.

Divorce and the rates of divorce have been well studied. But what about second
marriages of people who are not divorced but widowed? It's curious that there
seems to be no interest in how widows and widowers (w-ws) fare when they
contract subsequent marriages. Are second marriages of the w-ws more or less
likely to succeed? Apparently, it's not a pressing problem for sociologists. Or
perhaps it's too hard to procure the data. Just who are the remarried (or "re-
partnered") w-ws's? Many "remarried" widows and widowers don't bother to inform
either church or state of their new situation. They may have financial or tax
reasons to avoid scrutiny. They may be separately domiciled. They're not talking
but they're there. Hard to find and hard to study.

My suspicion, drawn from anecdotal evidence and just looking around at people
of my own age cohort, is that the divorce rate among remarried w-ws is very
very low. Why? Well, for one thing, because w-ws are people who are among the
marriageable by nature. They've stayed together, stayed married until death did
them part. Because they succeeded at maintaining a long marriage, they very
likely entered a later marriage expecting to do so again. In addition, w-ws
are likely to be older and weathered. Because they're not scarred by a painful
divorce, they are more likely to be sound of heart rather than wary and wounded.

Re-partnered w-ws have outlived many of the tensions of more youthful marriages.
They're probably not obsessed or consumed by their careers or by worldly
success. For better or worse, their successes and failures have been long
established, long completed. If they're old enough to be retired, they may have
the leisure to talk intimately with one another.

One of the principal causes of divorce, we're told, is tension around child-
rearing, an activity in which philosophical differences between the parents can
cause all kinds of difficulties and tensions and squabbles.  But most w-ws
aren't going to have more children, and the ones that they have are likely to be
grown and gone.

Nor will there going to problems with in-laws, because the in-laws are all dead.

And older w-ws, if they're fortunate, don't have the financial problems of
earlier decades: no sudden unemployment, no need to move to a larger, more
expensive house, no college tuitions. If they're not formally remarried, they
most likely keep their resources separate and therefore don't need to negotiate
about how money is to be spent.

Older folk don't have to deal with contraceptives. While sex is probably less
urgent and imperious than in earlier decades, it might be more consoling,
especially because older partners should have a better grasp of their own
needs and how they might be fulfilled. And they are probably more accepting of
themselves and of their bodies.

It goes almost without saying that w-ws have experienced the deaths of their
previous spouse and therefore share a most important mutual experience. A bond,
a link. An important mutual consolation, one among the many experiences that
older w-ws bring to the table.  They know from living many years on the planet
that various things that seemed important years ago turned out not to matter at
all.

And most important of all: older w-ws have learned over the course of many
decades not only how to love but how to cherish and to respect a wife or
husband.

Source: 2023/01/my-life-in-vehicles

Title: Automobiles in My Life
Date: January 24, 2023

This will be a very short essay, because automobiles have never been a big part
of my life. Unlike many of my friends, I've never been one to have a romantic
relationship with a vehicle.

My parents did not own an automobile and neither of them ever learned to drive.
I was a most provincial city boy, happy with my bicycle and my subway token and
wanting no more. I did not learn to drive a car until after I was married and
left Brooklyn behind.  Nevertheless, over the course of a lifetime I've owned a
number of cars. The first one was identical to the Nash Rambler depicted in this
stock photo:

The Nash was the car I drove to California and back in the summer of 1963 (the
first time I was west of New York). I've since owned an Oldsmobile '88, a
Renault Dauphine (a dog), an underpowered Dodge station wagon, an uncomfortable
but sturdy Corolla, a Saab, a Camry, and a Volvo that lasted for twenty-one
years and which I only surrendered  because it was hard on my aching back.
I've driven perhaps a hundred other automobiles and an occasional truck, mostly
rented, but I've never felt anything like affection for a single one of them--
they take you from one place to another and I'm grateful for the mobility. I'm a
cautious driver, but I've made some bad mistakes behind the wheel and I am lucky
to have gone through life without being mangled or killed, so far.

I confess that at various times in my life I've experienced the glamor of the
open road. I'm a happy fellow when I'm driving a two-lane at dawn or twilight
in southern Missouri or rural South Dakota. I have a soft spot for Iowa's Jesse
James Cafe and for the Crete Diner in Oneonta, New York. A stop at Grandma's
Cafe in some faded downtown is to me a peak experience, however weak the coffee
or gluey the cherry pie. I treasure those glorious small-town attractions: among
many others, the corn cob palace, Carhenge, the Donna Reed Museum in Denison,
Iowa, the Jell-o Museum, the Purple Martin Tower in Griggsville, Illinois, the
world's largest ball of twine in Cawker, City, Kansas.

I don't drive long distances any more. In fact, in the last twenty years I've
probably spent more time on the John Deere "Lawn Tractor" than in any other
vehicle. Maximum of five miles per hour, my kind of speed. It may not be
glamorous but it gets the job done. I've "buried" the machine a couple of times,
but it's still in one piece and still working.

Source: 2023/02/my-life-in-telephones

Title: My Life with Telephones
Date: February 08, 2023

In the course of my lifetime, the telephone has gone from relatively rare
to ubiquitous, from wall to pocket, and from rotary dial to cell. From no
intelligence whatsoever to smart and then to very smart. Revolutionary changes.

When I was growing up in Flatbush, our family was prosperous enough to have a
telephone (not everyone did), but the device was only employed for local calls,
never for "long distance." Non-local calls were prohibitively expensive and were
only for deaths. To be called to the phone by long-distance was ominous.

Before the innovation of seven-digit dialing, we were Windsor 6-2077. Sometime
after WWII, our exchange was altered from WI 6 to GEdney 6. To me, this was an
early indication that the world was unstable and would be filled with ups and
downs. One day we were a Windsor, a royal house, and the next day we were a
Gedney, a brand of dill pickle.

Every telephone in existence looked exactly like this one.  The idea that they
would ever look otherwise was inconceivable.

For a month of so in the late 1950s, I had a job operating an old-fashioned
switchboard at the Sears warehouse on Utica Avenue -- definitely my most
satisfying telephone-related experience, lifetime. Ah that lovely click when the
plug fully entered its receptacle! A delight!  The one I sat at looked almost
exactly like this:

In my short time at the console, I became quite a proficient operator, only
cutting off important calls a handful of times. It's hard to believe that such
an antiquated-looking machine was still in use when I was a lad.

We must also recall the almost extinct telephone booth -- often out of order,
because someone wielded a crowbar to make off with nickels and dimes. And
smelly. Plus, one never had the right change when needing it most.  I do not
mourn the passing of the phone booth.

When we moved to Vermont in 1968, the Topsham Telephone Company had not yet
switched to seven digit dialing. Our home number was high-prestige 21, but we
were jealous of the family whose number was 9. Ours was a four-party line --
also a thing of the past. I wonder whether my grandchildren have ever heard the
phrase "party-line."  Or "rotary dial," for that matter.

When AT&T was deregulated and the market was thrown open to innovation, there
came a great explosion of telephone styles. Phones blossomed into many odd
colors and configurations. For a while, we owned one of these:

The Simpson phone was not my initiative but that of one of the younger members
of the family.

But more change was in the works. The prediction that there would be pocket
phones in the future seemed fantastical science fiction-y.  All phones had to
be connected with wires -- otherwise how could the sound get out of the wall and
into the handset. I scoffed.

Nowadays, everyone carries a cell phone. But it's not just a phone -- it's a
computer. It does everything -- perhaps too much. There is substance to the
frequently heard complaint that some individuals, especially young 'uns, relate
more readily to their cell than to the person sitting next to them. It's a
paradox: with more potential communication comes more loneliness. I myself must
admit that there's a fascination to the cell phone that is disarming.  I'm
trying not be allow myself to be addicted. But there is something wonderful
about a machine that lets you not only speak with but to actually see your
daughter, who is a thousand miles away. Not a trick that a rotary phone could
perform.

Not to be an alarmist or a Luddite, there's a serious downside to the cell.
It seems as though the machine  might be reorganizing youthful brains-- with
unknown consequences,

Scenes like this one have become scarily familiar:

Look up, children, look up! Please look up!

Source: 2023/02/strangest-dream-yet

Title: Strangest Dream Yet
Date: February 15, 2023

In this one, I was lying in restless sleep in my own bed, when a figure, a man,
came at me. He tried to get under my covers, and I cried out, "You can't get
into bed with me. I'm a married woman!"  Very theatrical -- and strange enough,
but the details are even more peculiar.  Of course I'm not a woman -- I'm an
octogenarian man -- but not in the dream. Secondly the man who was trying to
attack me, though identifiably male, had the face of a stereotypical witch --
long crooked nose, verrucose almost echinulate skin, etc.  In addition, my
bedmate, who in real life is a woman, was, in the dream, male. That's a heck of
a lot of gender confusion for one dream fragment.

What is most memorable, however, is my plaintive cry -- "you can't get into my
bed.  I'm a married woman."  How to interpret this sentence?  I can invent
any number of bizarre "'Freudian" theories, but in fact I have no idea, except
for the opinion that I've expressed before on this blog, that I'm a mighty dull,
conventional fellow from 7am to 11pm, but from 11pm until morning, I'm crazy
imaginative, unconventional, and possibly even interesting.

Source: 2023/02/words-of-my-life-hack

Title: Words of my Life:  Hack
Date: February 18, 2023

I cannot think of a word that has undergone greater change during the course of
my lifetime than the plain monosyllable "hack."

"Hack" entered my language, like much of my early vocabulary, through the medium
of baseball. "He took a good hack at that fastball;" "he's up there hacking
away." A hack was a hard swing, not necessarily a successful one. [There was
also Stan Hack, the great Chicago Cub third baseman whose career was just coming
to an end as I was becoming conscious.]  In the days of my youth, "hack" was
also slang for taxicab and a cab driver was a "hackie." I don't believe I've
heard that particular use of the word in decades (except in 1940s movies).
In seventh-grade "shop" class at PS 217, Mr. Kaminsky introduced me to the
"hacksaw." The hack in hacksaw derives from a medieval word meaning "cut into
pieces," but the taxi hack has an entirely dissimilar origin. It comes from
hackney, a breed of horse and later the carriage itself that the horse drew --
the name of which then migrated to our big yellow taxi.

When did I first hear the expression, a "hacking cough"?  And why hacking?
Perhaps because the noise of a cough is similar to the sound of the short sharp
blows when one hacks through a forest or the jungle with a machete. Maybe that's
how it originated-- but I'm not entirely convinced.

Hack has another older meaning -- mediocre or failing, or not good at one's
trade, as in a "hack writer," or a "political hack." This usage is probably a
shortened version of "hackneyed," meaning trite or overused. When you waste
time, you're just "hacking around." In such cases,"hack" denoted incompetence.

Nowadays "hack" has come up in the world. To hack into a computer implies not
laziness but skill. In this usage, "hack" is also malicious. Hackers may be
smart but they're also dangerous; they can cause crashes when they illegally
intrude to alter a program.

The most common contemporary use of "hack," if I'm reading the data correctly,
occurs in the recent coinage "lifehack," which is defined as "a strategy or
technique adopted in order to manage one's time and daily activities in a
more efficient way." I can't be the only person whose junk mail folder is
regularly inundated with recommended lifehacks, most of which seem mighty silly
or simplistic.

And then there's an even more specialized use. Here's one that's new to me:
"scientists announced that they had genetically hacked tobacco plants to
photosynthesize more efficiently." This usage seems to retain something of the
older meaning of cut or slash although it is a stretch to envision a genome
being attacked by a sword or a snickersnee.

Goodness gracious, it's a long road from waving at an inshoot with the old
hickory to inserting bits of DNA in the tobacco genome. But here we are.

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/boulder-violence-massacres

Title: Is Safety an Illusion?
Date: March 01, 2023

Am I just plain nuts to think that I live in a safe and secure world? All the
evidence says "perpetual vigilance" and "it can happen here" and "keep a close
watch?

Let's look at the situation.

Our state has a violent history. In the far past: at Sand Creek in 1864, several
hundred Cheyenne and Arapahos were brutally murdered. In 1914, a century or so
ago, the Pinkertons, employed by the Rockefellers, killed no-one-knows-how-many
miners when they shot randomly into the Ludlow tent colony.

More recently, killing has become the work not of army or paid professionals but
of heavily armed civilians. In 1999 there was the horrible Columbine High School
massacre in which twelve were killed and twenty-one wounded. Just thirteen years
later came the mass killing inside a Century 16 theater in Aurora, just a few
miles south of where I live, in which twelve people were killed and another
seventy injured. Then in 2015 there was a shooting at a Planned Parenthood
clinic in which three were assassinated and nine others wounded. In March of
2021, just two years ago, in the Table Mesa King Soopers, a "gunman" killed ten
-- customers, employees, a police officer. And last year, we had the nightclub
shooting in Colorado Springs where five were murdered and twenty-five others
wounded.

I didn't happen to be in any of these places, but I might have been. Although
I wasn't at the Columbine school, I was at that very moment in a different
classroom in Denver; I didn't go to the movies to see the Dark Knight, but
I do go to theaters. It wasn't "my" King Soopers that was terrorized, but
nevertheless I've bought stuff at that very store many times when I've happened
to be in south Boulder; I wasn't at the Colorado Springs bar but I've certainly
patronized bars. In any one of these cases, It could just as easily have been me
that was shot dead or maimed. I've been one lucky fellow, but people much like
me have not been so fortunate.

Two days ago, a vicious prank phone call set off a scramble and shelter-in-place
warnings at two-block away Boulder High School. BHS is where AGP and our three
children spent many a year. This scare turned out to be a case of "swatting" --
a disgusting new practice in which a nasty sociopath calls an institution to see
if he can get a reaction from a SWAT team. Deliberate malice. Such false alarms
are not mass killings, but they're still hair-raising, anxiety-provoking, and
potentially dangerous events.

It's coming close to home, isn't it. Luck of the draw, so to speak, that I'm
still whole.

When I was a teacher, I was never in real danger but, like everyone else on the
faculty, I had a few deranged students. I remember once that a particularly
odd young lady asked to make an appointment for a conference. Wary of her, I
proposed that instead of her coming to my office that we meet in the public
cafeteria. l can't remember what she wanted to talk about, but I recall vividly
that at one point she asked, "do you think I have a gun in my purse?"  I
replied "I don't know whether you do or not, but I know that this meeting is now
over." I stood up and walked away, half convinced that I was about to be shot in
the back. But I wasn't.

It's a violent world; no one has ever been truly safe. But all we can do is go
blithely about our business, hoping to be spared.

I shouldn't complain; we're not in a war zone; it's not like Ukraine, where at
any moment Russian drones and shells and missiles can drop on you from the sky.

Source: 2023/03/words-of-my-life-troll

Title: Words of my Life:  Troll
Date: March 05, 2023

"Troll" is a word that has strangely metamorphosized in the course of my
lifetime. While It once had warm associations; now, not so much.

"Troll" came into my life in the late 1940s at Makamah Beach on the Long Island
Sound. My grandmother Sonia taught me how to "troll" for bluefish or sunfish.
Here's how you do it. You paddle slowly and let your "shiner" dangle on fishing
line a few yards behind the rowboat. "Troll" is very like "trawl." Perhaps
the two words are variants; or perhaps "troll" is a distant descendent of
Latin trahere, to drag." Troll is related to "trolley," a device used to drag
things from place to place, as a trolley does its passengers. "Troll" seems to
incorporate the meaning "wander" or "wander into."

From my early interest in northern mythology (a "mythology," by the way, is
someone else's religion), I learned that a "troll" is a clumsy ugly monster who
hides out under bridges or in cemeteries. Trolls were troublesome, provocative,
perhaps even cannibalistic.

But nowadays, the older meanings of "troll" have been superseded. A 'troll'
is now a person who participates in a conversation, usually an internet
conversation, with the intention of sowing discord or causing trouble. I am not
sure about the origin of this usage, but I would like to guess or hypothesize
that it combines the sense of "wandering into" with the malevolence of the
Scandinavian figure. A troll is therefore an electronic ogre.

Other words of my life: slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/boot-booty-bootless-

Title: Words of My Life: Boot
Date: March 08, 2023

Is there another common English word that exhibits such varied meanings as
"boot?" Or one that has shown such continual transformation during my brief
years on the planet?

Like much of my early vocabulary, "boot" entered my life through the medium of
radio baseball . In my mind's ear, I can hear the voice of Red Barber announcing
that "umpire Babe Pinelli has just given the boot to Leo Durocher." "Given the
boot" does not make the claim that Durocher was presented with footwear; it
means that he was kicked out of the game as if with a metaphorically-booted
foot.

Nor was it only obstreperous managers who were "booted." "There's a two-hopper
to third, but Cox boots it" -- meaning that he bobbled it, even though the ball
never touched his foot. In baseball, curiously, you can boot a ball with your
hand, which is, logically speaking, as nonsensical as mis-gloving it with your
foot.

As everyone knows, a boot primarily protects the area from the shin down to the
toes. But there's a second common meaning to "boot": "something extra," as in
the phrase "to boot." "He's a great pitcher -- and a good hitter to boot." The
shoe-ish meaning comes through old French from a Germanic source; the profit or
use or something-extra meaning derives from an unrelated OE (Old English) word;
moreover, in latter stages of its development "boot" has also been influenced by
its phonological neighbors booty, and, I suspect, butt.

In order to gain some historical perspective, let us consider the ways in which
Shakespeare makes use of the word boot. "To boot" meaning "in addition" is
employed frequently, as, for example, when Henry IV swears "by my scepter and
my soul to boot," or when Macduff says to Malcolm that "I would not be the
villain that thou think'st/ For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp/
And the rich east to boot." A less familiar use occurs in The Winter's Tale,
when Hermione, accused of adultery, concedes that  "it shall scarce boot me/
To say 'not guilty.'" Her "boot" means that it will not be to her advantage or
profit to assert her innocence. This signification can shade over into gain or
even into a coin itself, as for example when Camillo passes money to Autolycus,
saying,"hold thee, there's some boot." Contemplating his gain, Autolycus muses,
"What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot is here with this
exchange." Just as boot is gain, so bootless means without gain or helpless, as
when Henry V explains that he will be powerless to restrain a rampage: "We may
as bootless spend our vain command/ Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil."

Shakespeare gets some punning mileage out of the multiple meanings of "boot."
Glendower boasts that "[T]hree times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head/ Against
my power; thrice from the banks of Wye/ And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent
him/ Bootless home and weather-beaten back. "Bootless" means helpless; but
sardonic Hotspur, never noted for a sophisticated sense of humor, cannot resist
the obvious pun: "Home without boots. And in foul weather too."

So a boot can be a shoe, an advantage, an addition, a reward, a help. But look
what's happened to the poor helpless word in more recent times. "Boot Hill"
is a cowboy frontier cemetery.  Across the waters, a "boot" is the trunk of
an automobile. The infamous "Denver boot" is a wheel clamp that immobilizes a
vehicle. In the army, a boot is a recruit or rookie who is sent to "boot camp."

But then, along came the computer, where one "boots" or restarts one's machine.
This use, I'm told, originated with the phrase, to "pull oneself up by one's own
bootstraps" -- i.e. perform a difficult task at one's own initiative, just as a
computer starts itself. There's also the warmboot, which sounds little too much
like the old torture device, the Spanish boot and which can also be called a
softboot (but not by me).

In Shakespeare's day, boot was not always distinguished from "booty" as in the
case of the Archbishop of Canterbury's famous bees, which "like soldiers, armed
in their stings,/ Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,/ Which pillage
they with merry march bring home." Booty as pillage survives to this day, but
is, I think, obsolescent. Nowadays, booty is more likely to be used in the
phrase "booty call" which means (and here I'm relying on the invaluable Urban
Dictionary) a "telephone call made to request a sexual encounter." Who would
ever have devised or imagined such an innovation?  Does this booty derive
from "shake your booty," meaning to move your butt or bottom in a sexually
suggestive way?  Not a meaning known to Shakespeare, or at least, not one that
the Shakespeare concordance acknowledges.

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire.

Source: 2023/03/old-age-homes

Title: Old Age Home/ Retirement Community/ Senior Living Center
Date: March 10, 2023

We were invited for dinner at the place to which a number of my "senior" friends
have retreated. The experience was cordial and civilized, but somehow troubling.
I know one thing: I don't want to wind up there. I'm staying put as long as I
possibly can.

Too many old folks. I want to live where there are people of all ages and
varieties. Babies and toddlers and tweens and teen-agers and young adults. More
activity, fewer canes and crutches and walkers.

The place, though handsome and well-appointed, seemed to me to be inhospitable.
Supervisors at every entrance. We had to check in at a fancy kiosk where some
sort of electronic device took our official data and printed out a visitor
badge, which I pocketed. It felt much too "policed."

The dining room was hushed and mannerly. The food was institutional-plus, but
nevertheless institutional. I much prefer my own cooking; I've made a fetish of
self-sufficiency all these years and I'd like to continue so. I like to stir my
own pot.

The apartments are splendid, but the long narrow corridors between apartments
are oppressive. Too reminiscent of hospitals. Or jails.

My principal objection: friends who have moved there become subsumed into the
society of the place. They participate in the home's "activities." It's good and
healthy for them, I suppose, but my friends become lost to me. Swallowed in a
kindly maw. It's scary, to those of us who don't want to be swallowed.

I'll stay here on Walnut Street as long as I can. As in the traditional resolve,
Iplan to leave "feet-first." But we shall see what the future brings.

Source: 2023/03/outdoor-gear-shops

Title: Outdoor Gear Shops
Date: March 15, 2023

Source: 2023/03/locatives

Title: Can We Hope for a Locative Renaissance?
Date: March 18, 2023

Here on Walnut Street, we're trying to make more and better use of locatives
-- words that have long been underemployed and undervalued. We think that the
language (and therefore the world) would be richer and more commodious if others
would join with us in this endeavor. But we're not evangelizing, heck no! We
honor and respect each and every person's private and personal linguistic
choices, locatively-speaking.

Nor do we refer to the common adverbial locatives, such as homeward, downtown,
underground, or nearby.  The locatives that we wish to revive and reinvigorate
are the neglected -- even forsaken -- classics of locativity.

Everyone uses the locative where -- the point upon which you metaphorically
stand --  but how many of us remember to employ the excellent and useful "to"
form, whither, or the "from" form, whence.  It's true that whither and whence
sound a trifle obsolescent, but with frequent use the flexible ear will soon
accommodate. One might be tempted to say "wither goest thou" or "whence com'st
thou", but with a little effort, "whither do you go" and "whence do you come"
will sound perfectly natural, I'm sure.

Similarly, we regularly use the word here, but by golly, we have slighted hither
(to here) and hence (from here).

Equally neglectful is the abandonment of thither and thence ("to there" and
"from there"). Extraordinary useful words, relegated thoughtlessly to the rear
of the locative line.

And then of course, there's yon, yond and yonder, all related varieties of
"there" but further off than "there." At a distance. Shakespeare, as one would
expect, is a most skillful deployer of yons. From Hamlet: "But look, the morn in
russet mantle clad/ Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill."  From Julius
Caesar. "Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;/ He thinks too much; such men
are dangerous."  From Romeo and Juliet. "What lady's that/ Which doth enrich
the hand of yonder knight?"

A yonnish locative that is not endangered and continues to thrive is the
word beyond. Shakespeare's most remarkable and I daresay most beautiful use
of "beyond" occurs in Cymbeline, when Innogen learns that her exiled lover
Posthumus Leonatus has returned to England. She is impatient to meet him at
Milford Haven; Innogen's speech that begins with the plaintive cry, "O, for a
horse with wings" includes the most transcendent barrier-busting locative in the
entire history of the English language. Her longing to see her lover is, she
claims, "beyond beyond." A superlative locative, beyond anyone's imagination but
Will's.

Source: 2023/03/being-carded

Title: Carded at 84
Date: March 28, 2023

Wow, carded at this great advanced age! Not, of course, carded so as to be
permitted to purchase alcoholic beverages.  Those days are long since gone, and
besides, I don't drink.

It was yesterday, at the Denver Art Museum, when I asked for senior tickets (a
big $2.00 discount). "May I see your driver's license. I have to check that
you're over 65?" "Are you kidding, I'm 84!"  "No, I need to see it." Needed
to see LERM's also, although she's 79. Frankly, we were both a bit flattered,
even if it was all because of bureaucratic procedure rather than guess-your-age
eyeballing.

I remember that a score of years ago, a clerk at a some venue or other scanned
my face and without the least hesitation charged me senior fare. I was then only
65 and was slightly insulted to be taken for my full actual age. Now, a similar
but upside-down situation, and I'm mighty amused.

Source: 2023/03/shadowlands-how-to-improve-1

Title: Shadowlands (1993)
Date: March 31, 2023

Recently some much-admired old friends recommended a movie called Shadowlands
(1993). They pledged that we'd love it. But we didn't. In fact, we regarded
it as a film that lacked value and integrity. Of course, we won't mention to
our friends that we responded so negatively and that we now question their
esthetics. I'm sorry but it makes me uncomfortable to doubt people whom I
otherwise respect.

But gosh was this Shadowlands a pretentious stinker! It transformed into pure
soap opera the peculiar relationship between novelist and religious apologist C.
S. Lewis and his fan/correspondent Joy Davidman. We were not entranced by the
"white marriage" of a reserved, asexual Oxford don and a smart down-to-earth
Jewish-turned-Christian New Yorker. But the odd couple hardly had time for
an idyllic picnic on the banks of a picturesque stream before Joy developed
a terminal cancer, at which point the movie transitioned from merely dismal
to full bore lugubrious, perhaps because the director relied on the "Pause
Meaningful" (also called the "Soulful Two-Shot") for much of his effects.

Joy Davidman was played by Debra Winger, who had died of cancer ten years before
in Terms of Endearment (1983), so she was on familiar ground when pale and wan
in a hospital bed.

With such a story, a director should make every effort to avoid turning his film
into a tear-jerker. Not this director, not this movie. Shadowlands ended with a
shameless climax in which Lewis (Anthony Hopkins) indulged in prolonged tears,
sobs, and theatrical snuffling. The old manipulative formula: if you want to
make your audience cry, make your leading man weep.

Over the course of Shadowlands' static 131 minutes, I found myself longing for
old-fashioned movie action. If not a car chase, at least a mad dash --with
a couple of fender-benders -- to the hospital. Perhaps Hopkins, excluded by
a Nurse Ratchet from Winger's hospital room, might have gained entrance by
breaking a window in an adjoining room and tip-toeing across a narrow ledge,
twelve stories high.  And instead of yet another tepid scene in the college's
common room, how about letting Hopkins punch a fellow don right in the kisser.
Anything but another long shot of an o-so-green meadow and purling brook.

Source: 2023/04/roux-rue

Title: Roux/ Rue/ Rue/ Rubaboo
Date: April 07, 2023

"Roux" is word that everyone seems to know but me. To the best of my
recollection, "roux" had never crossed my personal threshold until last week
-- perhaps because I have never taken any special interest in fine cuisine.
I've now enlightened myself, but at the cost of blundering into a bewildering
etymological thicket.

"Roux," to reprise the obvious, is "a mixture of flour and fat cooked together
and used to thicken sauces.... Butter or lard are commonly used fats." But
why "roux," with its excrescent French x? Un nom étrange. Roux, if I have it
right, means brown, or more precisely, reddish brown (as opposed to "brun" or
"marron." In the case of the sauce, roux is an abbreviated version of "beurre
roux," or brown butter and, curiously, comes unbuttered into English as simply
"roux." Roux derives from Latin russus or ruber, reddish, both of which ancient
words originate in the same Indo-European root. I've now learned of a kind of
surgery called a Roux-en-Y, probably pronounced "ruin why," which is a kind of
"anastomosis"--  or gastric bypass -- in which blood or intestinal vessels
are configured into a Y shape. But although one may suspect so, this "roux"
has nothing to do with sauces, thank goodness, but is named for the Swiss 
physician who originated the surgery, César Roux. I suspect that Roux's roux
does not descend from ruber but from rufus, red-headed, as in William II, aka
William Rufus.

Source: 2023/04/idaho-travel-abortion

Title: Idaho Bill Would Restrict Female Travel
Date: April 09, 2023

Representative Clay Hawkins of Eagle Hollow has filed a bill in the Idaho
legislature that would regulate the travel of women of child-bearing age.

Hawkins' bill would prohibit fertile women (14 to 54) from leaving Idaho unless
they could present evidence that they were not pregnant. "How else," said
Hawkins, "can we prevent them from traveling to a child-murdering state like
Colorado and killing an unborn child?" The bill would require women to present a
certification from a doctor or the results of a recent pregnancy test.

The bill is expected to sail through the Republican dominated legislature.
Governor Brad Little has pledged to sign the bill "as soon as it hits my desk."
He called it "common-sense legislation."

Asked how the state plans to enforce the legislation, Representative Hawkins
replied, "roadblocks."

[April 15:  I wrote this parody of Republican foolishness a week ago, fully
confident that my readers would recognize it as a joke -- an April fool
exercise. But to my surprise, almost everyone who commented or contacted me took
it for real. Readers readily accepted the idea that an Idaho legislature and an
Idaho governor would take seriously a proposal to examine the menstrual cycles
of childbearing-age women.  It goes to show not that my readers are unusually
naive, but that the present-day Republican party is so fanatic, dictatorial, and
intrusive that it might just offer such legislation. Which tells us something
about the sorry state of our beloved country.

In truth, I do not believe it was my imitation of journalist style that deceived
my readers. I think it was the accompanying photograph. The doofus-schmendrick
in the photo is in fact a member of the Idaho House of Representatives (though
he's not Clay Hawkins, whom I invented). But the so-called Clay Hawkins has the
face of a person who would conceive of such a fascistic bill -- the foolish,
fatuous eyes, the pseudo-patriarchal beard no doubt camouflaging a receding
or slack chin, the general air of know-nothing simple-minded idiocy. It's the
picture, not the prose, that sold the satire.]

Source: 2023/04/joseph-green-genealogy

Title: Written for Descendants of Sonia and Joseph Green
Date: April 18, 2023

This is a picture of my maternal grandparents, my mother's parents, Sonia and
Joseph Green. I imagine that it was the work of a professional photographer.
I guess that the image dates from when he was about thirty years old and she
twenty-five -- so 1910 or thereabouts. I have no idea why the photograph has
faded to blue-purple; it used to be ordinary black-and-white. I believe that the
costumes that the formal young couple wear were hired for the occasion, as was
the habit in those days; I doubt that their wallets would have permitted such
fashionable dress.

They're a handsome young couple, are they not?  She very feminine, even
delicate, prominently displaying her wedding ring; he sporting a slightly rakish
mustache and a full head of youthful hair. When I knew him, forty years later,
his hair was white and very sparse.

Sonia Chafetz and Joseph Usilewski arrived at Ellis Island in August of 1904,
traveling steerage from Rotterdam. I've written about my grandmother Sonia here.

I know very little about my grandfather, Joseph Usilewski, later Green. I
was thirteen when he died, in 1952, from the last of his five heart attacks.
Although my grandparents lived just around the corner on Coney Island Avenue,
and I found myself in their presence very often, we had little to say to each
other -- mostly because I spoke only English and his English was halting at
best. We sometimes played 500 rummy and fan-tan, and I can remember him saying,
"Now I'm in a predicament" before discarding, but that's about the most intimate
we became. He was aloof and unsmiling --not in any sense "fun." But why should
he be? His life had not been easy. He was from Minsk in present-day Belarus and
was trained to be a pharmacist, but he had been drafted into the Russian army
for the usual twenty-year term. His pay, he told me, was "a ruble every other
month, when we got it." So he did the sensible thing -- deserted and ran off to
America with Sonia. The family story, which I heard from my mother, was that
both Joseph and Sonia were engaged to other people when they met and eloped.
My mother also said that when they arrived New York they had just one pair of
shoes between them and that Sonia would wait at home until Joseph came home
from work before she could leave the house. My mother also told me that when
she herself was born (June 14, 1905), her father was not allowed to visit Sonia
in the hospital because he could not prove that he was her husband (no ring, no
papers). Whether my grandparents were ever legally married, I do not know; nor
does it matter.

My grandfather was a strict father; my mother said that he raised his children
"with the belt." There was a two-year period when he wouldn't speak to my then
young-adult mother because he disapproved of her male friendships.

I don't think his was a happy marriage; he was frequently absent and it has been
supposed that there were "other women" in his life. Nor was he a great success
in the new continent; he never found a home in the world of business although
as far as I know he was always employed and never in debt. In his last years he
worked as a messenger carrying papers and money from one downtown business to
another. When I knew him, he and Sonia lived in a very modest two-room apartment
(in a third-floor "walkup").

I suppose I should mention that although born Jewish, neither Joseph nor Sonia
practiced their religion. Neither of them ever attended a synagogue or even
honored Rosh Hashanah or Pesach at home. Joseph was a socialist and an active
member of the Workmen's Circle, in his day a mutual aid society for recent
immigrants. I know nothing of his political commitments except that he had a
deep loathing for the communist government of Russia. "Worse than the czars."

Joseph had a brother, Nahum, and a sister whose name I have forgotten. Neither
of his siblings had children.

If I had been more enterprising, I might have learned from Joseph and his family
what life was like in White Russia in the nineteenth century. But I was too
young, too self-centered. Too bad.

Source: 2023/04/kitsch-or-the-epitome-of-tacky

Title: Kitsch? or the Epitome of Tacky?
Date: April 26, 2023

We visited the grandiose Americana at Brand Mall in Glendale, California. It's
gigantic, splendid, and luxurious.

I was, I gotta say, utterly transfixed by the artificial lake and its wondrous
statue. Words cannot do it justice; here's a picture:

The statue is titled, "The Spirit of American Youth Rising from the Waves."
It is 18 feet tall, weighs 2500 pounds and is covered with 23 carat gold,
which, I'm going to guess, made it expensive to construct and to install.  It
rises from the artificial lake and soars loincloth-clad above the neighboring
Cheesecake Factory.  It's shamelessly, courageously vulgar.

It is, in my opinion, the epitome of kitsch: crass, tasteless, crude, gaudy,
flashy, pretentious, showy. Banal. I think the contemporary expression is "over
the top."  No Stendhal syndrome for me.

I must say that it doesn't engage the intellect or require much in the way of
interpretation. It might even be called fake art expressing a fake emotion.
Nevertheless, it's lovable in a kind of melodramatic way. I'm glad to have
encountered it, even though it doesn't speak well for American or Californian
sensibilities. Perhaps it embodies tasteless nouveau-riche ambition. Bottom
line: it's astounding.

Source: 2023/05/more-republican-legislation

Title: More Republican Legislative Initiatives
Date: May 08, 2023

Texas Representative Trey Moody (R-Flower Mound) introduced a bill in the lower
house that would require all public school teachers, administrators, and other
personnel to bear weapons during the entire school day. Weapons must be "carried
publicly, in a visible manner" such as in a hip holster.

Moody stated that "not only would firearms discourage shooters, they would also
improve discipline and learning. An armed teacher is a respected teacher," he
declared. According to the bill, teachers who refuse to carry sidearms would be
immediately fired "for cause."

The Idaho legislature passed a bill that would reinstate the firing squad
as a method of execution. The firing squad would consist of six to eight
citizen volunteers. Anticipating great demand for the position, the law states
that members of the squad be chosen by lottery from Idaho citizens who can
demonstrate that they are proficient with 'long guns, or AK-47s" and are
certified members of the National Rifle Association.

Tennessee senator Shelby Shatzline (R-Sequatchie) has sponsored a bill that
would automatically expel professed atheists from the state legislature.

Atheists, he contended, "lack the moral bearings to serve the public. They
simply cannot tell right from wrong, inasmuch as they are not guided by a loving
and  omniscient deity." The bill is expected to pass resoundingly in the
Republican-supermajority Tennessee legislature, though its impact may be moot,
inasmuch as there are no known atheists in either house. Senator Shatzline is
also drafting a bill that would expel atheists from Tennessee.

South Carolina representative Britt Brownfields, has introduced a bill that
would penalize unmarried people who live together. It would impose a penalty of
"100% of state tax liability" upon such couples. Brownfields stated that living
"in sin" weakens the moral fibre of the nation and flouts Biblical law.

According to the draft of the bill in addition to the tax penalty, violators
would immediately be tarred and feathered and ridden out of town on a rail.
Perdue Chicken will volunteer the feathers and Koch Industries the tar.  A
donor or vendor of rails has not yet been selected.

Source: 2023/05/even-more-republican-legislative-initiative

Title: Still Another Republican Legislative Initiative
Date: May 14, 2023

Alabama representative Ernie Yarbrough has introduced a bill called the Abolish
Abortion in Alabama Act which reclassifies abortion as murder in the first
degree. Pregnant women who abort a child, either surgically or through the use
of drugs, would be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. According to the
Alabama Political Reporter, Yarbrough contends that "abortion is murder, and
justice demands that our laws treat it as such."

Representative Yarbrough has been one the nation's foremost advocates of what he
calls "medical freedom."  He has long opposed face masks and covid vaccinations
-- or in fact vaccinations of any sort. He "believe[s] that no person, entity or
government has the right to force its citizens to violate bodily autonomy. The
right, blessing and freedom as individuals to make personal medical, health and
wellness decisions ultimately rests in the hands of Alabama citizens." Abortion
is therefore an intrusion into the God-given right of every embryo (or unborn
child) to be born. "All of us, including fetuses, deserve to make these personal
decisions without threat of coercion, persecution or job loss."

Representative Randolph *Randy" Holman (R-Phenix City) has submitted a bill
that would take Yarbrough's policy position a bit further. Holman's bill
would require the "re-fertilization" of women who were guilty of abortion.
In most cases this would involve identifying the father of the unborn child
and requiring the couple to re-fertilize.  Otherwise, says, Holman, even if
a child- murdering woman is fined or jailed, she hasn't made restitution to
society. Only "re-fertilization" will do the job, Holman says. He calls it
"compensatory pregnancy."

If the father of the unborn child cannot be found, surrogates may be employed.
Surrogate fathers would include members of the legislature who voted in support
of the legislation.

Representative "Randy" Holman:

Source: 2023/08/my-summer-so-far

Title: My Summer So Far
Date: August 25, 2023

It's the end of August 2023, and what an unusual summer so far. It's all about
the rain -- constant, unremitting, monsoony.  Record-setting.  Last week
we had three dry days in a row -- first time this entire summer. I've not
once seen the stars. One of the great pleasures here is the shiny distinct
Milky Way on a clear night -- but there has not been a single cloudless
night in months. The pond, therefore, has been gloriously filled and the
waterfall, characteristically only a trickle at this season, is still a
veritable picturesque and noisy Niagara. We had a great blueberry crop this
year, but not a single edible plum, perhaps because of the late frost. The
vegetables have done well, especially the tomatoes and cucumbers. I don't know
why I haven't seen a single cabbage butterfly this summer -- but I'm glad
they've shunned us. Ditto the tomato hornworm. Is it the rain? We've had more
tomatoes than we can eat even after giving away bagsful. LERM and I have had a
great time, weather permitting, with the various flower gardens. Delphiniums
and phlox have had especially good years -- and we've planted some new shrubs
--hydrangeas and weigelas -- and extended the day lily borders. Mowing has been
a challenge, because the grass grows so rapidly and there are so few days when
it's dry enough to cut. As a result, when I do find an opportunity, the grass
comes out of the machine in wet clumps and plugs. Unsightly, to say the least.
NGP has not been impeded by the weather or by the surgery. He's out there every
day tending to the forest and expanding his course. Not many guests (my friends
are becoming too old to travel). BHP and his family were here for almost three
weeks -a great pleasure -- but the daughter never appeared,.

And to think that last summer was so droughty that the well went dry.

I've done some reading but no writing -- not even on this blague.

Source: 2023/09/at-home

Title: "At Home"
Date: September 17, 2023

"And you're still at home," observed Mr. Henry, who had arrived to repair
our on-the-fritz propane-powered clothes dryer. (Mr. Henry has been curating
our appliances for a generation; he can diagnose a problem by a glance from
several yards away, or perhaps he does it by magic. He's a kind of stove and
refrigerator genius).

"At home?" Mr. Henry had inquired about my age and I had confessed my longevity.
"Confessed" is not exactly the right word. "Bragged," perhaps. I've reached the
age when I don't mind if people ask about my years. I'm proud, I think, to have
reached 84 and 5/12s still able to do a day's work -- when many of my friends
and former colleagues have plummeted off the cliff or have moved to a "senior
living" (formerly called "old age") residence.

But Mr. Henry's comment took me aback -- took me a few seconds to grasp. "Still
at home?" Where else would I be? Ah, in an institution.

I wonder about the difference between the 84-year-old person that Mr. Henry
perceived and the 84 that I experience, internally, every day. To myself, I'm
certainly not the geezer that I catch sight of in the mirror. Gray, paunchy, a
trifle stooped. A bit unsteady on his feet. Even on my best days, I'm not as
vigorous, even middle-age vigorous, as I once was. I tire easily and rest often.
Work a bit, nap a bit. I no longer perform feats of strength, not only because
my muscles have shrunk, but because I'm afraid of injuring my always-vulnerable
back.

I don't feel seventeen, but I feel myself to be myself. I'm competent. My brain,
thanks be to all the gods and goddesses in the various pantheons, is still
functioning well, though I'm troubled by "noun loss."  I know which plant
is a delphinium and which a hyssop, but there are days when those nouns just
disappear and can't be recalled. Same with the names of people. The recall
system is as fragile as the dryer, but the storage system is working just fine
(if I'm patient).

I find that sometimes people who look only at my outside underestimate my
abilities and give me credit and even praise for actions that I think of as
routine. I find this phenomenon to be mildly insulting. It's no fun to exceed
expectations when the expectations are so low.  At the same time, I know that
the task that I can easily dispatch today, might be one that I won't be able
to perform tomorrow. And yet I don't want to allow myself to be patronized or
applauded for putting my pants on correctly,

I no longer feel immortal. In fact, I feel mortality pressing in on me. I don't
fear death, but I'm not ready for it. I'm enjoying life far too much. How I
would feel if my various twinges and aches turned into chronic pains I cannot
say. But for today the watchword is, press on!

Source: 2023/09/bottlebrush-buckeye

Title: The "bottlebrush buckeye"
Date: September 19, 2023

As a youth, I spent many a happy hour in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. One of
the plantings that I remember vividly was what I conceived of as a "wall" of
bottlebrush buckeyes. It's been many a year, but what stands in my memory is
roughly 40 or 50 linear feet of 20-foot-tall decorative shrubs in full flower.

So naturally, when I came to West Bradford, I tried to reproduce the effect. I
just happened to have a perfect spot for a wall of buckeyes -- a fertile slope
of the proper size and shape. In 1980 (plus or minus a year or so) I purchased
two such plants from White Flower Farm in Connecticut and set them 30 feet
apart, optimistically hoping that over the course of the years they would expand
to fill in the allotted space.

It did not happen. One of the plants lingered for a year or so before giving up
the ghost; the other stood still -- grew a bit, then died back over the winter.
Our Zone 3 Vermont weather proved to be too harsh for a plant that had thrived
in Zone 6 Brooklyn. I resigned my self to the fact that my experiment with the
bottlebrush buckeye was a failure.

But then perhaps 10 years ago, after decades of stagnancy, the plant began to
increase in size. Global warming?  Wetter summers? Maturity? I can't say. And
then this past summer, after forty-plus years of doing virtually nothing, the
bottlebrush buckeye produced some flowers. And there they are -- long awaited
and very welcome!

(The purplish plant in the background is Joe Pye weed, eutrochium purpureum,
which thrives and multiplies without the least bit of assistance from me. And
also a 20-year-old weeping willow and young Eastern cottonwood, which I set in
place about 5 years ago.)

This past summer, dazzled that the buckeye produced its extravagant flowers at
last, I gave it a few hours of care. Weeded it, pruned away the dead growth, 
and gave it a small optimisitc dose of 10-10-10 fertilizer. I'm very curious to
see what happens next summer. Could it be that my 40-year old experiment will
succeed at last?

Source: 2023/09/tree

Title: Cemetery struck by fallen tree
Date: September 21, 2023

I'm more or less reconciled to my anonymity. Just not a famous dude. Not an
"influencer." Haven't been covered by newspapers or reporters in a generation or
two. But now notoriety has struck.

Careful and diligent readers of this blague know that the old West Bradford
graveyard -- a couple of acres of bumpy terrain -- abuts our Vermont property.
And now they will discover that "our" cemetery has been featured in the Bradford
Journal-Opinion (formerly the United Opinion). Here's the story:

The picture is of such poor quality that it's impossible to decipher. The story
isn't that easy to read either so here's a transcription:

Cemetery struck by fallen tree

by Alex Nuti-deBiasi

BRADFORD--The Bradford Selectboard voted last week to spend $3500 to carefully
clean up the West Bradford cemetery after a tree fell last week shattering limbs
and possibly damaging headstones and gravesites.

"It looks like a bomb went off," Donnalyn Burgess Lyon told selectboard members
at the meeting on August 24. I'm beside myself."

Lyon has several generations of family members buried at the bucolic cemetery
located on Hackett Hill Road near South Road. She visited the cemetery to trim
the grass and care for the gravesites.

A reporter who visited the cemetery ahead of last week's meeting did not see any
damaged headstones, but at least one heavy limb rested on a stone.

Lyon told a reporter she visited the cemetery on a weekly basis to care for
plots and trim the grass around stones until she broke her leg. Now she makes it
every couple of weeks.

Board members said it appears that the tree was located on an abutter's property
but that the town should spend the money to clean up the municipal property
before pursuing reimbursement from the abutter. They solicited a quote from
Thomson Logging for the clean up.

"We want it taken care of and not cause more damage," board chair Meroa Benjamin
said.

Hey, we're newsworthy -- and a diligent reporter is right there on the case.
We're a little taken aback that Donnalyn's sensationalist remark that "it looks
like a bomb went off" was reported without comment.  A bomb didn't go off; a
tree fell.

Moreover, we object to the story's headline: the cemetery wasn't struck by a
fallen tree; it was struck by a "falling" tree. Once it's fallen it doesn't do
any striking.

For the record, the tree was a big tooth aspen, which folks around here call
"popple." It was huge, and it was thoroughly rotten at the base of the trunk.
The wonder is, "it hath endured so long."

And also: the "abutter" has reimbursed the town for the cost of the cleanup.

Source: 2023/09/awkward-question

Title: Awkward Question
Date: September 27, 2023

I was at the old-age home (sorry, "retirement community") last week -- a place
that gives me the creeps even though many of my friends and former colleagues
seem to live there happily. (I'm on the waiting list but I hope that I'll never
be constrained to move in.)  I was there to share lunch with a 90-year-old
friend. At the next table over (in the rather luxurious dining room) was a woman
whom I knew slightly fifty years ago -- as a neighbor and as the mother of a
Flatirons Elementary School tudent. She's 89, a widow, and still healthy, still
attractive.

She (let's call her Ms. GK) initiated the conversation with this question. "Is
your wife still alive?"

It wasn't the inquiry itself that took me aback. It was the casual way in which
it was asked, with no more emotional resonance than, say, "do you want raisins
in your cereal?" or, "is it raining outside?"

Which made me realize that Ms. GK --  and all her fellow denizens of the
facility -- live in a world of "sole-survivors" where the deaths of spouses
"were as plentie as Blackberries." Therefore, there is nothing noteworthy
or remarkable for her to inquire about the status of a long time companion,
especially when more than half of husbands and wives have already kicked the old
bucket.

Nevertheless, the lack of emotion, the cold bloodedness, the absence of
euphemism, of Ms. GK's question produced in me a "take stock" moment. Whether we
are in or out of the institution, we are in the same ninth-decade world.

But I do hope that I myself do not become quite so matter-of-fact about the
death of friends and family.

Source: 2023/09/janet-reno

Title: Our Classmate Janet Reno
Date: September 29, 2023

My first visit in four months to the new acquisitions shelf of the Boulder
Public Library turned out to be fruitful, for I discovered J. H. Stiehm's
2023 biography of Janet Reno: Janet Reno, A Life (Gainesville, Fl). Janet was
a classmate ('60) at Cornell and also proceeded with me to Harvard, where
she was one of 16 women in her law school class, and I was a undistinguished
graduate student in GSAS. I knew her slightly at Cornell; she "sat desk" at Sage
Hall, where I was a frequent caller. Our relationship never advanced beyond
superficial chat and I was surprised as all get out when she re-emerged in 1993,
having been appointed Attorney-General by President Clinton. She served in that
position for eight years and made quite a mark.

I've been on a project of reading the memoirs of members of my age-cohort,
especially of those with whom I've crossed paths, even if ever so slightly.  I
think that so far, Janet Reno is the only one of my acquaintances who's earned
not just an autobiography, but a biography of her own.

I was particularly interested in the paragraphs about Janet's Cornell and
Harvard years, but I'm sorry to report that those sections are notably thin
and superficial. Stiehm's account make Cornell seem archaic and primitive --
out of a 1930s movie. It is news to me that "freshman wore beanies, sophomores
had Cornell sweaters, juniors had blazers, and seniors had straw hats." Mere
mythology. It's true, though, that there was considerable drinking at fraternity
and apartment parties, but for what college was that not true?

Careless errors: Janet did not live at Dickinson Hall, she lived at Clara
Dickson Hall. She did not study political theory with non-existent Professor
Mario Anatti, but no doubt she did take classes with the distinguished scholar-
politician Mario Einaudi.

Stiehm passes over in silence the most egregious moment in Janet's career --
when she was suckered into allowing villainous Ken Starr to expand his probe
into Bill Clinton's sexual adventures. Either an apology or an explanation
should surely have been in order.

Source: 2023/09/in-which-i-do-a-good-deed

Title: In Which I Do a Good Deed
Date: September 30, 2023

We were sitting on a metal bench in front of the Boulder Public Library, resting
up for the half mile walk home. It was unusually peaceful; families in and
out, borrowing or returning their bags of books. Once in a while, there's a
discordant note: a homeless, drugged, or deranged person, muttering or sometimes
shouting incoherently, dragging a dirty blanket or wheeling a stolen supermarket
cart or bicycle. But yesterday there was an event. A large young man, 40ish, had
lost his child. He asked us, "have you seen a boy with a red hat." No we hadn't,
but we said we'd pay attention. The poor distressed guy ran from place to place
in the park and in the adjacent parking lot, shouting "Zack."  As he became
increasingly agitated, so did I. Is there a worse feeling of powerlessness than
when you've lost contact with your child. As he became more and more frantic,
I remembered Florence Dombey and Mrs. Brown, and Etan Patz, and Leiby Kletzky.
After a few moments, I said to LERM, "if the boy with the red hat had come out
of the library alone, we would have seen and noticed him. He's got to be inside
the library and I'm going to find him." I walked into the building and almost
immediately heard some high-pitched crying from somewhere in the stacks. In a
few seconds I located the boy (four-years-old, I would guess). I said to him, "I
know exactly where your father is and I'm going to take you to him." I took the
boy's hand and walked out of the library -- almost immediately to encounter the
crazed parent coming our way. I released the child and in a second he was in his
father's arms. Father and son consoled each other. I sat back down on our bench,
knowing that I had done a good deed. It was a very satisfying, human feeling.
After a brief while, we walked home uneventfully.

Source: 2023/10/jane-austens-emma-harriet-smiths-ancestry

Title: Jane Austen's Emma; Harriet Smith's Ancestry
Date: October 10, 2023

Both partisans and skeptics of Jane Austen's Emma will remember Harriet
Smith, the young woman who becomes the object of Emma Woodhouse's officious
matchmaking. Harriet's ancestry is explained by JA; she is "the natural daughter
of someone" -- that is, she is an illegitimate child of obscure origin.
Harriet's patronizing friend Emma imagines, without a shred of evidence, that
the poor dear must be the daughter of nobility. She therefore interferes with
Harriet's romantic prospects, first by discouraging an "attachment" to an
upright and capable farmer -- and then by promoting relationships which we
readers are taught to believe should be beyond Harriet's aspiration. JA, for all
her satirical spirit, is not one to challenge the rigid class distinctions of
rural Highbury.

But then, at the very end of the novel, other options having led to disaster,
Harriet and farmer Robert Martin are allowed to marry.  Almost as a coda -- an
afterthought -- Austen reveals to us that

Harriet''s parentage became known. She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman,
rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been her's
and decent enough to have always wished for concealment, -- such was the blood
of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch -- It was likely to
be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman, but what a connexion
had she been preparing for Mr. Knightley -- the Churchills -- or even for Mr.
Elton! The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached by nobility or wealth, would have
been a stain indeed.

It's a curious and I think distressing revelation.

There's an unpleasant sneer in the dismissive phrase, "daughter of a tradesman"
where "merchant" or even "prosperous merchant" might have been more generous.
Moreover, the pregnant phrase "illegitimacy unbleached by nobility or wealth"
neatly encapsulates the hypocrisy of a society that can condone a rich bastard
but condemn a poor one.

But what is most bothersome about the paragraph is what it omits. Although JA
pull back the curtain on Harriet Smith's father, she does not bother herself
to reveal anything about Harriet Smith's mother. Surely even an illegitimate
child had one, and surely that mother, in addition to her pregnancy and
childbirth, had a story of her own -- both before and after she surrendered her
child. If Harriet's father can be revealed (even though he is not named), why
then, why not her mother?  What is implied by this omission? That the mother
doesn't matter -- she was merely "someone's" mistress or concubine. Or perhaps
a prostitute. That Harriet's status in society has nothing to do with her
inconsequential mother.

Or perhaps that JA, raveling the loose ends of her story, preferred to avoid a
distracting complication.

My own theory is that JA just simply forgot. Because fathers matter a great deal
and mothers matter much less, it's not of any moment who was Harriet's mother.
In psychological terms, JA is guilty of a perfect parapraxis -- and unconscious
forgetting, canceling, or, in modern jargon, an erasing. Harriet's mother is not
even erased -- she's utterly non-existent.

Sometimes what is not represented can be as revealing as what is included.

Source: 2023/10/falling

Title: Falling
Date: October 18, 2023

I suppose I fell an uncountable number of times in the days of my youth, but to
these floppings I paid no mind. I started to take note during my first year in
Ithaca, when, a creature of sidewalks and "gutters," I fell splat on my face in
the slopes and snows far above Cayuga's waters at least a score of times. Lithe
and springy, I did not a whit of damage to myself.

Falling became a real issue in my life only when my father, at age 74 in
1978, took a header down a flight of basement stairs at 539 East 9. From that
moment, his life changed rapidly for the worse. Whether his  arthritis was
a consequence of the fall, as his doctors claimed (they called it "traumatic
arthritis") I cannot say, but from that time until his death eight years later
he was crippled with pain. His once athletic body wasted and shrunk, and
his lively step devolved into a sad shuffle. For me, it was a warning and a
precedent. Don't fall.

Nowadays, even though I'm older by several years than my father was when the
arthritis finally took his life, and am most definitely marooned in what he
liked to call "extra innings," I'm most aware that it is a fall that could do
me in. I take precautions: not paranoid, I hope, but sensible. Some years ago
I moved to a building with an elevator -- no more second floor bedrooms or
basement washing machines for me. For our West Bradford summers, I've put up
rope banisters where the ground is steep or irregular. I carry a stick when I
walk on the paths or in the woods. "Three legs good, two legs bad." Even so,
this past summer I fell twice. The first time, because a cemetery groundhog had
dug a burrow next to a gravestone and grass had grown to conceal his hole. I'm
glad the fall was a gentle one, because I would have hated to have gone down
in local lore as the guy who died when he cracked his head on an old, lichen-
covered tombstone. Too much irony, too much black humor.

My second fall was when a rope snapped -- so not my fault at all. The ropes
that we used for a banister on a steep path leading from the dike to the
waterfall garden had simply rotted out. I tumbled slowly and gracefully. We've
now replaced that old rope with a new one so massive that it could secure an
aircraft carrier.

Moreover, I've stopped going up on ladders -- not even kitchen step ladders.
If a ceiling light bulb needs to be changed, I'll hire someone or beg a favor
from a young person. I'm aware of the tragic story of a friend of a friend who
lived in a house with a two-story entrance foyer. Though seventyish, he climbed
a ladder to straighten a wall hanging and lost his balance. He lingered for a
few days, but never regained consciousness.

Some friends of a decade or so younger than I came visiting yesterday. In the
course of a lively conversation, I revealed that I shun step stools and ladders.
One of the guys said, "I'm not ready to give up climbing on ladders." I said,
"Why not, it's dangerous -- you can hurt yourself."  He said, "I'm too young.
It's a matter of self-respect." To which I responded, "Fuck self-respect."

I asked my cardiologist what was going to kill me. She said, at your age,
and with your state of health, the most likely cause is either an infection
or a fall. Which I take to be good news of a kind. I can be vigilant about
infections and I can be very cautious about where I set my feet. Especially
so if I remember my "mature" vulnerability and if I keep in mind my father's
history.

Nevertheless, I'm beginning to feel that I may not be immortal.

Source: 2023/10/words-of-my-life-provider

Title: Words of My Life: Provider
Date: October 20, 2023

I first encountered the word "provider" in its positive sense as a virtual
synonym for "mensch": "he was a good provider; he took care of his wife and his
kids and his aged parents and even his employees" (if he had any).

But nowadays the word has been stripped of its warm associations and has emerged
as a cool or neutral term. I encounter the word most often when I need medical
attention. A doctor is no longer a doctor; he's been renamed a "provider." I
believe this usage to be the invention of the nefarious insurance companies that
govern and distort our medical system. "Doctor" and "nurse" are praise-words,
rich in significance. "Provider" has no resonance. It reduces your doctor to an
index or reference number and is therefore of great utility to the bureaucracy.
I can't imagine that a doctor, asked what he does, would be happy to respond, 
"I'm a provider."

The word "teacher" has, for many, a positive resonance. I was a teacher; I was
not an "education provider" -- nor would I have embarked on a career with the
aim of being considered such.

I believe that nowadays the most common use of the word "provider" occurs in the
internet phrase, "content provider."  And so the word continues on its long
downward path.

Source: 2023/10/anti-bucket-list

Title: The Anti-Bucket List
Date: October 24, 2023

Here follows a list of some of the many activities that I definitely,
excruciatingly, do not wish to perform before I kick the ol' kettle. My life
is perfectly complete as it stands, and I feel no psychological pressure to
engage in any of these anxiety-ridden ventures. Nope, all the pressure is on the
side of safety, indolence and sloth. I'm mighty "fulfilled" just as I am. As
fulfilled as I want to be.

I do not yearn to explore the depths of the Marianas trench in a submersible --
nor even go down a few hundred feet to view a shipwreck. I prefer the surface
of the wine-dark sea, or better still, a quiet pond where, even if I'm a daring
distance from the edge, my feet can still touch bottom.

I do not want to take up diving into shallow rivers from rocky precipices.
I'm not interested in being death-defying or picturesque. I can defy death
just perfectly while lying on my couch. Also, no bungee-jumping, or, even more
lunatic, jumping out of airplanes with a fickle parachute on my back. No thank
you.

I have no desire to smuggle weapons or drugs across the border or into Singapore
or Iran. In fact, I don't think I'll do any smuggling at all. I consider my
career as a smuggler, never flourishing, to be absolutely finito.

I do not need to take up a late-life career as a wild-animal trainer. No lions,
tigers, bears. Though I do wish that I could do something about the broccoli-
eatiing groundhogs.

I don't wish to train for a second career as a food-taster to the mighty. I
wouldn't be good at the job; I'm chronically, almost terminally hypochondriacal.
I would probably find poison in every forkful or sip --  and then display all
sorts of bizarre symptoms. I especially don't want to be a food taster for
people on Mr. Putin's shit list. No sirree.

I do not want to go dancing with the stars. Never, never, never, never, never
(as William Shakespeare wrote in a slightly different context).  No televised
tangos in my future.

I am not going to sign up for that trip to Mars. Or to the moon. Or anywhere
that requires a pressure suit. I'm comfortable in my "relaxed fit" jeans and
shirt.

Source: 2023/10/in-a-lonely-place-bogart-grahame

Title: In a Lonely Place (1950)
Date: October 27, 2023

On this last time through, I was struck by an element of the film of which I
had not taken sufficient notice. It's a distinctly post-WWII movie. Dix Steele
(Bogart) had been a successful writer before the war; he was, we're told, a good
commanding officer; but now he's erratic, crazy jealous, his sanity at knife's
edge. The film does not offer an explanation for his decline. When he's shown
pictures of the brutally murdered Mildred Atkinson, he exhibits no emotional
response;  it's as though he's so thoroughly inured to violent death that he
lacks fellow-feeling. The audience must infer he's seen too many such deaths.
In the past, I hadn't sought a cause for his symptoms, but this time, it was
transparent to me that although the writers don't dwell on the war as a cause,
they assume that the 1950 audience will get the point. It's shell-shock or
battle fatigue or what is now called PTSD. When I came to appreciate the film's
1940s ambience, In a Lonely Place became not merely an intimate psychological
drama with noir overtones, but a trenchant commentary on WWII devastation and
disruption. And therefore a more profound and richer work of art.

I was curious enough about what is left unsaid in the film to look for a copy
of the novel from which the film is drawn. It's Dorothy B. Hughes, In a Lonely
Place, first published in 1947 and now reissued in 2017 by New York Review Books
(thanks NYRB!. Not a difficult search, because it was right there on a shelf in
the Boulder Public Library.

In a Lonely Place is a novel in the Chandler-Hammett-Gardner orbit. For those
who love the genre, it might be a great read. For me, not an aficionado of
mysteries or detective novels, it was, I'm afraid, a plod -- much marred by an
arid, graceless prose style, with many a sentence so awkward that it pained
both eye and ear. But just as I suspected, in the novel the WWII material is
front and center -- and it's PTSD all right. The shocker, however, is that
Dix Steele is not the Bogart-Steele of the film. Not even close. He's not a
disturbed  ex- officer trying to adjust to the post-war world. Instead, he's
a serial killer on the prowl for another victim. He's murdered his landlord
and a former girlfriend, and a trio or quartet of young pretty women. He's a
textbook misogynistic nutcase and therefore not nearly as interesting the film's
complicated troubled Dix Steele.

I'm in awe of the brilliant transformation from book to script. The credit goes
to two writers:  Edmund Hall North, who first "adapted" the novel, and Andrew
P. Solt (a refugee born in Hungary as Endre Strausz) who wrote the screenplay.
And of course to the director, the great Nicholas Ray.

(In the picture above, Dix's arm is around Laurel's neck. It should be an
affectionate embrace, but he's too possessive. She's justifiably wary.)

Source: 2023/11/a-brooklyn-memoir-robert-stern

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist: Robert A. M. Stern
Date: November 07, 2023

I must confess that I had never heard of architect-entrepreneur Robert Stern
until I read Martin Filler's NYRB review of Stern's recent autobiography --
which is called Between Memory and Invention: My Journey in Architecture. How
could I have been so behindhand, so ill-informed?

Filler's evaluation of the memoir is sharp-elbowed. He plainly doesn't like
Stern himself although he grudgingly grants that he was a successful dean of
architecture at Yale. His critiques of Stern's buildings are unfriendly and
a bit wicked: of Yale's two newly-constructed colleges, Filler claims that
"first- year students might imagine that they've wandered into a themed Disney
resort called Academialand." The Comcast Center in Philadelphia, he says, is
of "surpassing banality"; the George W. Bush Presidential Center in Dallas
"resembles a branch bank in a suburban shopping mall." Moreover, Filler is is
both scornful (and possibly envious) that Stern married into lavish wealth
(his wife was a Gimbel heiress). Is it wit or is it bigotry to deride Stern's
progression from a working-class Brooklyn Jewish family to a big time Manhattan
success as a typical "rugelach to riches story?"

It was when I learned that Stern was a Brooklyn boy that my interest was
provoked and I trotted over to the Boulder Public Library to procure a copy of
Memory and Invention. I doubt I would have read the book from cover to cover
except for its neighborhood relevance. Robert Stern, it turns out, was not only
a local lad but he was born in exactly my year, 1939. He attended public schools
and had hoped to attend Erasmus Hall High School, which would have made him my 
classmate, but, he claims, he lived outside of the district and so was shunted
to Manual Trades High School (famously featured in the grimy novel and film, The
Blackboard Jungle). It was a surprise to me that he grants a sentence to one of
his junior high school classmates, the "diplomat" Matthew Nimetz, whose name I
remember from my four years at Erasmus but whose person, as far as I can recall,
I never encountered. I have to doubt that Stern was districted out of Erasmus.
Manual Trades was a school that students chose, like Stuyvesant or Brooklyn
Tech. Stern misremembers. He probably decided to cast his lot with Manual Trades
because it was reputed to be a "hands-on" school. It's doesn't much matter: he
would have been just as unhappy at Erasmus. He craved Harvard and Manhattan and
notoriety and money, and none of the local schools would have filled the bill,
certainly not EHHS.

Although the lengthy accounts of Stern's buildings might enlighten and inspire
a specialized readership, I myself found the book dispiriting. There is lots of
information about commissions procured by sucking up to the mighty and a heck of
a lot more about infighting among the high-flying architects than I needed to
know. In addition, the book overflows with self-congratulation and is replete
with assiduous and triumphal name-dropping.

It's not for me to judge Stern's achievement, but I cannot disagree with his
contention that architects should be fully steeped in but not restricted by the
architecture of the past. I gather that Stern is a "neo-traditionalist' and
Filler, his reviewer-critic, a "modernist."  I cannot say how many buckets of
talent (Filler would say "none!") that Stern brought to his game, but however
many they are, they are only drops in an ocean of ambition.

Despite it all, I was intrigued by Stern's Brooklyn childhood, especially where
his history bisects (or veers away) from my own. His grandparents, like mine,
are folks of eastern European shtetl origin who struggled without much success
to adapt to the new world. They landed in Brooklyn, which Stern seems to have
resented. He yearned for "the city," Manhattan. I myself did not sufficiently
appreciate Brooklyn, and like Stern, I wanted out. Nowadays, it's embarrassing
for me to recall that the one big idea of this Brooklyn "yoot" was to leave the
old country, Flatbush, behind. Stern, on the other hand, is unembarrassed: "I
disliked Brooklyn--it was a place to be from and get out of (his italics). The
difference between us is that he knew that he wanted Manhattan; I didn't know
what I wanted, I just wanted to go somewhere else, which I have managed to do,
having spent most of my life in the mountain west and in green New England.

Stern also knows what all of us old Brooklynites know -- that our once
provincial and disrespected borough has become a bit hoity-toity. The realtors
have taken over. Stern says that his childhood neighborhood "is now alternately
called Windsor Terrace and Kensington, but at the time everyone just called it
Flatbush."  Which is exactly my recollection. If you had asked me in 1950 what
part of Brooklyn I hailed from, I would have said "Flatbush." But now the PS 217
catchment area is called Kensington or Ditmas Park, expressions that I had never
heard until the last decade or so.

One curiosity about Between Memory and Invention: unlike every other Brooklyn
reminiscence I have ever read, Stern never mentions the Dodgers. Quite a telling
omission, I think, if you think about it for a moment. Nothing about either food
or sex, either. An uncharacteristic Brooklyn childhood.

Source: 2023/11/a-few-new-words

Title: A Few Words New to Me
Date: November 09, 2023

An "ongon," frequently depicted, it turns out, in Ice Age Mongolian art, is
a type of shamanistic spirit. When a shaman dies, he becomes an ongon. My
dictionary says that the plural of ongon is ongod, but the prehistoric art book
in which I found this word prefers ongones. I doubt I'll have regular occasion
to use the plural form, but if I did I would prefer the more familiar English-
sounding version, ongones. The adjective entopic is the opposite of ectopic.
Ectopic refers to something in its usual place and entopic means that it is
its regular place, as, for example, your tongue is in your mouth. If it were
elsewhere, it would be ectopic. In an entopic pregnancy, the embryo is in the
womb, where, by golly, is just where it ought to be. A "psychopomp" (from Greek
ψυχοπομπός, meaning a 'guide of souls') is an entity who carries the
soul of a dead person to the underworld or to heaven, or wherever. I suppose
that the familiar cartoon figure of a hooded, faceless man with a scythe is
a kind of psychopomp, though I don't remember anyone ever calling it so. A
"geoglyph" is a design in the earth created by removing soil and exposing the
underlying rock. Here's a most famous geoglyph:

Source: 2023/11/another-brooklyn-memoirist-pete-hamill

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist:  Pete Hamill
Date: November 15, 2023

Half of Pete Hamill's memoir sometimes seems to have dropped down from another
universe or more precisely from an alternative civilization, while the other
half depicts events and ideas that are as familiar to me (as they say) as
the back of my hand. Although Pete and I are both Brooklynites and near-
contemporaries (he was born in 1935, and I in 1939), our lives were o so similar
and yet completely different. But that's the way things were in complex,
composite 1940s Brooklyn.

The title of Hamill's memoir establishes the differences. It's well-named --
A Drinking Life (1994) -- and it is saturated with liquor and Irish bars and
elbow-lifting and most especially with Pete's father's uncontrollable and
disabling alcoholism. Yet just a few blocks over, in my part of Brooklyn,
alcohol played no part whatsoever in my own family or my life in the
neighborhood. I would not call an autobiography of my own An Abstinent Life,
because we weren't teetotalers and there was always a glass of Scotch to offer
to guests, but we hardly ever touched the stuff ourselves. It wasn't until much
later in life that I came to realize that my father and I were genetically
incapable of digesting alcohol. I've written about this peculiar phenomenon
here.

Equally in contrast was Hamill's early education. The poor fellow was enrolled
at Holy Name of Jesus, a Catholic parochial school where one of his teachers
was the "snarling vicious Brother Jan, a thick-necked Pole with a jutting
jaw and bent nose" -- your classic sadist -- who derived his joy in life by
whipping with a thick ruler the bare hands and butts of defenseless boys. I
myself learned to read and cipher at P.S. 217, a public elementary. At 217,
we had teachers both gifted and incompetent but no deranged monsters and no
corporal punishment. I can remember being bored at school, but not terrified.
Not terrified of the teachers, that is -- among the students we had our fair
share of bullies and sociopaths.

Hamill's Park Slope family took Roman Catholicism seriously but he himself
was not an enthusiast. Although he loved the costumes and the incense and the
majestic hymns, and although he confesses that the loved the "cartoony name"
of the Holy Ghost, he was, right from the start, an instinctive atheist. My
Flatbush family proffered us nary a single drop of religious information or
indoctrination or training. I myself had never attended a single religious
service in either synagogue, church, temple, mosque or tabernacle until 2021,
and then only because it was New Orleans and we heard that Ellis Marsalis had
volunteered to improvise a few measures on the piano. Hamill was a atheist by
dissent; I was one by inheritance.

Nevertheless, Hamill and I shared a great deal -- mostly, I think, in the form
of popular culture. Ring-o-levio, spaldeens, stoop ball. Where else but in
Brooklyn was a "do-over" a "hindoo?" And baseball. Hamill remembers that an
uncle confided to him that "the Dodgers are the greatest thing in the world."
He delights in reciting a litany of familiar Dodger names: "Augie Galan, Dixie
Walker, Ralph Branca, Joe Hatten, Henk Behrman, Hugh Casey." Except to a select
few of us, these names are meaningless random syllables, but to those who were
children at a particular time and place, they are poetry in its purest and
most sublime form, each name a luscious mouthful of pure pleasure. Syllables
that will forever bond Hamill and me to the end of the chapter. Syllables that
transcend this transitory sublunary existence.

Like me, Hamill was a great lover and collector of comic books. Both of us
savored heroes such as Captain Marvel and Captain Marvel jr. and the Human Torch
and the Green Lantern and Plastic Man and the Sub-Mariner and Wonder Woman and
Invisible Scarlet O'Neill. Hard to believe but there are those who think that
Freddie Freeman is only an all-star first baseman, but Hamill and I know better.

And also like me, Hamill found his way the public library where he measured
himself against Jim Hawkins and Edmond Dantes and Sydney Carton and D'Artagnan.
Tough competition.

Sometimes, Pete Hamill leaves pop culture behind and delves into his own
personal psychology. Here's a paragraph of unusual sincerity and one that
touches at least tangentially on my own experience. It appears in a discussion
of the writings of Robert Louis Stevenson. (I should mention that I read
everything of Stevenson's that the McDonald Avenue Library possessed.)

"I sensed (says Hamill) that I was my own version of Jekyll and Hyde. In my
head, the Good Boy was constantly warring with the Bad Guy. I wanted to be the
Bad Guy, tough, physical, a prince of the streets, at the same time I was driven
to be the Good Boy: hardworking, loyal, honorable, an earner of money for the
family. The Bad Guy cursed, growled, repeated dirty jokes and resisted Brother
Jan, the Good Boy served Mass in the mornings and read novels in bed at night."

In retrospect, I realize that I shared  a bit of Hamill's doppelgangerism.
In real life, I was a conforming Jekyll; but in my heart, in my soul, I was
a fierce dissenter. Lots of anger, lots of unfocussed passion. I didn't much
act upon my Hydeness, except for the occasional adolescent pilfering and the
meaningless fights. But how else to account for the violent dreams -- especially
the regularly-repeated nightmares where I bashed in the heads of unidentifiable
adults with a heavy shovel?  And buried their bodies in my father's backyard
garden underneath the hybrid teas?

Source: 2023/11/another-brooklyn-memoirist-barry-manilow

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist:  Barry Manilow
Date: November 17, 2023

The singer and composer Barry Manilow writes that he took three arduous years
to produce his rather thin memoir (Sweet Life, Adventures on the Way to
Paradise, 1987). I'm skeptical of his claim because his book has all the outward
indications of the celebrity genre that might justly be called the "as-told-
to's. It's written as a flow of "I did this, then I did that; I was great." 
The dullest prose; I don't think there's so much as a metaphor in the entire
book.  Gosh, I searched high and low for genuine feeling, for insight or
learning, or for complexity of vision. No dice. How could such an unreflective,
shallow being have achieved so much?  Been so popular, so highly regarded, so
famous.

I can't say that I'm very familiar with Manilow's music, but I'm pleased to
learn that he produced Bette Midler's debut album, The Divine Miss M. "Delta
Dawn" and "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy" were midlife favorites that I've been
pleased to revisit today (with the assistance of officious Alexa).

Brooklyn influence? Manilow seems to be a bit ashamed of his origins. At age
20, he moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan. "As we drove away, I said to myself,
'Good- bye, Brooklyn. Thanks for everything. I'm never coming back.' And I never
did."  The only clear evidence of his Brooklynity is that he named his beloved
dog "Bagel."

Source: 2023/11/jokic-zubac-embiid

Title: Where Have All the Native-Born 7-Foot Centers Gone?
Date: November 23, 2023

Just about every NBA team now has a non-native 7-foot center on its roster.
What's wrong with America -- can't we produce sequoia-size centers any more? 
Except for Minneapolis-born Chet Holmgren, Oklahoma's incredible rookie, by
jiminy they're all furriners. The last three MVPs, mirabile dictu, all big
guys, originated elsewhere: Milwaukee's Giannis Antetokounmpo from Nigeria
by way of Greece, Philadelphia's Joel Embiid from Yaounde, Cameroon, and
Denver's Никола Јокић, more familiar to us 'Mericans as Nikola Jokic,
from Sombor, Serbia. In addition, there's also awkward but effective Jonas
Valanciunas on the New Orleans Pelicans, from Lithuania; GSW's Dario Saric from
Croatia; Rudy Gobert, now blocking shots for Minneapolis (sharing center duties
with New Jersey's big Kat) from France; Kristaps Porzingis, playing for the
Boston Celtics (an exceedling lanky guy who seems to think he's a 7'3" guard)
from Latvia; Chicago's Nikola Vučević, from Montenegro; Jusuf Nurkić, of the
Phoenix Suns, formerly one of the "itch brothers", from Bosnia; Atlanta's Clint
Capela, Swiss via Angola; Sacramento's Domantas Sabonis, who is a fine fine
player but not as dominant as his father, Arvydas, from Lithuania  -- alongside
his backup, Alex Len from Ukraine; the Clippers Ivaca Zubac, from Croatia;
Houston's multi- talented Alperen Şengün, who leads the league in unusual
diacritical marks, from Turkey; Portland's Deandre Ayton from the Bahamas;
Pascal Siakam, playing for Toronto from Cameroon; Goga Bitadze from the other
Georgia, playing for Orlando: and of course the latest teen sensation, France's
Victor Wembanyama, from France. And I've probably forgotten one or two others.

Seven foot tall American centers, where have you gone? Why and wherefore? Die t?
Environmental deterioration? Genetics? Disinteres                             t?

It's not just a passing moment. Veteran NBA fans will remember Rik Smidt, Yao
Ming, Hakeem Olajuwon, Dikembe Mutombo, Dirk Nowitzki along with such off the
beaten track performers as Romania's Georghe Muresan and Sudan's Manute Bol.

Source: 2023/12/hereditary-meritocracy

Title: "Hereditary Meritocracy"
Date: December 03, 2023

"Hereditary meritocracy" is a phrase, and a concept, that hits home.
Reluctantly, I must concede that these words characterize my small corner of the
American experience (at least in part).

"Hereditary meritocracy" is a pointed irony. It's obviously an oxymoron -- a
contradiction -- in which an adjective that goes one way is sutured to a noun
that goes another -- juxtaposing, as it does, unearned heredity to earned merit.

Heredity, as it defines an individual, comprehends the talents or defects that
happen to lie in one's genes. In the wider social sense, it refers to what is
often called "ascribed status" or "ascribed value." You can be a marquis or a
mogul because your father or grandfather was "well born" or because he made
a ton of money -- not because you yourself ever lifted a finger. But to be
a member of the meritocracy, you must have achieved something intellectual,
financial, political, artistic, or whatever. Your own abilities, your own work.

But heredity and merit are not as distinct in practice as they are in theory,
as the phrase "hereditary meritocracy" indicates. The hereditarily rich and
well- born have advantages that allow their offspring to "achieve" and prosper.
Children of the advantaged develop, it's been shown, larger cerebellums. They
attend better schools, enjoy a richer home life, have better medical care
and are coached in music and art and athletics. Of course they then perform
better on standardized tests, which is then interpreted as as a sign of merit.
It's a better forecast of "success" to be rich with mediocre genes than poor
with excellent genes and good work habits -- though it's hard for some of the
privileged to admit this obvious fact.

And now to the point. I myself and my family have during this last century made
our way into the "hereditary meritocracy." Although we're not particularly rich
in cash, we're rich in family resources and intergenerational support. I believe
that every one of my own parents' descendants, and there are now 24 of them,
has or will graduate from college. We are almost uniformly "professionals": 
accountants, lawyers, teachers, librarians, journalists. Not a one of us rolls
cigars for a living, as did my grandfather. We're prosperous.

Should we be embarrassed or ashamed that we can provide a privileged life for
our descendants. I don't think so, because we didn't step on anyone's heads to
get here. We need not apologize for our successes in this new world.

But we do have obligations. The first is to be aware of our good fortune and
to realize that our successes owe as much to opportunity as to effort. (After
all, with the same genes, we were stagnant and miserable for a thousand years in
the "old country"). And then we must also make sure that we do not put barriers
in the way of others -- or more positively, we must try to help others find
themselves in the same comfortable niche that we have reached. It's an imperfect
system, this "hereditary meritocracy," but it is far from the worst the world
has known.

Source: 2023/12/amnesia-on-film-black-angel

Title: Amnesia on Film:  Black Angel
Date: December 06, 2023

[Warning, metablogians: do not read the following paragraphs if you're planning
to see Black Angel, a curious, interesting 1946 noir. Your viewing pleasure will
be ruined by the following "all spoiler" entry.]

Once again, it's amnesia, Hollywood style -- an alcoholic blackout that
is granted a patina of respectability when a doctor calls it Korsakoff's
syndrome. The plot in brief: a whiskey-soaked amnesiac (Martin Blair, played by
Cornell's own Dan Duryea) has just plain forgotten that he murdered his bad-girl
blackmailing wife.

I must say it's a difficult premise for me to swallow -- but is nevertheless
the kind of oddity that's par for the course in the Hammett-Chandler-Woolrich
universe.

To add to the complexity, forgetful Martin sets out to find the killer, and is
hot on the trail when his memory suddenly returns -- and in a flash he realizes
that he himself is the guilty party for whom he's searching. It's a mighty
contrived and out-of-left field kind of revelation -- but I must confess that I
fell for it. I was deceived by a series of red herrings and was surprised by the
film's outcome. I rather doubt that most viewers will be as much a sucker as I
was.

Like many noirs, Black Angel gets off to a very fast start. Scarcely thirty
seconds in, Mavis Marlowe (Constance Dowling) opens a bureau drawer and
retrieves her nice ladylike pistol. I respect a movie that's thoroughly
and instantaneously loyal to its genre. I wonder, though, whether future
generations, studying those many black-and-white crime films of the 1940s and
50s, won't think that every chest of drawers, armoire, lowboy, highboy, tallboy,
dresser, and chiffonier in Los Angeles or New York City harbored an easily
accessible derringer, rod, gat, or piece.

Source: 2023/12/basketball-in-my-life

Title: Basketball in My LIfe
Date: December 13, 2023

My father, who was born in 1904, was a basketball enthusiast when the game was
in its infancy. He played guard on Eastern District High School's team and later
played as a freshman at CCNY under legendary coach Nat Holman. But Dad came
from an impoverished family and left college after one year because, he told
me once, "I couldn't see how I could stay in school when my family needed so
much." So while his formal education went by the wayside, he was able to make up
the difference by a lifetime of reading. And although he was not a complaining
sort, it was clear to me and I think to my brothers that he felt a bit grieved
that his formal athletic career had been cut so short. He kept at it, though,
on his own. Well into his forties, he was absent from family dinner one night
a week. "Wednesdays," my mother explained, long before I could understand what
the words meant, "your father goes to the gym." And Saturday mornings, in warm
weather, were reserved for tennis. Dad very much wanted his three sons to carry
on his athletic tradition, but I think, in retrospect, that in the long run we
all disappointed him. Both my brothers were fine athletes although not big or
fast enough for professional careers; I was, alack and alas, a disappointment.
Dad, who had also been a semi-pro catcher in baseball, taught Gene and Jon
how to throw an "inshoot" and an "outshoot," but he could not bring himself
to coach me because it was obvious that with my 55 mile an hour fastball and
scattershot arm, I wasn't going anywhere, pitching-wise, and although he showed
me a couple of basketball moves he was, I recognize, a bit embarrassed by my
want of athletic skill. (In my defense I must report that although I was more
academic than athletic, I was voted "class athlete" by my P. S. 217 (8-5) eighth
grade class -- a group which must have been, now that I think of it, quite a
collection of klutzes). My older brother was a good enough basketball player to
play for his college team for a year, and my younger brother was an outstanding
sandlot all-star in baseball who once struck out Joe Torre, who, it will be
remembered, finished his major league career with a .300 lifetime average. (The
second time he pitched to Torre, my brother says, the future MVP hit a ball that
"is still circling the earth.") I myself had the briefest career on the diamond.
The pinnacle of my experience was that, once, playing second base, I turned a
double play -- took the toss from the shortstop, stepped on the bag, gracefully
wheeled, and pegged the ball perfectly to the first baseman. It happened once
and once only, but it was glorious -- definitely a Hall of Fame moment. The peak
of my basketball career occurred in the slippery court (which doubled as a dance
floor) in the basement of the Flatbush Jewish Center on Coney Island Avenue and
Avenue J. I was, I estimate, thirteen years old. Wearing number 3, in black and
gold, I was steaming down the left side of the court on a fast break and was
forced away from the basket, so instead of a layup I managed a sweeping running
left-handed hook which caught nothing but net. There was modest applause. None
of my teammates guessed that I had intended to bank the ball off the backboard
and that it had slipped out of my hand and swished, entirely by accident. I only
reveal this deep secret now, very now.  Another high point in my career: I once
won a local foul shooting contest. I hit 23 of 25. One small caveat, though.
The contest was conducted in the P.S. 217 schoolyard, where the baskets were,
how shall I say this correctly, unsteady and soft. As a result, they were like
sewers -- everything flushed. I doubt that I would have made 23 on a standard
rigid rim. Nevertheless, I did win the medal and the other competitors all used
the same ball and basket as I -- so, therefore, a modest triumph. And then
playing basketball faded into the background, because I didn't get my growth
until very late and for a while I was playing at 4' 11" or 5' 1" against hairy
guys who had already reached their full mature height. But I continued to pursue
my undistinguished career -- including the most competitive activity of my life
-- three on three half court in the EHHS gym, one basket wins, and "winners
out." And then a little intramural in Ithaca; an occasional pickup game in
Cambridge. Oh, and twenty years later on, I played a bit with my own offspring,
all three of whom were more athletic than I. My last pathetic hurrah (almost a
decade ago, now) was being obliterated at h-o-r-s-e by my granddaughter Ella.

Nevertheless, I retained my interest in the sport. No longer a participant, I
became a serious spectator. I know enough about roundball to appreciate both
player and play. For thirty years or so, I had a good seat at the home games of
the CU Buffaloes -- it was high quality college basketball (although the Buffs
rarely enjoyed a winning season). One source of interest and fun for me was to
evaluate the talent and try to predict which of our guys (or the visitors') had
the skill and size to move up to the next level. Over the years, I followed
the early days of many a later NBA regular -- and even a couple of stars. I
remember in particular Jay Humphries, who played four excellent seasons for
CU and then averaged in double figures during an extended NBA career. Also
local lad Chauncey Billups, "Mr Big Shot" himself. Andre Roberson, a terrific
defender and rebounder who never lived up to his potential because he just
couldn't master the corner three; Matt Bullard, a fine outside shooter; Scott
Wedman; Alec Burks; Derrick White (still playing for Boston and getting better
each year); and Spencer Dinwiddie, whom I didn't judge to be an NBA player but
who has become a steady professional. The high point of my CU spectatorial
career occurred in 2006 when the Texas Longhorns brought to our stadium a
gangly teen- ager named Kevin Durant. One didn't have to be a sophisticated
evaluator of talent to recognize that KD had a spectacular career ahead of him;
it was grandly obvious. It took him only two years to lead the NBA in scoring.
I stopped attending CU games when the athletic department, an independent
entity with only a loose connection to the University, demanded that I make a
donation of $400 for the privilege of purchasing season tickets. I resented the
presumption, and I felt that there were many causes more worthy of my limited
philanthropy than CU basketball. Although I stay away from our local Events
Center, I'm still an occasional arena visitor. In fact, just last season, LERM
and I bought incredibly expensive tickets to watch the Cavaliers take on the
Pelicans at the Smoothie King Arena in New Orleans. The venue was up-to-date
but way too brightly lit, and crowded, and noisy. Moreover, I dislike the
theory that attendees must be continually entertained and placated with garish
novelties. I don't go to basketball games for the half-time acrobats or the
animal acts or the costumed dancers or the "kiss-cam" or the ear-popping "music"
nor to be commanded when to cheer or when to chant "DE-FENSE." I go to watch and
admire the players. Despite the distractions it was a good game, even though
Zion Williamson was out with an ankle injury. These pros, even the unheralded
ones, are fabulous athletes and they are especially impressive in person.

So for most of my life it's been the electronic medium that has kept me abreast
of the game. It all started with radio; I suspect that very few readers of this
entry will be able to recall the fast-paced narration of Marty Glickman on WHN,
but he was, let me tell you, a hoops artist who could bring the Knicks alive
with voice alone. Then came television, sometime around the early 1950s. The
thirteen inch black-and-white Dumont that my father acquired displayed an image
that seemed miraculous at the time but paleolithically primitive compared to
the 60" HDTV that entrances me nowadays. It's all present -- right there before
my astonished eyes. Incredible no-look passes and sensational blocks and three-
pointers from downtown -- and also horrid tattoos -- in brilliant color. In my
TV-basketball saturated brain is stored the entire history of the NBA from then
until now. In the 50s, Max Zaslofsky, Harry Gallatin, Sweetwater Clifton, Carl
Braun, the McGuire brothers Dick and Al, and Ernie Vandeweghe, who played only
home games because he was a full-time medical student. A team that was good but
always managed to lose to the Celtics -- who had Cousy and Sharman and later
Bill Russell, the Jones boys (Sam and KC), Havlicek and Heinsohn. I was in those
years a most loyal and enthusiastic fan of our own New York Knickerbockers --
the championship teams composed of Willis Reed, Dave DeBusschere, Bill Bradley,
Earl Monroe, and Walt Frazier, names and faces as present in my memory as
the more celebrated Dodger boys of summer. Then came the Magic-Bird era, LA
"showtime," Michael Jordan, Duncan-Ginobili-Parker-Popovich, and now LeBron
James, who, although, he is certainly the most effective player in history, is
less exciting to watch than his innovative contemporary, Steph Curry. During
this last while, I've become a devoted GSW fan; when they were at their best, a
few years ago, they played an extraordinarily beautiful game. There were nights
when they'd score 30 baskets on 25 lovely assists. It's been a great ride that's
now coming to an end, but there's another generation of players on the horizon
and perhaps I'll be around long enough to enjoy them. After all, I've been there
for the entire history of the NBA. What developments I have seen! What was once
a local, coterie sport has gone international, with many of the best players
coming from overseas or south of the border. Where once all the players, save
a few, were White and middle-class, now 75% to 80% are Black and inner-city,
bringing with them a heck of a lot of skill and flash and dazzle. Lumbering
awkward centers, with their slow roundhouse hook shots, have been superseded by
astonishingly mobile 7-footers who can protect the rim but also drift outside
to nail a three. Salaries, in the old days, were little more than nominal and
now there are marginal players making millions off the bench. The athletes have
become celebrities -- and their shoes have become almost as famous as they
are, and more lucrative. Franchises, which once went for a song, are now worth
billions.

When I'm watching a game on a Sunday afternoon, I think about my father. I wish
he could sit with me and discuss the progress of the sport. I'd like to show
him what has happened since he left us in 1985. He'd like it that the players
are bigger, faster, stronger, in better shape, and that the shooting is more
accurate and the defenses more subtle and sophisticated. He'd love the pick-and-
roll and the pick-and-pop. He'd appreciate the alley-oops and the accurate full
court passes. I also know what he wouldn't like -- the overhasty three, the
lenient interpretation of walking and palming, and the occasional showboating,
Most of all, he'd hate it that the NBA is now in cahoots with the gambling
establishment. He would see it, as I do, as a major miscalculation -- as a
scandal waiting to happen.

Every once in a while, even at this advanced age, I dream that I'm in the midst
of a game, and I rise up and with an effortless flick of the right wrist launch
a perfect 40-foot three that hardly even grazes the net. A childish fantasy,
perhaps, but still very  satisfying.

Source: 2023/12/another-brooklyn-memoirist-barry-menikoff

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Barry Menikoff
Date: December 14, 2023

I met Barry Menikoff a couple of times. The first time was at the Huntington
Library in San Marino, California and the second time when he was a visiting
professor here in Boulder. A Robert Louis Stevenson specialist, he was; I've had
a fondness for RLS from my childhood, and I've read a substantial percentage
of his voluminous works, so we had something to talk about. Menikoff was then
teaching in Hawaii and mighty anxious to find his way back to the mainland.

I knew nothing of his childhood except that like me he was a Brooklyn boy. Then,
a while ago, I heard through a mutual acquaintance that he had written a memoir
of his childhood and youth. And so he has. It's called Stone Mother, and it's
privately printed but available on Amazon, and it's a damn good book that might
with a few judicious edits have been a successful commercial publication.

I used to tell my friends that I was the most naive boy in the history of the
known universe ever to arrive on a college campus. But now I have a competitor.
Menikoff knew a lot of things -- principally how to survive the death of
his mother and the disappearance and neglect of his father, so he was not
without resources. Socially, he was behindhand, and in terms of books and
intellectual life, he was nowhere. It was quite an achievement for him to get
from Brownsville to Brooklyn College and then on to a successful career as a
teacher and scholar.

I think that what I liked best about this memoir is its honesty.  It tells the
truth and by doing so creates a strong, credible picture of Brooklyn life back
then,

Source: 2023/12/another-brooklyn-memoirist-marty-glickman

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Marty Glickman
Date: December 19, 2023

In the late 40s and 50s, Marty Glickman was the radio voice of the New York
Knicks. As a basketball announcer, he was simply the best. Most of us from that
era, especially Brooklyn guys, can still recall in our mind's ear his melodious,
accurate and rapid-fire recreation of the game. "Gallatin to Braun on the left
wing. Swish."

Until a couple of days ago, I did not know that Marty Glickman had written (in
an "as-told-to" kind of way) an autobiography called The Fastest Kid on the
Block (1996), and that, believe it or not, one copy of this book is among the
holdings of the Michener Library of the University of Northern Colorado, in
Greeley, Colorado -- and is now in my very own hands. A warm thank you to UNC
and to Interlibrary Loan.

Glickman was not only an announcer; he was also a student at fabled P S 217, my
own not-so-"alma" mater, which he attended from first through sixth grade. He
was born in 1917 so that would be in the 1920s. He was, get this, the fastest
kid on the block in my very own neighborhood.

He was not just a voice but an athlete, best known as a two-way football player
at Syracuse University. He was also a top of the class sprinter who once ran a
hundred yards in 9.5 seconds (the great Jesse Owens held the world record at
9.3). In 1936, Glickman was scheduled to run the second leg of the 4 x 100 at
the Berlin Olympics.  He was scratched at the last minute for reasons that are
still murky, but Glickman's opinion, and mine, is that Adolf Hitler didn't want
a Jew to win a medal, so he had Goebbels whisper to Avery Brundage, who was the
head of U. S. Olympic committee, that Glickman not be allowed to run. (Brundage
was a notorious racist, misogynist, and Jew-hater, known as "slavery Avery."
(There's an unverified report that Brundage spoke at the February, 1939, Nazi
rally at Madison Square Garden; it would nor have been out of character for him
to have done so.)

Glickman is philosophical about not being allowed to run in the Olympics. It
would have been good to show his grandchildren his gold medal, he says. I myself
am indignant for him.

Once, when I was still a Brooklyn yoot, a rumor swept the P S 217 schoolyard
that "Marty Glickman is going to be here this afternoon."  He appeared, but all
that I can remember is that he spoke to a knot of kids. I remember nothing more.

Source: 2023/12/books-i-read-2023

Title: Books I Read, 2023
Date: December 29, 2023

Ian McEwan, Black Dogs; Ian McEwan, Saturday; Julian Barnes, The Noise of
Time; Ian McEwan, Amsterdam; Marcia Davenport, East Side, West Side; Thomas
Halliday, Otherlands; Joseph Sassoon, The Sassoons; Jane Austen, Persuasion;
Jane Austen, Mansfield Park; Thomas Hardy, Tess of the d'Urbervilles; Jonathan
Raban, Bad Land; David Thomson, Sleeping with Strangers; Michael North, The
Baltic; Niall Williams, This is Happiness; James Vincent, Beyond Measure;
Larry McMurtry, Lonesome Dove; Andrea Wulf,The Invention of Nature; Oliver
Goldsmith, The Vicar of Wakefield; David Hone, How Fast Did T. Rex Run?; Richard
Klein, Cigarettes are Sublime; Claire Keegan, Foster; Howard Koch, Casablanca:
Screenplay and Legend; Jeremy Dauber, Jewish Comedy, a Serious History; Caroline
Pennock, On Savage Shore; The Best of Sholom Aleichem, ed. Howe and Wisse;
Richard S. Laub, Two Acres of Time; Susan Rubin Suleiman, Daughter of History; 
Rachel Brownstein, American Born; Mabee Weinstein, Ferns; Jane Austen, Emma
(2x); Margo Jefferson, Negroland; Marsha Gordon, Becoming the Ex-Wife; Judith
Hicks Stiehm, Janet Reno, A Life; Elliot Willensky, When Brooklyn was the
World; Pete Hamill, A Drinking Life; Roger Cohen, The Girl from Human Street;
Dorothy B. Hughes, In a Lonely Place; James Sturm, The Golem's Mighty Swing;
Ian Smith, Black Shakespeare; Robert A.M. Stern, Between Memory and Invention;
Paul G. Bahn, Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art; George Orwell,
Homage to Catalonia; Barry Manilow, Sweet Life; Jonathan Balcombe, Super
Fly;  Eric R. Kandel, There is Life after the Nobel Prize; Barry Menikoff,
Stone Mother; Norman Podhoretz, Making It;  David Scheel, Many Things Under
a Rock; Ernest Hemingway, The Sun Also Rises; Eric Kandel, In Search of
Memory; Timothy Garton Ash, Homelands.

Source: 2024/01/another-brooklyn-memoirist-norman-podhoretz

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist -- Norman Podhoretz
Date: January 03, 2024

To most readers of this blague, Norman Podhoretz is a nonentity, but for a
while there, he was a big deal in certain intellectual circles. His youthful
autobiography, Making It (1967), elicited howls of indignation. Nowadays, it's
impossible not to read Making It retrospectively, because it's undeniable
that the author, who began life as liberal or progressive, has metamorphosed,
over the years, into a monster. He is now a full bore Trumpian fascist. In
the Podhoretz universe, abortion is infanticide and homosexuality constitutes
a danger to the polity. Although the child of shtetl Jews, Podhoretz is now
stridently anti-immigrant. In 2010, he ridiculously proclaimed that "I would
rather have Sarah Palin sitting in the Oval Office than Barack Obama." He has
called the Trump presidency "a kind of miracle" and announced  that Trump is "a
vessel chosen by God to save us from the evil on the Left." Such a sentiment is
not just echo-chamber conservative twaddle: it's nutso insanity pure and simple.

How much of Podhoretz's wandering in the wilderness can be traced to his
Brownsville Brooklyn childhood and youth is hard to say?  Making It is a
most peculiar autobiography. It's beautifully written -- in the sense that
the arguments are finely deployed and the sentences are lucid, sometimes even
lyrical. But it's also clear that Podhoretz, from the start, was the kind of
obnoxious guy who delighted in provocation. It's not uncommon for Brooklynites
of his generation to wish to leave Brooklyn behind. Podhoretz is shameless about
his ambition: he had "a vulgar desire to rise above the class into which he was
born."

Most megalomaniacal autobiographers want to be liked. Not Podhoretz. He strives
to be disliked, even hated, and in this he succeeds. He had a fear of becoming
an "inauthentic WASP" but that's exactly what he became. The further to the
right he went, the further away from his mother's embarrassing Yiddish accent. A
sad life.

The character in literature who Podhoretz most resembles is Johnny Rocco in Key
Largo, who wants "more."

Podhoretz's "more" is similarly empty and was similarly dangerous.

Source: 2024/01/new-years-resolutions-2024

Title: New Year's Resolutions -- 2024
Date: January 05, 2024

It's that time of year once again -- time to get 2024 out of the starting gates
with force and vigor. I'm all into self-improvement, as everyone knows. So here
are my resolutions.

1). Sleep longer, and stay in bed later in the morning. No need to bounce out of
bed. It's warm and cozy in there. Breakfast will wait a few minutes longer. 
Related resolution: take more and better naps. Nothing more pleasurable than a
lie-down after a satisfying lunch.

2). Eat more ice cream. We are fortunate to live in an age of ice-cream
abundance and variety. I intend to take advantage of the circumstances.  And
by ice cream, I mean Ice cream: no ersatz concoctions of soy, whale-oil, kefir,
oatmilk, yoghurt, tofu, or coconut oil. Cream, as from a cow.

3)  Walk more slowly. What's the rush?  Why is everyone in such a gol-durn
hurry?

4)  Avoid responsibility. Let others do their share. At this point in life,
there's no shame in shirking.

I hope this program is not too ambitious. I wouldn't want to fail at it and
embarrass my friends and supporters. I'll do my best.

Source: 2024/01/alou

Title: Alou
Date: January 10, 2024

I read Felipe Alou's autobiography, My Baseball Journey (2018). It's not a
literary masterpiece, but nevertheless a solid book that "does the job."
It's particularly valuable for its story of the brutalities faced by a black
Dominican pioneer coming to segregated America in the early '50s. A good
reminder of a part of our ugly racial history that is so easy to forget or
ignore. In an afterword, Bruce Bochy calls Alou the "Jackie Robinson of South
America." My Baseball Journey is also a good reminder of the daily hardships
faced by the professional athlete. True enough that they're well paid, but also
true that they're subject to injuries and decay and insecurity and have to fight
for their job every day. There's no such thing as tenure in sports. Alou was
smart and resilient and proud and enjoyed a career that can be justly celebrated
-- but not all do.

Here's my favorite paragraph: "I missed playing when I retired. Every retired
ballplayer goes through the same things, the same thoughts and emotions. I still
miss playing. To this day, I have dreams that I'm still playing. Sometimes I
have nightmares where I"m late for a game or I've missed a team bus to the
ballpark." I understand this sentiment very well; like many of my peers, I still
dream that I'm either late for class or am standing in front of a large audience
and have absolutely no knowledge of the subject about which I'm required to
discourse for an hour.

One weakness of My Baseball Journey: though Alou managed through the steroid
years, and knew Barry Bonds and others, he gives the drug problem mighty short
shrift. His book turns a blind eye toward that painful period.

Source: 2024/01/words-of-my-life-joint

Title: Words of My Life -- "Joint"
Date: January 17, 2024

"Joint" is a word that in the course of my lifetime has engaged in some serious
shape-shifting. When I first encountered the word, joint (derived from the
Latin jungere, to join) was simply a place where two pieces of wood were glued
together or where one's bones were articulated to produce a wrist, elbow, or
knee. Mighty simple and uncomplicated, it would appear -- but even then "joint"
had begun to accumulate variants. Rick Blaine's sentence in Casablanca was an
early warning: "of all the gin joints in all the towns in the world, she has
to come into mine." A "joint" was apparently a nightclub or bar. "Gin joint"
suggests that  "Rick's Cafe Americain" was louche or sleazy, and perhaps
it was, what with all the crooked gambling going on and with the mysterious
"letters of transit" stuffed into Sam's piano. But why "joint"?  It seems
fanciful to suppose that a joint was a place where various people "joined"
together, but I can't think of a more persuasive etymology.

Another use of joint came to my attention in the late 1960's when I became
seriously interested in Jacobean oak furniture. Here's a handsome "joint stool":

A joint stool was the most ordinary kind of chair during the period when
Shakespeare was wielding his quill. Why "joint"?  Apparently because it was a
joined stool, and therefore of higher quality than one that was merely glued.
A joiner was a skilled craftsman before mass-produced nails and screws became
inexpensive and commonplace.

Shakespeare knew joint stools very well: "Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-
stool," says the Fool to a joint stool. Fool humors mad hallucinating Lear by
pretending that the joint stool is the king's daughter Goneril. Shakespeare, by
the by, played many a variation on "joint," employing or inventing  such terms
as "joint-servant," "joint-laborer," "joint-ring," "jointress," "unjointed,"
"injointed," "short-jointed," "conjointly," and "disjoint."

But even Shakespeare would not have imagined the transfigurations of the word in
these our latter days. Nowadays, a joint is a prison, though I don't know why
one would call it so when such colorful appellations as "hoosegow," "clink,"
"stir," "slammer," and "pokey" are all on the tips of our collective tongues.
Nor would he have imagined "joint" as a marijuana blunt or spliff. He wouldn't
have known but might have appreciated "joint" as a term for the male sexual
organ.

All of which makes it possible, theoretically, to say, "I was in a joint,
smoking a joint, figuring out how to exercise my joint."

As for me, I use the word "joint" everyday -- in the most useful phrase "joint
card."

Other words of my life:  slouch, cishet, yips, ramps, jot and tittle, worship,
mucilage. spatchcock, umpire, stopper.

Source: 2024/01/nora-prentiss

Title: Othello (1604), Nora Prentiss (1947), Date Night (2011)
Date: January 29, 2024

Many years ago, in what sometimes seems like an earlier life, I taught
Shakespeare courses to both young and "mature" students. When we reached
Othello, halfway through the semester, I would, of course, point out that the
play did not take the traditional form of tragedy-- of a great man or king gone
awry as in the case of Macbeth or Richard III. Othello instead introduced a
formula that was innovative for its time but which has become commonplace in
ours. Othello is a domestic drama in which a marriage falls all to pieces. I
liked to tell my captive audience, only slightly facetiously, that the whole
of life is divided into two parts: the comic, which begins with birth and ends
with marriage, and the tragic, which begins with marriage and proceeds to
death. A statement which is a kind of shorthand, simplified version of a cliche
of criticism. Like many such abbreviations, this formula contains a dollop of
truth. Othello in fact begins with a marriage -- or more accurately a defiant
elopement -- and comes to conclusion with Desdemona strangled in her bed and her
husband the Moor a suicide. It's the sole play of Shakespeare's that follows
the strict marriage-to-death path, although Romeo and Juliet is comic until
the secret wedding but becomes tragic afterwards, while the wondrous Winter's
Tale begins with Leontes and Hermione already married and pushes through some
desperate circumstances only to come to a miraculous comic climax with the
restoration of a woman presumed dead and a glorious second-generation wedding.
Both RJ and WT sometimes seem like two different and opposite kinds of plays
condensed into one -- and yet are all the more triumphant for being so.

These musings were precipitated by the film that we watched a couple of nights
ago -- Nora Prentiss (1947), which Wikipedia characterizes as a film noir, but
which is better thought of as two films in one -- a film that starts as an
instance of domestic drama or "bourgeois realism" or even soap opera and doesn't
become a murder mystery until two-thirds along the way. In a limited sense,
it's not unlike Shakespeare's hybrids, but alas does not successfully yoke or
blend its disparate plots. As a result, the last section of Nora Prentiss,
I'm sorry to say, becomes not intriguing but unbelievable and ludicrous. It's
an odd and interesting film, although not a good one, but it's worth watching
for aficionados of TCM not only for its manipulation of genre expectations but
also because it is one of a large group of films that are so very common and
ordinary in twentieth-century America where such enormous value is attached to
a happy and fulfilling marriage -- and to the disappointment that arises when
the marriage comes a-cropper. In Nora Prentiss, a midlife couple with a pair
of kids, who live in an orderly picket-fence house, ought to be living a happy
life, but, by golly, both husband and wife are discontented and bored. They
are afflicted with the whole package of suburban anxieties. It's Cheever-land
or Updyke-land: demanding children and divorcing friends, the stultifying
daily routine, the unsatisfying jobs, the dull obligatory social events, and
especially the lack of sexual excitement which is signified in these Code-
burdened movies by the gulf between the twin beds and the sterile head-to-toe
sleepwear and also by that pathetic chaste kiss before husband and wife turn
away from each other as they extinguish the cute matching bedside table lamps.
Gosh, it's a scenario that is familiar from dozens and perhaps scores of postwar
(and later) films.

Melodramatic Nora Prentiss follows the fortunes of steady-Eddie Dr. Richard
Talbot, enacted by Kent Smith, who meets nightclub chantoosie Nora, played by
Anne Sheridan. Flirtation turns into an affair, and the affair evolves into true
love or at least into genuine sexual passion. But all goes from bad to worse
when Talbot, instead of seeking a divorce from his stern unlovely wife, concocts
a dumb whopper of a plot that makes Friar Lawrence's harebrained sleeping-dram
waking-up-in-the-tomb plan seem brilliant in comparison. Talbot fakes his own
death and disappears -- causing the film to turn police-procedural. And then,
through a series of hard-to-credit mischances and gimmicks, Talbot finds himself
in his newly assumed fake guise indicted for murdering -- oh no yes indeed! --
his very own self. Nora Prentiss by this time has metamorphosed into a film that
by rights should be renamed City of Naked Death or Shadow of Evil Night. Even
so, the film might have been salvaged had not so much depended on the acting
skill of Kent Smith, who is perfectly fine in the first part of the film, but
incapable of managing the switch from reliable doc to nervous fugitive. It's
not entirely his fault: the role puts too much pressure on the actor. I doubt
whether such a transition could have been handled by Roscius or Burbage or
Garrick or Sir Laurence Olivier himself.

Here is a picture of Ann Sheridan and Kent Smith. Sheridan wisely holds on to
her hat; Smith's chapeau dominates the scene; very 1940s.

Source: 2024/02/another-brooklyn-memoirist-martin-h-levinson

Title: Another Brooklyn Memoirist: Martin H. Levinson
Date: February 02, 2024

Autobiographers from Brooklyn divide, on the whole, into two camps. There
are the discontented, who yearned from day one to get the hell out of the
neighborhood as quickly as possible; and then there are the nostalgics,
perpetually romanticizing those great days of spaldeens, stickball, and
chocolate egg creams. Martin Levinson's privately-published memoir Brooklyn
Boomer, Growing up in the Fifties (2011) is most decidedly of the latter group.
But what a thin and disappointing piece of work it is!!  Gosh, were we all
quite so shallow! Levinson's book displays no sense of life's complexities and
contradiction and ambiguities. Perhaps it's because he didn't or wouldn't read
-- no exciting trips to the Brooklyn Public Library in this sterile memoir. Nor
even to the movie palaces.

The best word for Brooklyn Boomer is, I'm sorry to say, superficial. Also
padded.

Also unoriginal.

Plus the account of public school "assemblies" is shamelessly cribbed from a
2006 entry on this very blog.

Source: 2024/02/words-new-to-me-once-again

Title: Words New to Me Once Again
Date: February 05, 2024

A dvandva compound is a formation in which two individual nouns are joined
to form a new word. Wik offers the example "singer-songwriter." I think that
"barber-surgeon" is therefore a dvandva, although I am confident that I am the
first person ever to denominate it as such. Anaptyxis is a term in linguistics
for the demotic insertion of a vowel between two consonants, as in filim for
film or realitor for realtor. A calque a word-for-word translation from one
language to another. Clausula is a term in ancient rhetoric for a consciously-
contrived rhythmic ending to a long sentence. If I've ever employed a clausula,
I am sure that it's been entirely fortuitous.

A suffete was a Carthaginian official or magistrate. A groma is a Roman
surveying instrument that had plumb lines hanging from four arms at right
angles. I do nor know how it was employed but it must have worked very well
because the Romans did some remarkable surveying. A gromatic text is therefore
a record of a survey. An ostracan is a fragment of ancient pottery onto which
writing has been scratched or incised. Since ostraca are durable they are a
primary source of archeological information. A cippus was a cylindrical stone
used as a gravestone by the Etruscans and as a boundary marker by Romans. Here's
a handsome old cippus.

Source: 2024/02/new-words-etruscan-related-new-words

Title: New Words of Etruscan Interest
Date: February 13, 2024

I have just finished reading Sybille Haynes comprehensive study, Etruscan
Civilization, A Cultural History (2000). It's not only a window into a
remarkable extinct world, but also a trove of exciting words new to me. And as
readers of this blague are well aware, vocabulary excites Dr. Metablog.

For example: a skyphos is a two-handled cup for drinking wine. Here's an
especially handsome one from the 5th century BCE.

It's decorated with a portrait of a hoplite, a Greek soldier.

Then there's the versatile word symplegma, which sounds suspiciously like a
noxious bodily discharge -- but isn't. If one searches for the word symplegma,
the first meaning that one encounters is a "genus of ascidian tunicates in the
family styelidae." What the heck are any kind of tunicates doing in a volume
on  Etruscan civilization? But on further investigation it emerges that
symplegma has a second and more pertinent definition. It's a word that is used
by art historians and archeologists for a depiction of sexual intercourse.
Honest to Pete, who would have guessed?  How the two symplegmata -- the
tunicate and the fornicate -- are related, is, I must say, quite a mystery.

Another word with two distinct significations is tibia. We all know that the
tibia is the bone that connects ankle and knee. I did not know that for students
of ancient world it also refers to a brooch or clasp.

Bucchero is the name of typical and common Etruscan ceramic distinguished by its
burnished black glaze. Here's a bucchero oinochoe (or jug for wine).

Speaking of jugs, there's also the aryballos, which is a "globular flask" used
to contain perfume or oil. Another kind of jug is the "canopic jar", which was
used by the ancient Egyptians to store a guy's (or gal's) inner organs during
the process of mummification. I have no idea how mummies were processed, nor
have I any desire to be enlightened.

A coroplast was, in antiquity, an artisan or sculptor who created terracotta
figurines. Here's a lovely example of such a one's work.

Nowadays, Coroplast, Inc. is the name of a large company that produces
corrugated plastic sheets used in packaging and signboards.

A felloe or felly is the outer rim of a wheel to which spokes are attached.
I imagine that this word is well known to bicyclists and wheelwrights, but
I had never encountered it. My chagrin, my apologies. An acroterion is an
architectural ornament mounted at the apex of corner of a building, a kind of
rooftop gargoyle. An anthemion or palmette is a design consisting of radiating
petals. Sometimes anthemia are carved into acroteria. If two anthemia are set
back to back they are said to be addorsed.

Source: 2024/02/what-we-read-in-the-1950s-the-magnificent-ambersons

Title: What We Read in the 1950s: The Magnificent Ambersons
Date: February 25, 2024

Although The Magnificent Ambersons was first published in 1918, it was still
admired and almost canonical in the 1950s when I was coming to awareness. It
was the sort of unchallenging social realism novel in the Sinclair Lewis or
John Marquand tradition that was then school-and-societyy approved. Did I read
it then? I can't say for certain. I can swear that I read Tarkington's Penrod
series which was specifically targeted to young people. I would have thought
that this week's reading of The Magnificent Ambersons was a return to familiar
territory, but it doesn't much matter because I didn't recognize a single word
of it. All was newer than new -- and disappointing to boot.

Tarkington's reputation, once sky-high (two Pulitzer prizes), has plummeted
since the 50s and I doubt that my grandchildren or their co-eval friends have
ever heard his name. Strange to say, the edition that was on the shelf at the
Boulder Public Library had all the marks of a high school text, with commentary,
footnotes, and sample questions designed to challenge those dedicated young
folks who were diligent enough to make it to the end. I suspect that students
and their teachers will find themselves repelled not only by the superbly
snobby, unattractive, and bratty central figure but also, and especially, by
the frequent and offensive use of the slur "darkies." Mighty off-putting, I'm
afraid.

The Tarkington mini-revival was precipitated by a viewing of Orson Welles' 1942
The Magnificent Ambersons - a film that deserves to be called "rivetting" -- but
rather for the cinematography than for the disturbing, perverse family drama
that it depicts. Welles thought it was his best work. Audiences will neither
be able to concur or disagree with his assessment because some forty minutes
of his completed film were cut and destroyed by a studio editor in order to
make the work more commercial and more palatable. Moreover, a happy ending was
sutured onto the film -- the original had been much "darker." Though how much
darker is hard to imagine, because even as it stands it's a gloomy story of
perverse values and gratuitous tragedy. In the edited and "improved" version,
George Minafer survives his automobile accident and reconciles with attractive
Lucy Morgan. In the novel and apparently in Welles' version, George dies of his
injuries. In both novel and film, George is a self-centered prig and frankly,
when the film came to conclusion, I myself would have been quite willing to
let him die. In no way had he earned the favors of such a self-respecting and
intelligent young lady as Lucy. Hadn't paid his dues, even though to make some
money he had taken up a dangerous work involving "nitro-glycerine." I do wonder
what might have been depicted in those purged Welles minutes because the film
follows the novel closely, almost slavishly.  What did Welles include that the
novel passes over, or more suggestively, what did Welles invent and add?

I think that one of the reasons that Booth Tarkington has sunk without much
trace is because of his exceedingly short-sighted and reactionary stance. The
Magnificent Ambersons is anti-modern, but not out of any deep ecological,
philosophical or psychological conviction. Tarkington idealizes the Indiana of
his childhood and doesn't much like change. People are moving into his town
(Indianopolis though he never uses the name) from Eastern Europe and they're
outworking and displacing the good old solid Americans -- those established
families with their shared values and small-town friendliness. These new
arrivals make money and build large ugly house and instead of horse-drawn
carriages they drive automobiles. The new auto industry is a particular bete
noir for Tarkington. The Ambersons lose their money investing in it and George
gets himself run over by a vehicle that was plunging down the street at 20 mile
an hour.  Autos bring speed and soot and social disruption.

At this moment, I do not feel a need to read any more novels by Booth
Tarkington.

Source: 2024/02/the-piacenza-liver

Title: The Piacenza Liver
Date: February 29, 2024

It's humiliating for me to confess that until a few weeks ago I had never heard
of the Piacenza Liver, which is a life-size bronze Etruscan replica of the liver
of a sheep, and unquestionably European civilization's most heralded metal
liver. How could I not have known?

The PL was unearthed in 1877 and dates from the first century BCE. Here's a
picture of this most important artifact:

It's shocking to me that the tourist-oriented website of the city of Piacenza
advertises its Duomo, a 12th century Romanesque church, its Passerini-Landi
Library, and the Palazzo Farnese, a 16th century great house, but offers not the
slightest mention of its foremost liver (which is housed in the palazzo). An
inexplicable omission.

Source: 2024/03/ball-games-i-played-in-the-1940s-and-1950s

Title: Ball Games I Played During the 1940s and 1950s.
Date: March 03, 2024

Basketball, volleyball, punchball, stickball, dodgeball, box ball, box baseball,
baseball, softball, stoop ball, touch football, handball, kickball, wall ball.
Ping-pong. Hit the penny. Never played tennis or tackle football. Never even
heard of soccer.

What have I forgotten?

Source: 2024/03/state-of-the-person

Title: State of the Person
Date: March 22, 2024

If there can be a "state of the union" address, and in Colorado a "state of the
state," why should we not have a "state of the person" -- specifically, the
state of this person, i.e. me. An annual report. Today seems like a good day for
it -- inasmuch as I have just now passed a weighty milestone, my 85th birthday.

On the whole, let me say, without bragging, that this particular person is in a
surprisingly good state.

My Brain: it's still working. I believe that I am as competent as ever at
analyzing problems and drawing conclusions and planning appropriate actions. Nor
have I lost a significant amount of language. There is even an occasional moment
in which I wow myself with a well chosen word or a smidgeon of wit. That's the
good news. The downside is that my recall system has definitely lost ground.
Noun loss, it's called. My memory for names has woefully declined, so much so
that it's become a considerable annoyance. I can recognize an acquaintance on
the street, or, say, actors in a film, or an athlete, but I cannot bring up a
name. I test myself when I watch NBA basketball on the TV.  A familiar player
appears on my screen: I know where he went to college and who he played for last
season and the strengths and weaknesses of his game, but by golly I can't recall
his name. I find this to be highly frustrating -- and perhaps a scary harbinger
of future debility. Sometimes the moniker bobs to the surface a day later,
making me aware that my storage system is still working. No question but that my
celebrated, prize-winning instant recall is a thing of the past. Also starting
to fail: short-term memory. Nowadays, when I read a long novel, by the time I
come to the conclusion I've forgotten details from the first chapters. A couple
of times now, when I've read a good new novel or a classic old one, I've turned
right around and gone through a second time. Trust me, this was not a habit of
my younger brain. I also find it difficult to acquire and retain new knowledge.
I spent four years studying Italian and made no more than a year's progress. I
had to complete the same lessons over and over again just to make it stick --
only to have the expression or the conjugation or whatever evaporate in a month.
I can't memorize poetry -- which I once did so effortlessly. So I've mostly
given up new areas of information -- although this last month I'm taking a crack
at learning Etruscan -- a challenge even though it's an extinct language with
only about 250 known words. No struggles with pronunciation, thank goodness!

My mood: generally positive and cheerful, except between 2 am and 4 am, when I
lie awake filled with real and imaginary dread. I experience sadness, of course,
but not depression. No need for anti-depressants or anti-psychotics, thank
goodness.v I'm optimistic, on the whole, still taking pleasure in small things,

My Body: still functioning although some routine tasks have become difficult.
Putting on socks and shoes, for example. I'm just not limber -- not even as
limber as I was at 75. When things fall to the floor in the morning I tend to
let them lie until later in the day when I'm slightly more supple. When I work
in the garden, I keep a long stick next to me so I have something to help me
arise. Sometimes I feel myself starting to shuffle, the way my father did in his
last years -- and then I make a determined effort to lift my feet. I have almost
all of my own teeth (a couple of fakes) and with the help of specs and hearing
aids my eyes and ears are valiantly continuing to do the job.

Your older body has accumulated some deficits: a touch of cancer, four kinds
of heart peculiarities, the threat of another TIA or UTI. But I do as I'm told
and take the pills that my various doctors recommend. I asked the fine serious
woman who serves as my cardiologist, "what is going to kill me?" She replied
that at my age, and given my state of health, the most likely causes were a) a
fall, and b) an infection. Consequently I've become mighty careful about where
I set my feet. I don't know what to do about infections except to be vigilant.
But it would be foolish not to recognize that at this age life is precarious and
that anything can happen at any time. I could keel over before I finish the next
sentence. One undeniable symptom of deterioration is that my stamina is much
diminished. Much more resting between tasks, many more naps.

The hardest part of the day continues to be the nighttime. I've aways been a bad
sleeper and I'm no better now. Lying awake can lead to alarmism: is that pain
in my knee a bruise or is it a blood clot that will go to my heart, or is it a
symptom of a metastatic cancer?  But alarmism is not as troubling now as it
was in days of yore -- no matter what happens now, they can't take the first 85
years from me. Frankly, I'm more worried about living too long than I am about
dying.

I'm always been troubled with nightmares and continue to be so. I envy those
who turn out the light at 11 and wake up at 7. It would be blissful to be one
of those elect. On most nights, instead of sleeping I roll and twirl like a
rotisserie chicken. It's wonderful that the Widder Malkinson is able to ignore
my tossing and turning.

Family: I'm most pleased about my family and family relations. Although I was
not a perfect father, I was a hard-working and serious one, and I think that my
children would acknowledge such. I love all three of my children more than they
can know -- or at least, more than they could know until they had children of
their own. I like all my kids and grandkids and on the whole they like me. I
believe that I grew closer to my kids during the years of A's long decline. I
have good conversations, or at least polite ones, with the older grandchildren
but the three younger ones treat me with no more interest or respect than if I
were an orange cone -- which is probably appropriate for their age; I certainly
did not engage with my grandparents or people of their generation when I was 9
or 11. I hope to live until the the young guys are in their twenties when they
might find it consequential to talk with their aged GP.

I've made an effort to keep in touch with cousins -- especially cousins on my
father's side. After all, I am by far the oldest member of my extended family --
the "patriarch," I like to say.

Love: here's a great success story. My relationship with the Widder has been
near-miraculous -- a ten-year honeymoon, although it may seem soppy to says so.
Of course in some ways it's easier to form a relationship at this age of little
responsibility -- no conflict over children, no careers, no declining parents,
no money worries, very few obligations. Both Lynn and I appreciate this much
simpler life. Her and my offspring have been generous with us -- a boon that we
do not take for granted. Moreover, it's common knowledge that people in a loving
situation live longer than singletons -- so we're both, in theory, keeping each
other alive.

Friends: very important to me at this stage of life. I work at keeping in touch.
But every month, it seems, some 50-year friendship comes to an end. The death
and diseases of my friends and family and former colleagues are the most painful
feature of this octogenarian life.

Intellectual life: I read a lot and write a bit, but I no longer read books
about books. I like writing this blog. At this point in my life, I read at least
9 non-fiction books for every novel. In addition, I've become fascinated by
the films of the 40s and 50s and watch as many as two or three a week. There's
something reassuring about the black-and-white cinematography, the ubiquitous
fedoras, the coast-to-coast trains, and even the ever-present curl of cigarette
smoke.

The world: quite a mess. A period of great reaction. There's a real danger of
losing our democracy. And losing our planet. But I'm cheered that there are so
many people of good will in the world and in my life.

When I was a young fellow peering at the calendar, I thought "the year 2000 is a
long way off. If I should live to the new millennium, I'll be 61 years old and
I'll have lived a long life."  Now I'm a quarter century beyond that marker,
still going strong. Who ever would have guessed?  My principal emotion at this
point: gratitude. Gosh I've been fortunate.

Source: 2024/03/two-astonishing-dreams-in-one-night

Title: Two Astonishing Dreams in One Single Night
Date: March 30, 2024

The first:  I dreamt that I received a phone call from my deceased older
brother's deceased first wife (who has, by the way, been dead for thirty or more
years). She says, very clearly, "______ is dead" (I leave out the name of the
person she mentioned because some people are squeamish or superstitious -- but a
person very much alive. I'm shocked. I say, "what happened."  There's no answer
at the other end although I hear the sounds of paper rustling. I ask again and
once more there is  no response. Then I say, "did he do himself in." There
is quiet at the other end of the line. End of dream. I take the non-answer as
agreement -- yes, it was suicide  After a while, I wake up, less troubled than
puzzled. How peculiar -- how different from my usual "lost-in-the big-city" or
"can't-find-the-classroom" fantasy.

Later in the night, I dream that it's time for me to write a novel (remarkable
in itself because I am a most unimaginative, uncreative person and not a
writer of fiction). In the dream, I compose the first paragraph of a novel. I
can't remember my exact words, but basically I set the scene in an old, tired,
tumble- down country tavern where a couple of nondescript folks are sitting and
drinking. It's all very fuscous, grey, washed out. (In retrospect, it seems as
though I've plagiarized Thomas Hardy.)  But I complete the paragraph with this
remarkable sentence: "A brindle cat supplied the color." A wonderful detail,
even if I do say so myself. But here's an oddity. Even though my well-informed
dreamatorium found and deployed the word "brindle," my conscious self is not
familiar with the word. What a revelation!!

I wake out of the dream and, immensely curious, immediately google the word
"brindle" which turns out to mean something like tortoiseshell -- a standard
very familiar domestic cat color. My daytime self is therefore dazzled by the
pertinent vocabulary of my nighttime self.

I am also impressed by the use of the word "supply" -- a brindle cat supplied
the color" --where my more pedestrian daytime self might have said, "there was a
brindle cat."

Once again, I find that although I'm a moderately dull kind of guy during the
day, my unconscious or dream life is imaginative and daring. How can this
happen?

Moreover, I wonder what would my life have been like if I had been granted
easy access to the creative side of my brain? Is it possible that I would have
written many a sentence as accomplished as "a brindle cat supplied the color."

[Addendum April 24

Just a few minutes ago I woke out of the usual troubled sleep.  I must
have been dreaming, but I can't recall a single detail except that the name
"Karlheinz Stockhausen" came vividly to me. I even said the name out loud
(there's a witness). But why in the living blazes would Karlheinz Stockhausen
be in my mind, or unconscious mind, or dream life?  I am aware that KS was a
composer of electronic music; that is to say, I've heard his name. But I'm not
interested in electronic music and as far as I know I've never heard a single
note of any of his compositions. He's not a figure to whom I've given a moment
of conscious thought. And yet there he was in my mind and in my mouth. Without
the slightest inkling of context.

Minds (especially my very own) are mighty mysterious.]

Source: 2024/04/my-life-in-gambling

Title: My Life in Gambling
Date: April 09, 2024

This will be a very short entry, because gambling is not a part of my life. I'm
not averse, just uninterested. My brain lacks a gambling gene.

I don't bet on sports; I don't participate in office pools; I've never once
been to the track. I don't bet on cards because I don't play cards, not even
solitaire. I've never put so much as a nickel into a slot machine. I've never
bought a single lottery ticket.

My idea of gambling is to put a dollar into a Coke machine -- sometimes you get
the Coke, sometimes the machine fails. That's chance enough for me.

Source: 2024/04/two-new-orleans-conversations

Title: A New Orleans Conversation
Date: April 14, 2024

For our annual winter stay in New Orleans, we rented a place in the old Bywater
district. It's a feature of the neighborhood that one house is a perfect example
of classic vernacular architecture while the next one over is a ramshackle mess,
smelling of mold and nearly swallowed by yellow cat's paw creeper. And then one
over after that is a vacant lot, the home having been demolished years ago.

Almost all Bywater houses touch or impinge on the sidewalk, European-style,
and many of their owners decorate the public way with pots of common annuals,
especially those lovely rocket pink snapdragons. Others set out repurposed
bathtubs and various other containers filled with flowering perennial plants
that I can't identify. It's a mighty colorful area -- when it isn't derelict.

Somewhere on Royal Street (or was it Decatur?) between Desire and Independence,
we admired the sidewalk garden of a renewed double-shotgun (a common kind of
home) and fell into neighborly chat with the bright-eyed old lady sitting on its
porch (or stoop, or veranda, or patio). We offered, "good day for taking some
sun," and she, perhaps lonely, launched into a monologue: "my friend takes care
of me. He's young. I broke my hip last year, so no more stairs." Etc. And then
she asked, quite out of the blue, "how old do you think I am?" Clearly, she was
proud to boast of her many years.

Now, I've been around enough blocks to know that it's never a good idea to
estimate someone's age. It's a difficult art -- you must guess about ten percent
below what you think is accurate, because if you guess older you've insulted
the inquirer and if too much younger you're guilty of insincere flattery. So I
hesitated, kept quiet. At last, to break the silence, I replied "well, ma'am,
how old are you?" I thought I had given a safe response because I could see that
she wanted me to be curious. "I'm 84, can you believe it?"

I was more surprised than she had imagined, because if I had ventured a guess,
I would have said 92. Or at the lowest, way up in the 80s, because, well, the
woman looked ancient and frail. She reminded me my two grandmothers, who died at
87 and 89 and who, in their last years, rarely if ever left their homes but if
they did venture out, did nothing more adventurous than to sit on a bench for a
few warm minutes.

But I'm 85, a year older than my new Bywater acquaintance. She's inactive,
winding down her life, resting in a soft chair, and I'm not only upright and
walking, but happily exploring a distant city. For a moment I felt a bit of
superiority, of triumph. I certainly did not say to my elderly friend, "yeah,
you're 84 but I'm 85, look at me." I'm not that crude. But I confess that those
or similar words passed through my brain. Not a sentiment that I admire in
myself and one I quickly banished. It was unhandsome, ungenerous even if it came
and went in a millisecond.

I know that I'm fortunate to be moderately vigorous, still strolling the avenues
and enjoying good health. Yet I am very aware that my well being is not an
achievement about which I can be vain or proud. It's simply the luck of the
draw, luck of the genes. In addition, it's a fact that I have been fortunate
enough to have had access to a lifetime of superior medical care. Without that
surgery in 2010, and the later one a decade ago, I would not have been touring
the Bywater. I'd have been dead or at best, wheelchair-bound and in pain,
gorging on advils and aspirins and narcotics. A moment's reflection served as a
good antidote to any feeling of superiority that I might harbor.

Still musing, I began to wonder about my Royal Street friend. Who is she,
aside from an ancient person savoring the sun?  What memories does she hold?
Who knows, perhaps she lived a wild and varied life. Was she a traveller, an
adventurer?  Enjoying complicated and deep relationships with a series of
devotees?  Perhaps she was a talented musician -- a soloist in the church
choir -- or an artist?  I allowed myself to fantasize what she was like in her
glamorous thirties -- crossing the equator on a cruise with her first husband,
the one with the estate in Jamaica. And the children: one a famous surgeon, the
other, the unlucky one who was a hero in Iraq but who took years to regain his
footing. Or was she, perhaps, a writer?

Everybody has a story; what is hers?

Source: 2024/04/my-life-in-cooking

Title: My Life in Cooking
Date: April 23, 2024

And now for another installment in my long-running "autobiography by topics."

Today's topic is my life as a cook. I say cook, rather than chef, because
my kitchen work has always been functional rather that artistic -- the very
opposite of sophisticated or elegant. I am most definitely not a chef -- just
a guy who can put a meal on the table. Confession: I prefer to my own food to
what is presented to me at all but the most elite restaurants. I'm basically a
hamburger-and-ketchup plebeian; fancy foods with exotic ingredients do nothing
for my pedestrian palate. Why leeks, chives, ramps or shallots when your
everyday yellow onion will do the job. Especially if it's one of those amazingly
sweet Vidalia onions.

My lack of gourmet-ism originated with my family of origin, back there in 1940s
Flatbush where cooking was not imaginative. Its basics were Velveeta cheese and
those slimy canned Harvard beets. No frills but a sufficiency where "enough
[was] as good as a feast." My mother, who presided over the kitchen, did it
all, every bit of it (my father might just have starved if he had to extend
himself to boil water). Mom was a functional cook and her limited repertoire
of meals repeated weekly. I never knew her to try something new nor did I once
see her consult a cookbook. Spices were limited to salt and pepper. Chicken
was boiled, lamb chops were broiled, flounder was poached. There was too much
malodorous liver and too much tongue and too many salmon croquettes. Almost
all meals were accompanied with mashed potatoes. My favorite food, in those
days, was noodles with a meat-and-tomato sauce (which would nowadays have been
upgraded to "Bolognese"). (The word "noodles" was later promoted to "spaghetti"
and has now been ennobled to "pasta.") On an occasional flush Sunday there was
roast beef. The family celebrated Thanksgiving with a grand turkey and countered
Yom Kippur with a defiant roast pork.

What a tedious chore it was for my mom to set out twenty-one meals a week for
the five of us, but she did so without complaint.

The only memorable meals of my childhood were supplied by my grandmother Sonia.
Unsurpassed blintzes, potato latkes, jams and jellies. My favorite meal in those
days: black radish, onion and pumpernickel complemented with gribbinis. I have
written about my love affair with the black radish here.

The first steps into cookery of my own arose out of my native frugality. When
I was in college, most of my friends ate in the dorm cafeteria or in nearby
restaurants but I soon discovered that with a little initiative I I could eat
better and cheaper. It was a bit of a learning process, because, growing up, I
regarded cooking as a kind of alchemy to which only married women were privy.
In 1957, I abandoned the dormitory for a remarkably grotty off-campus apartment
and discovered that I too could turn on a gas burner and transmogrify raw
ingredients into food. For the next three years I lived on a hunk of meat and a
boiled potato and warmed frozen peas -- at a quarter the cost of an equivalent
restaurant meal! Not elegant food -- but what a revelation!  It was not only an
improvement in standard of living, but a demonstration to myself that I need not
imitate my father's example of dependent helplessness.

My galley skills, such as they were, were also good for my social life. Dates
with my girlfriend (later my wife of more than half a century) often began with
me preparing a Saturday night dinner for her. Fortunately for the two of us, she
was not put off by my want of culinary imagination.

Let me record a sad reminiscence about the way in which we were all hog-tied by
Eisenhower-era conservatism: I did all the cooking until June of 1960, when AGP
and I married. At that point, it seemed mandatory and inevitable  that kitchen
responsibilities should be transferred from me to her. It was, we believed, an
inviolable rule of the universe that wives cooked and husbands ate. That was
the way things were in that reactionary pre-feminist period -- even though my
bride had until that point never prepared a single meal in her entire life. How
conventional, how thoughtless we both were. However, true to the stereotype, AGP
rapidly became a much better cook than I could have imagined. But what socially-
constrained idiocy! How blinkered were the two of us! It's embarrassing to
confess it all even sixty-plus years after the fact.

Once the three children joined us, cooking became less fun and more of an
obligation -- but now a chore at last shared by the two of us. Inasmuch as
we were both employed, food preparation became a weekend activity. Together
we'd cook up a cauldron of beef stew or a spaghetti sauce or something else
that could get us through the week. Lunches were improvised, but I was always
the breakfast cook. I wish I could properly estimate the number of eggs that
I scrambled or pancakes that I flipped. They would stuff a moderately-sized
warehouse, I'm sure. For AGP, meals became a burden. If I remember correctly,
it was not so much the labor of preparation as it was the organization that
distressed her. Just gathering the ingredients and keeping the refrigerator
stocked became dull boring work. Her point, and I know she was correct in this,
was that even if I did I half the cooking, she had 100% of the responsibility.
Things became even more complicated when the kids went through their vegetarian
phases and when their complicated after school activities made orderly
scheduling next to impossible.

I remember that one summer, sometime in the 70s. I announced that I would do
all the gathering and cooking for two months. AGP's only task was to lie in the
hammock all day and to eat whatever I produced. AGP enjoyed the vacation, but
she pointed out that it our society, men could get the credit for labor that was
taken for granted for women. She was once again correct in her assessment, but
nevertheless I felt that I had done a good deed. I think she enjoyed the kitchen
respite.

Eventually the kids left home and life became simpler. We were now "recovering
parents."  Food preparation became simpler and fun again. Joint fun.

Unfortunately, it was only a few years later that AGP began her long decline. Of
course I took over more and more of the kitchen responsibilities. I think for
the last ten years that AGP was with me, I was the head and only cook. How else
would we have survived?  As a result, I became more interested in the work.
As I have said, I never became a chef, but I do take some pride in my general
competence around the kitchen -- especially in my barbecued spare ribs, my beef
stew, my stuffed cabbage (grandma Sonia's recipe) and my transcendent lasagnas.

Nowadays, in my miraculous second relationship, cooking, like everything else,
is shared equally.

Gosh it's been a long haul.

Source: 2024/05/my-life-with-shakespeare-i-performance

Title: My Life with Shakespeare - I
Date: May 14, 2024

As a rule, I keep my distance from live performances of a Shakespeare play
because I seldom enjoy the experience and regularly find it misleading. This has
not always been the case. A few versions, notably the lucid Scofield Coriolanus
at Stratford in 1962, are still vivid in my brain. What has happened? 
Somewhere along the way, I've lost patience and lost interest in playgoing. Am I
alone?  I remember sitting in some theater or other in the way back when, when,
glancing left and right in my row, I could not help noting that a significant
cadre of my fellow spectators were not engrossed in the performance but were
nodding off, and that others in my vicinity were clearly bored, drifting
passively toward sweet sleep.

This is a phenomenon that I had never encountered at a baseball game where
everyone is alert and engaged. Anything but silent and sometimes raucous?

So why were all these numb Shakespeare spectators sitting as still as stones?

And why was I among them, inasmuch as I too, let me confess, was bored by the
performance. I was not, as I yearned to be, lost in the words or engaged by the
action. While I resisted sleep, except possibly for a second or two here and
there, I was treading mental water, so to speak. Not exactly hypnotized, but
certainly not transfixed. And I was in this state of inattention even though
I knew the words that the actors were saying as well or better than they knew
them themselves. Eventually, in the course of time, I came to admit to myself
that to attend a Shakespeare play was not for pleasure but rather to honor an
eminence, to pay dues to a cultural icon, to participate in a ritual of cultural
hegemony -- and that I had paid good money in order to worship at the shrine of
Shakespeare and to lend my support to what has long been labelled "Shakespeare
idolatry."  This revelation, or apercu, or insight made me unhappy as I am not
by nature given to reverence. To try to bend my will to admire on-stage oratory
felt inauthentic, contrary to myself as I knew myself.

Yet I am an unabashed, unapologetic lover of Shakespeare. Not of the theater,
but of the book. When I sit myself down to read one of Shakespeare's most
excellent plays, the experience can be and often is utterly transcendent.

It is reading that unlocks the play; puts me in touch with true genius.There's
something about the one-on-one concentration that you can give to a book in your
very own hands in your very own chair that you can't give to a performance,
where you're crammed into your space and have lost to your neighbor the battle
for the arm rest. You're distracted by the inevitable snuffles and sneezes of
your fellows and by the too-clever sets and costumes and lighting and artifice
-- all of which interfere with your grasp of what is most important about poetic
drama -- the words. But at home, I'm dazzled by the poetry and I am transported
with aesthetic bliss (however defined). I'm moved to tears and laughter and also
admiration.

He's endlessly fascinating, this Shakespeare guy, and intelligent, and a poet
like none other.

It's all I need; a comfortable posture for my ancient limbs, a bit of silence, a
book --  and I'm in awe.

Performances, in my opinion, erect a barrier to understanding and obscure rather
than illuminate the plays. It's necessarily so, because directors and actors
interpret the play.  It's their job;  it's what they do. Interpret. And every
interpretation, no matter how skillful, is an obstacle.

A reader is less constrained and can keep his mind open. No one, no thing, to
mediate between the eyes and the page.

Performances are especially hazardous when directors deliberately attempt to
make a play relevant or in accord, somehow, with the zeitgeist of the decade.
Clever catchpenny novelties do nothing for me. Why must plays be set anywhere
but where Shakespeare intended them?  Any effort to update a play, or make it
"contemporary" or "feminist" or "anti-fascist" or "anti-colonial" or whatever,
produces only distraction and distortion. Which is why the long history of
Shakespeare on stage is a woeful history of addled misinterpretation. Nahum
Tate's notorious King Lear of 1681, in which Edgar and Cordelia embrace at the
end and Lear is pensioned off is ludicrous, but not more absurd than last year's
Queen Lear.

Query: if I'm so disdainful of live performances, how is it that I'm so fond of
Shakespeare on film.

But that's a subject for another day.

Source: 2024/06/amnesia-on-film-crossroads-1942

Title: Amnesia on Film: Crossroads (1942)
Date: June 02, 2024

Source: 2024/06/my-career-as-a-dowser

Title: My Career as a Dowser
Date: June 06, 2024

When we built the summer house/cabin/hovel in 1977, we needed to dig a well,
and someone, probably the plumber, hired a dowser. I didn’t approve –-I
would have hired a credentialed hydraulic engineer. For me, dowsers belong
in the same ol' crazy crate as astrologers, phrenologists, flat-earthers,
Shakespeare-author conspiracists, along with the lunatics who report on visits
to the earth by ancient astronauts. Nevertheless, a dowser arrived, an elderly
gentleman. Curiously, he dowsed with an old pair of rusted pliers rather than
the traditional forked willow stick. He was an enthusiast for his trade and,
ignoring my skepticism, showed my how to cut a willow and exactly how to hold
it. After he left, I tried it out. A most odd experience, one of the oddest in
my life, then took place. As I walked about, brandishing the rod, from time to
time the tip of the willow would turn suddenly down. Not in a subtle way, but
forcefully and dramatically – strongly enough to redden and even slightly cut
the palms of my hands.

Even more strange -- if I handed the willow to another person and he or she
walked about, nothing happened. Nothing, that is, until I held that person's
wrist. Then the dowsing rod went all crazy and twisted downward out of the
holder's hands.

It was a wondrous incredible experience and is vivid in my memory now these
fifty years. But it was a one time only event.

Every once in a while, over the decades, just for fun, I would cut a piece of
willow and walk about, but I’ve never been able to reproduce the phenomenon.
The dowsing rod doesn’t dowse, doesn’t do anything at all;  just behaves
like an ordinary piece of wood.

I don't believe in dowsing. I don't believe that you can find underground water,
or even underground electric wires as some think, by walking about with a piece
of willow in your hands.  On the other hand, I know that something peculiar
and very real happened to me that one time. Was there water underground. I
don't know, but I know that I wouldn't dig a hole on the basis of that fleeting
evidence. I am a man of reason, or at least I like to think so.

Incidentally, the place that the 1977 dowser picked out for us to dig was a
great success. We've enjoyed a bounteous  supply of water for all these many
years.

But now that I know more about wells than I did half a century ago, I can read
the landscape well enough to recognize that the dowser picked an obvious place
to dig a well -- with or without the help of his magical pliers.

Source: 2024/09/my-onion-heart

Title: My Onion Heart
Date: September 15, 2024

Last night I woke from a dream with this peculiar phrase repeating itself in my
half-conscious brain: "it fills my onion heart with fear and trembling."

I have a couple of questions to ask of my capricious dreamatorium, which
although obviously capable of creating passable iambic pentameter is rarely
self-explanatory.

a) What is "it?"  What is the nameless dread that precipitated this piece of
blank verse, and b) what in the living heck is an "onion heart."  And why am
I accused of having one?  Is an "onion heart" pungent and tasty, when eaten
either raw or sauteed?  Or is it constructed of layers of scales and therefore
mysterious and perhaps unknowable.

Frankly, I don't have a good theory, except to say that I don't feel that to be
described as having an "onion heart" is complimentary. If my dreamatorium wanted
to say something nice about my heart, it had such relevant and easily available
alternatives as "lionheart" or "braveheart." Or even "sweetheart," for goodness
sake.

Source: 2024/09/bottom

Title: Words of My Life:  Bottom
Date: September 19, 2024

"Bottom" is another of the many words that came into my life through the medium
of baseball. As soon as I was able to walk and talk, I learned that an inning
has both a "top" and a "bottom." "Bottom of the ninth" was an optimistic phrase
because there was always the Ebbets Field hope that the Dodgers might come
through with a game-winning rally. Later, when I discovered that there was more
to human existence than baseball, the various and colorful meanings of "bottom"
began to reveal themselves. For example, the posterior part of the human body,
which I knew as the ass or the behind or the tuchas, was, I learned, called the
"bottom" by people of sophistication. A euphemism?  A Britishism?

Even later on, I discovered that bottom, signifying buttocks or butt was not the
root meaning of the word but a metaphorical extension of its original sense.
Old English botm, cognate with Latin fundus, meant land or farm or soil. This
meaning of "bottom" is well-preserved in the phrase "bottom land" -- the level
and fertile acres along the banks of a watercourse. Many English family names
are consequently topographical surnames of ancient inhabitants of various river
fronts -- such as Bottoms, Robottom, Higginbottom, Ramsbottom, Longbottom,
Winterbottom, and Bottomley. Names that have nothing to do with either innings
or asses.

The oddity that "bottom" can refer both to farmland and to the human butt can
sometimes yield unconscious comedy. For example, in 1977, I was a guest at a
wedding in the infelicitously named Kent village of Pett Bottom. I must hope
that Pett is a variant of Pitt, a "hollow," rather than commonplace "pet" with a
supernumerary "t".

These days, "bottom" is more likely to mean something like "the essence" -- as
in such phrases "to get to the bottom of the matter"; or "the bottom of one's
heart."

And then there's egregious Bottom in A Midsummer Night's Dream, who does not
disdain the mandatory pun: "This is to make an ass of me."

Source: 2024/09/aunt-molly

Title: My Aunt Mollie
Date: September 23, 2024

This post is written for my children, grandchildren, and any potential future
descendants. Aunt Mollie was an important person to my in earlier years. She
should be remembered.

Mollie was my father's older sister. She was born in 1900, the third of the
four children of Isaiah and Eta. She was an extremely private person and never
revealed the least personal information about herself. I know nothing of her
childhood and I am not even certain that she attended high school. I know that
she was for many years employed in the surgical instrument field, where she
advanced to a responsible management position and earned a reasonable salary
(for those days). She retired early, perhaps in her fifties. She never married
nor introduced me or anyone else in our family to a boyfriend, lover, or suitor,
though in later life I learned that it had been her constant habit to visit a
"Mr Isgin" every Wednesday. Who was Henry Isgin? I believe that he was a fellow
worker at her place of employment and I know that when he died he willed Mollie
his Long Island City house. That's all I know; I hope that her relationship with
him was satisfying.

Mollie's curly black hair never grayed. Her eyes were so dark that there was no
visible distinction between iris and pupil. My daughter, who knew her only in
her last years, remembers her as small, squarish, and big-bosomed.

Mollie never "moved out"; during my childhood, she lived with her parents and
later with Eta only in a small ground-floor apartment at 334 Eastern Parkway
in Crown Heights. When Eta died in 1963, she moved across the river to a her
own place at last, a modest apartment in Greenwich Village, where she lived
until her death in 1985. She enjoyed the concerts and the theater and her
independence. She was a solid New Yorker; like my father, she never learned
to drive an automobile. Unlike my father, who was uncomfortable outside his
familiar sphere and was averse to travel, Aunt Mollie was an adventurous sort.
She traveled the world, usually solo. She was constantly on the move. I heard
tell, for example, that she was a passenger on one of the first commercial
flights to China (in the 1930s).

In 1952, she offered to take me on a trip to Washington DC. I jumped at the
chance. It was my first time out of Brooklyn and quite the revelation: gosh,
there were other cities, other neighborhoods in the universe! We stayed at the
Mayflower Hotel (gosh, there were hotels!), ate in "restaurants" -- another
novelty -- visited the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials, and even took a boat
ride up the river to Mt. Vernon. We heard Harry Truman deliver a Fourth of
July address from the base of the Washington Monument. It was exhilarating
and inspiring -- a first toe-in-the-water alternative to my very marked
provinciality and to the exaggerated caution of my parents. I am sure that I
would never "gone away" to college, or relocated to the Rocky Mountain west, or
traveled to other continents if it hadn't been that Aunt Mollie introduced me to
the world outside the P S 217 schoolyard in my thirteenth year.

Mollie also helped me financially. She wasn't rich but as a single woman with a
good income she accumulated enough cash to intervene, generously, at critical
moments. In a sense, she was the family banker. She gave me a couple of thousand
dollars for part of the down payment on the Hackett Hill property and later
held, on favorable terms, the mortgage on my house on 10th Street. When she
died, she bequeathed me the remainder of the principal.  Although these were
not great sums, they were nevertheless very crucial to me and to my family's
financial well-being.

Even more important: Mollie admired and, I believe, loved my wife -- which was a
very good thing because my own mother was not so positive.

I can't say that I ever had a real conversation with Mollie. She asked little
and told less. She was not curious, or thoughtful, nor well-educated -- not
even a reader. She was always a little crude and could be critical and blunt
(though not to me). To my brother, when he was going through a tough period in
his financial life, she said, "Why don't you just get a real job." To a niece,
she offered, "Why don't you just lose weight."  A true Victorian at heart, she
regarded all illnesses as mental and moral weakness.

Mollie was proud of her extraordinary vigor and health. She once told me that
she went 40 years without seeing a doctor. She was robust and middle-aged at
84, dead at 85 -- every one of her organs having failed. Loss of mental acuity
was the first sign of decay. In 1984, she called my father on the telephone and
said, out of the blue, "Pop is here."  Dad said, "What do you mean Pop is here.
Pop died in 1946." Mollie answered, "Yes, I know that. So why is he here." 
After that shocking moment, the end came quickly.

I' have never visited my parents' graves, but I'm told that Mollie is buried on
my father's right and that my mother is buried on my father's left. So Dad lies
forever between the two women to whom he was closest in life.

Source: 2024/09/starokonstantinov

Title: More on Starokonstantinov
Date: September 26, 2024

The (website) "My Shtetl -- Jewish Towns of Ukraine" gathers information about
Starokonstantinov -- "Old Constantine" -- the town from which, in 1895, my
courageous grandparents emigrated to America. The site is in Russian but it can
be mechanical translated into awkward but intelligible English.

Some of my friends of European extraction have been able to return to the
old country villages where their families originated, but that option is not
available to me. Trust me, there's no pilgrimage to Starokonstantinov in my
future -- even if the town happens to survive the Russian invasion and the
rockets. My grandparents did not bring to Ellis Island happy memories and
nostalgia or pique my curiosity with warm fuzzy memories of their earlier years.
Nevertheless, Starokonstantinov provokes my curiosity. For how many decades
did my ancestors live in this so-obscure-to-me town?  How did they manage to
survive?

One of the compilers of the My Shtetl website, Yevgenii Schneider, has unearthed
a report on Starokonstantinov written in 1884 by a certain N. I. Zuts, a
lieutenant in the 45th Azov Infantry Regiment. Why or for whom these paragraphs
were written I have no idea, but some of it largely duplicates information that
I have previously posted. According to Lieutenant Zuts, Starokonstantinov was
founded in 1505 as the village of Kolyshchentsy in a grant from the king of
Poland to one Ivan Labunsky. On January 5, 1561, Labunsky's descendants sold
Kolyshchentsy to Prince Konstantin Ostrozhsky. Three months later, Ostrozhsky
was permitted by the king to found a city first called Konstatinov, then
Novokonstantinov, and finally in 1632 renamed Starokostiantyniv. A castle was
constructed in 1571. In 1620, the city passed into the possession of the princes
Zaslavsky, and in 1682, to the princes Lubomirsky. Starokonstinov became part of
Russia in 1793.

(It seems to be the case that Ukraine was a largely unpopulated or
underpopulated frontier until a few hundred years ago. When and why did my
people decide to try their luck on this vast semi-empty plain?)

The website does not make it clear who, if anyone, is living in these houses
today.In addition, Evgeniy Schneider appends a brief history of the Jewish
community of Starokonstantinov. I've transcribed it.

Source: 2024/10/my-baseball-first-vocabulary

Title: My Baseball-First Vocabulary
Date: October 04, 2024

Folks who weren't there can hardly appreciate how thoroughly the nation and
neighborhood into which I was born was baseball-saturated. In the 1940s and
1950s, the heyday of the fabled Dodgers, baseball was Brooklyn and Brooklyn was
the world -- of this there was, nor could be, any doubt.

Baseball was the all-encompassing medium though which we learned about success
and failure, defeat and resiliency, exhilaration and sadness, and ultimately of
the knowledge of good and evil.

Not only morality, but language itself. It's an unimpeachable fact that my early
vocabulary was solidly baseball-based. It took years and sometimes decades
before I discovered that many baseball words also carried an off-the-diamond
significance.

Readers may scoff at this claim to the linguistic priority of baseball --
because they can't imagine or can't believe how central pitching and catching
was to our experience. So "let's go to the tape."

Take, for instance, the word "pennant." During my salad years, "pennant" was a
common everyday word that meant only "league championship." If you finished 
first in your league, you "won the pennant." I had not the least glimmer of
an idea that a "pennant" was also physical object -- a flag, it turned out,
usually triangular and usually nautical. To me, a pennant was immaterial and
metaphorical. When Russ Hodges famously (to those of us of a certain age)
screamed, in 1951, "the Giants win the pennant, the Giants win the pennant,"
there was no reason for twelve-year-old me to suspect that the word had an
extra-baseball existence. (Nor did I know that "league" meant anything but
National or American, major or minor.)

Another such word is "battery," which to me and to my cohort of scruffy
schoolyard friends meant nothing more than the duo of pitcher and catcher.
"Today's battery is Newcombe and Campanella"; "they're facing the 'brother
battery' of Mort and Walker Cooper." But later it came to pass that the word
battery was known to the world beyond Ebbets as a source of electric power--
in those days lead-acid and now lithium. And that, in addition, "battery"
had violent associations -- as in "assault and battery" -- or its military
signification as an assemblage of cannons. (The word "batter" had already leapt
its baseball perimeter. Thanks to my mother, I was early familiar with the
tasty mixture that could be baked into cookies or bread). And "bat" was the old
hickory or ash, not a flying mammal.

There are many other baseball words that migrated away from their first home.
A "rubber" was a 4" wide strip of something -- was it really made of rubber?--
that lay on the mound just 60 feet and 6 inches from home plate. Later, a
rubber became an eraser and then the material from which automobile tires are
made and then, much much later, a condom. A "mound," of course, was first and
foremost a pitcher's mound, not a geographical feature. A "dugout" was where
players gathered when they weren't on the field; later it became a kind of
canoe. "Stuff" -- some days a pitcher had his good stuff, but some days his
sinker just didn't drop. A "stance" was a batter's pose in the box; some batters
had an open stance and some a closed. "Clutch" did not denote holding tight to
something or other; it meant only a "clutch hit". A "blast" was not a bomb going
off; it was long four-bagger. The "count" was not degree a of knighthood; it was
the state of balls and strikes on the batter.  The next batter would wait on
a metaphorical "deck" long before a deck became a pack of cards or an exposed
porch. A "blooper" was a "Texas leaguer"; only later did it become a flawed
outtake. Strike! Three strikes and you're out. Later, a labor movement. And many
more.

"Fair" and "foul" indicated where a batted ball fell to the earth in relation
to the first or third base lines. Macbeth's "So foul and fair a day I have not
seen" was many years into the future.

Source: 2024/10/my-life-in-objects-xviii-bronze-door-plate-

Title: My Life in Objects XIX: Bronze Door Plate
Date: October 09, 2024

It's my newest acquisition, purchased on ebay just a couple of days ago, but
already a favorite. It's a bronze door plate, very beautiful and heavy in the
hand. It's inscribed PULL. It bears no manufacturers or identifying marks but
the style is mighty pure Victorian. I imagine it came from a demolished once-
elegant downtown department store. What the heck do I plan to do with it?  Why,
it will be attached, next summer, to the old iron gate that we mounted at the
entrance to the "waterfall garden." It's whimsical, of course, because while
the gate helps to define the space, it guards absolutely nothing and is easily
circumvented.

If PUSH had been available I would have purchased it too. But PULL is
sufficient. A plate saying NO SOLICITORS has also been proposed -- but that
addition might be just a little bit of overkill (and silliness).

Source: 2024/10/words-of-my-life-outing-1

Title: Words of My Life -- Outing
Date: October 09, 2024

During my lifetime, the word "outing" has mutated beyond recognition. It first
entered my youthful vocabulary (as did so many other words) through the medium
of baseball. An "outing" -- in the old days --meant to me only a stint on the
mound. "Podres has had a good "outing" today." The more general meaning of
"outing" as a short trip taken for pleasure, such as a picnic, or a jaunt in
the country, only came into my  life many years later. "They enjoyed a family
outing to Montauk." The fact of the matter is that my family of origin didn't go
on "outings," but at some point I must have heard I heard about such journeyings
from friends or read about them in novels.

These days, I rarely encounter the baseball or picknicky meanings of "outing."
"Outing" has transformed into the obnoxious word that describes the odious and
hostile practice of exposing the sexual identity of a person against his/her
will.  From picnic to nasty, alas.

Frankly, I prefer the traditional significations and activities.

Source: 2024/10/sleeping-in-my-life

Title: Sleeping: a History
Date: October 13, 2024

I'm a terrible, terrible sleeper. It's a lifelong plight and a serious
disability. Truth to tell, I'd have more success as a contestant in a tango
contest, or as a heldentenor yodeling in front of thousands, or as a trapeze
artist or as a sumo wrestler than I have as a sleeper.

Bad sleeping runs in my family. I suppose that I inherited the trait from my
father. Growing up, we never knew where we'd find the old guy in the morning,
because during the night he'd wander from room to room and from bed to chair and
even onto that scratchy old green tufted sofa. For me, the hardest part of any
day has always been the night -- and, believe it or not, the problem has become
more severe as I grapple with old age.

My usual routine is to fall asleep prematurely (and unwisely) at 10:00 pm. Then
I wake at 12:30 am, usually in a fright from a ghastly nightmare, my brain
alert, but my body yearning for oblivion. Then I'm up for a while, involuntarily
reprising some atrocious embarrassment or shameful failure in some earlier part
of my life. Unable to find the right situation for my ancient limbs, I twirl
beneath the blankets like a rotisserie chicken. I don't want to disturb my
peacefully-slumbering bedmate, so I wander the residence, finally to settle in
an auxiliary bed. Then my wayward brain starts to ruminate on the state of the
nation, especially on the prospect of a second term for the moronic demagogue.
At this point, I reluctantly surrender to necessity and take a sleeping pill
(the powerful hypnotic ambien). I read or watch a basketball game on the TV,
but after about 45 minutes the drug takes hold and the muscles in my eyes
slacken so much that I can no longer bring the separate images of right and left
eye together. Eventually I fall into "airplane sleep" -- the kind of shallow
surface sleep that we all experience when we fly "economy" or "coach" (better
called "steerage"). At about 6 in the morning, I wake out a second horrid
dream, relieve myself, and try to snatch a couple of peaceful hours --  a hope
which I regularly fail to accomplish. Eventually, "the darkness has passed/ And
it's daylight at last."  I'm foggy-headed for a while but at last I regain my
equilibrium until it's time for another nighttime bout with Morpheus. And that's
how I pass one third of my life.

On the cheerful side, although I'm a bad nighttime sleeper, I'm a fairly
proficient daytime napper. The most wonderful and memorable sleeps of my life
have been afternoon naps. When I was in my teens, back there in the Eisenhower
era, it was my weekend custom to trot to the schoolyard in the morning and play
three-on-three half-court basketball for a couple of hours (in those days I
enjoyed an endless "second wind"). Then I'd come home for a mid-day dinner --
perhaps if the parents were feeling flush it would be a roast beef or roast pork
along with a bounty of potatoes (the most soporific of vegetables). Then I'd
retreat to my room, tune the old wood-cased Philco to a Dodgers game, perhaps
even to a double-header, and allow myself to be soothed by the rhythmic cadences
of Red Barber and Connie Desmond. A deep, profound and most satisfying nap would
then ensue -- the kind of sleep where you're so far gone that you don't know if
it's day or night, summer or winter when, hours later, you crack an exploratory
eyelid.

Where are the sleeps of yesteryear?

In my maturity, sleep has been, as I've said, a combat zone. In these last years
I've achieved weekend afternoon depth just two times. Alas and alack, it was
the drugs, the sedatives for my two surgeries that did the trick. When you're
anesthetized, at least as I experienced it, there's nothing -- no sound, no
dream, certainly no twirling -- between the moment the anesthetic kicks in and
moment it leaves. You're just not there. You're nowhere.

The ancient formula was somnus imago mortis. That is to say, sleep is the
simulacrum of death. Sleep is designed to prepare us for death. There was a time
that I would scoff at such a pious formula -- but not any more. I think that
if death is what I experienced during anesthetized sleep, why, then, there's
nothing to fear. It will be peaceful and long and very boring, but not at all
stressful.

I would like my tombstone to read, "No More Insomnia, Forever."

Source: 2024/10/words-of-my-life-an-index

Title: Words of My Life: the List So Far
Date: October 29, 2024

My series of posts called Words of My Life was inspired by a Federico
Roncoroni's Sillabario della Memoria, viaggio sentimentale tra le parole amate.
Roncoroni's book is a unique and I think original kind of autobiography -- a
history (voyage, he says) of words that have been been loved by him. Words of
My Life is a  homage to Roncoroni. So far I've written brief essays on the
following words (and I intend to continue). Just as is the entirety of the blog,
these essays constitute an autobiography in shards and fragments. Here's the
list of entries thus far. Each mini-essay is just a click away.

barmagillion

boobs

boot

bottom

cishet,

hack

fango

fluff

joint

jot and tittle,

mucilage.

nostalgia

orts

outing

pairings

pandiculation

provider

ramps

roux

sleepers

slouch,

spatchcock,

stopper.

troll

umpire,

whores

worship

yips

Source: 2024/10/museums

Title: My Life with Museums -- an Introduction
Date: October 30, 2024

In the course of my long life, I've visited hundreds of museums -- more than
I can possibly count or remember. Nor just the famous and glorious ones: how
many times, driving in unfamiliar locality, or wandering in a new city, have
I been irresistibly lured into the local landmark?  Even in the most modest
establishment, there's something new to learn and discover. Nevertheless, my
focus, lifetime, has been on art museums, where even the most iconic, most
reproduced painting or sculpture acquires new life when viewed in the flesh.
Let's face it: copies can be useful and informative, but the real thing is the
real thing -- always revelatory, and sometimes transcendent or sublime. In fact,
let me confess, in the Rembrandt Gallery at the Metropolitan Museum in New York
City, I experienced a transient version of the so-called Stendhal Syndrome. Once
and once only, but never to be forgotten.

I'm dazzled, in memory, by the vast holdings of the Borghese, the Louvre, the
Rijksmuseum, the British Museum, and an early love, the under-appreciated
Brooklyn Museum right there on Grand Army Plaza.

I'm grateful to the exhibitions and the hard-working curators that introduced
me to major painters I wouldn't otherwise have appreciated: Aelbert Cuyp and
Jan Steen at the National Gallery, Camille Pissarro at the Jewish Museum in
New York; many more. And also the specialized museums, chief among them the
Vasa Museum in Stockholm, which taught me more about life in the seventeenth
century than could a fleet of books. And a special favorite, the Corning Museum
of Glass in Corning, New York -- a most wonderful and comprehensive display of
an ancient and modern craft. But also the many local museums that I visited
during my thirty-eight cross-country migrations. Who could ever forget the Donna
Reed Museum in Denison, Ohio, or the Jell-O Museum somewhere near Buffalo, New
York?  Gosh, I'm still hoping that someday I will make it to the National
Museum of the American Coverlet in Bedford, Pennsylvania.

And then there are the troubling museums. I wonder if I will ever have the
courage to enter the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC. It was
disorienting enough to visit an open-air museum, somewhere in Lithuania, where
a variety of preserved structures from that country's miserable past have been
brought together to simulate a peasant village. It was a strange dispiriting
visit. After all, my ancestors as far back as we can know lived and worked in
such a sad little village. My visit was, I suppose, educational -- but also
melancholy and depressing. The village seemed not so much preserved as embalmed.

Source: 2024/11/another-creative-dream-1

Title: Another Creative Dream
Date: November 11, 2024

I'm aware that Oscar Wilde is reputed to have said that the most terrifying
words in the English language are -- "I would like to tell about you my
dream."  But I'm going to report on last night's dream anyway, because it's so
bizarre and interesting (at least to me).

I'm sitting at a table in a restaurant with my ladylove. Actually, it's not
exactly a restaurant; it's more like a nightclub of the kind that's familiar
to me only from 30s films, not from real life. Small tables in a very large
room, patrons wearing fancy slick clothes -- men in dark evening wear, women in
shimmering white. Low chatter. Everything normal except that wandering among
the tables is a giant African lion, male, with an intimidating mane and a long
swishing tail.

I say to my lady, "I don't like the looks of this. That lion could easily carry
off a small child."  End of dream, or at least, end of what I remember.

Once again, it's clear that my nighttime self is far more imaginative than my
pedestrian daytime self, who would never in a million years have thought to
introduce a whopping big lion from the Serengeti into an ordinary restaurant.
I'm not nearly so visionary. Does the dream have any meaning? An obvious
interpretation is that even places safe for recreation can be dangerous.  Or,
conversely, that dangers can be domesticated and made safe. Take your pick.

Source: 2024/12/deaths

Title: Deaths, 2024
Date: December 26, 2024

The year got off to an early start when Brad Gombas died on December 16. Brad
was the brother of my late brother-in-law Allen Gombas. I knew him in the
1970s, when he was a young man; he lived most of his life in New Mexico where
he established a career as a builder and craftsman. I wasn't in touch except
through the extended family communication chain. On December 26, my friend
since  1965 Ray Pike died at age 90. Ray was an accomplished journalist. Nancy
Pike and AGP were the young mothers in a playgroup that included the infants
NGP and Nina Pike -- in an earlier life it now seems. We saw Ray and Nancy at
least once a year for many decades. Then on the last day of the year Sue Palmer
died (peacefully, I'm told), after many many years of illness and pain. She was
a superbly talented artist and a friend, though not a close one, since 1969. In
February, we lost Nancy Levitt. Not a close friend (wife of a colleague) but a
long time acquaintance  -- a regular at the Takacs, seated just in front of
us these past 30 years. Sheldon "Spike" Cohen, later Alan Mills, a friend from
the PS 217 schoolyard, died in March. Esophogeal cancer that had metastasized.
A long drawn out death, with many months of hospice care. In May. Bill Wood
died. He was a world-famous scientist and a friend. It must be 20 years now
since his wife, Renate Wood, a poet, left us. Bill had been in a relationship
with another old acquaintance, Marilyn Krysl, for these many years. Marilyn
died a couple of months after Bill; she had been in "memory care" for several
months. During the summer, we lost two former English colleagues. The first to
go was congenial Chuck Squier, at the age of 91, who had moved to Boise, Idaho
to be near his children; he was a friend and also a long time neighbor on the
Hill; the second: nice guy Doug Burger. In August I discovered that Anatol Anton
had died earlier in the year. I knew Anatol when he was a member of the CU
Department of Philosophy in the 70s or 80s, but hadn't been in touch since he
left Boulder to return to San Francisco. Anatol was a cheerful bear of a man,
far to  the political left, who grew up in Greenwich Village with a semi-famous
painter for a father. Fred Litto, classmate from P S 217 and Erasmus, died in
Brazil, where he had lived for 50 years; we always planned to get together, but
it never happened. Another PS 217 friend, Tony Sogluizzo, died in the spring
but I didn't find out about it until much later. He was a genuinely decent and
gentle man who had a good career as a librarian. Late in December, we attended
the dignified funeral of Bill Belew, husband of Lynn's friend Sharon Belew. 
And so the year came to an end.

Source: 2024/12/books-i-read-2024

Title: Books I Read, 2024
Date: December 26, 2024

Ernest Hemingway, For Whom the Bell Tolls; Raymond Chandler, The Big Sleep;
Felipe Alou, My Baseball Journey; Guy de la Bedoyere, Gladius, the World of
the Roman Soldier; Gordon Dee Alcorn, Owls; Martin H. Levinson, Brooklyn
Boomer; J.N. Adams, Bilingualism and the Latin Language; Sybille Haynes,
Etruscan Civilization, a Cultural History; Philip Freeman, Julian, Rome's
Last Pagan Emperor; G & L Bonfante, The Etruscan Language, An Introduction;
Ernest Hemingway, The Snows of Kilimanjaro and Other Stories; Booth Tarkington,
The Magnificent Ambersons; Ellen Gilchrist, In the Land of Dreamy Dreams;
Kim Chernin, In My Mother's House; Ines Augrain Thomas, Memoirs of an 84
Year Old; Louise Penny, The Cruelest Month; Abramovitch and Galvin, Jews of
Brooklyn; Helen Czerski, The Blue Machine, How the Ocean Works; Ian Buruma,
Spinoza, Freedom's Messiah; Robert Leighton, Tarquinia, an Etruscan City; Joseph
B. Solodow, Latin Alive; William Shakespeare, Coriolanus, Barry S Brown, La
Signora Watson e I Segreti di Parkington Manor; Carlo Levi, Christ Stopped at
Eboli; Patrick Joyce, Remembering peasants, a personal history of a vanished
world; Charles Darwin, Origin of Species (parts); Sean Sayers, The Making of a
Marxist Philosopher, Leo Tolstoi, Anna Karenina; David Gibbins, The History
of the World in Twelve Shipwrecks; Lisa Kaltenegger, Alien Earths; Nicholas
Kristof, Chasing Hope; William Shakespeare, Much Ado about Nothing; Abdulrazak
Gurnah, Other Lives; Mollie Gillen, The Masseys; Hibl & Hibl, The Handel Lamps
Book;  William Shakespeare, King Lear; Caroline Dodds Pennock, On Savage
Shores; Andrew Lipman, Squanto, a Native Odyssey; Thomas Hardy, Far from the
Madding Crowd; Lee Siegel, Groucho Marx; Ben Goldfarb, Eager, the Surprising
Secret Life of Beavers; Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern Bearers and other
Essays; Alice Munro, Too Much Happiness; Margarette Lincoln, London and the
17th Century; Julian Barnes, The Sense of an Ending; Mark Kurlansky, The Basque
History of the World.

Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-now

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 1
Date: January 09, 2025

Here's a truth that blows my freakin' mind: since I earned my B. A. in English
from Cornell University in 1960, sixty-five years have come and gone. Glaciers
have melted and rivers have changed their course since, way back when, in a
prior millennium, I was first introduced to serious literature -- to Chaucer and
Milton and George Eliot.

My professors in those far-away-and-long-ago days were exclusively male and for
the most part veterans of WW2 or the Korean war. They wrote definitive scholarly
articles for the Philological Quarterly or for Modern Philology; they published
learned monographs on canonical poets and novelists; and they taught courses
with such forthright titles as The Seventeenth Century and Wordsworth and
Coleridge. Although I was an indifferent student before I arrived at Cornell,
I found an intellectual home in the Department of English. Inasmuch as I did
not have a brain for rigorous science or for the tough analytic philosophy that
was then in fashion, I was fortunate that the work of English suited my limited
abilities -- curiosity, patience, a good memory, and something of a feel for
language.

Just yesterday (and what, pray tell, prompted me?), I took a peek at the
current website of Cornell's English Department. (In the index-card 1950s, when
the manual typewriter was the acme of technology, the word "website" would
have signified a dark corner colonized by spiders.) Even at first glance, the
2025 Cornell website said to me "very very different, very 'now'." While an
occasional word or phrase was recognizable, it was the novelty -- the modernity,
I guess -- that flared from the electronic page and dazzled mine eyne. Time
marches on, no doubt, but whether it marches boldly forward or plunges over a
cliff remains to be established.

First of all, it's no longer the Department of English. It's now, hurrah!,
the "Department of Literatures in English." What a welcome redefinition --
an assertion that English is a world language and that it houses a world
literature. Nowadays, if I sit down with a work of fiction, I'm just as likely
to read a novel by a writer from Africa or India or Australia as one from the
British isles or North America. There's not a reason in the world why Chinua
Achebe or Abdulrazak Gurnah should not be studied in an English Department. I
respect this shift in focus and I regret that my 1950s Beowulf-to-T. S. Eliot
English department was so parochial, so provincial. I can only admire the fact
that the Department of Literatures in English has annexed to itself whole
continents of writing -- a case of academic imperialism that this time seems
wholly right and just.

The website also reveals that, in a nation in which the study of the humanities
in higher education is at risk, Cornell's English is a huge thriving enterprise.
There are fifty-one people on permanent staff, almost all of professorial
rank. Of this number, twenty-seven -- or slightly more than half -- are women.
And among those pictured on the site, a significant number are "of color."
Undoubtedly, the present department is a far more representative collection of
individuals than my 1950s faculty. Moreover, the chair, the associate chair,
the director of undergraduate studies, the director of graduate students, and
the director of writing are all women. It may once have been the case that the
occasional female interloper was a token for display only, but not so now.

And what do these handsome and distinguished men and women study? Fortunately
for me, members of the faculty list their areas of concentration. Most claim
two or three specialties, some as many as five; a few recalcitrant individuals
list none, leaving me to wonder whether they are polymaths or just ornery
uncooperative academics. Among the fifty-one, the single expertise most commonly
claimed is "cultural studies." This preponderance set me back a bit, because
"cultural studies" is not a term I recognize nor one that existed, as far as I
know, in the 1950s, when the word "culture" was synonymous with "civilization"
-- sometimes just Western Civilization -- and when "cultured" meant something
equivalent to "educated" and possibly even "socially established." But now,
apparently, "cultural studies" is, and I quote a respected source, "an academic
field  that... investigates how cultural practices relate to wider systems of
power. These include ideology, class structures, national formations, ethnicity,
sexual orientation and gender." Am I correct, and is it possible, for me to
infer from this litany of nouns that "cultural practices" comprehends just about
everything that we as a society say or do? Clearly the Department of Literatures
in English lays claim to a heck of a lot of intellectual territory -- and that
it is a far more aggressive entity than is revealed by its mere absorption of
Anglophone novels. I was initially suspicious of these extensive claims, but
after reflecting a while I recognized that, if I set to one side the self-
aggrandizing listing of ideology, ethnicity, class... etc,), cultural studies
may in practice simply bring to the forefront such elements as imperialism and
nationhood in Robinson Crusoe or race and gender in Othello. Wouldn't it be
comforting if "cultural studies" is at least in part merely traditional wine in
spiffy new bottles? I, for one, certainly hope so.

After cultural studies, it is "literary theory" that claims the largest group
of adherents -- thirteen, or about a quarter of the faculty. This revelation
surprised me because I would have guessed that "theory" had long since gone the
way of the aurochs and the mouflon. "Theory" had its herd of enthusiasts in its
obscurantist heyday in the last century, yet it seems to be alive and kicking at
Cornell -- but only, I suspect, as a vestigial remnant of an earlier time and
only among the more senior members of the Department.

Following "theory" in popularity among the professoriate are the seven members
who stake their claim to "gender studies." Six other say "African-American." The
nine who announce a specialty in creative writing may not know that they are the
successors and the beneficiaries of the late revered Professor James McConkey.
Not a single member of the faculty offers "Shakespeare" or "Milton" as an area
of expertise. I do not doubt that the study of gender and African-American and
Asian-American literatures is a good thing, but I would have wished that the
authors of the finest works of art in all of Anglophonia be accorded equivalent
attention and status.

Would a reincarnated Youthful Me elect take a degree from such a faculty? 
I'm skeptical, but I can't say for sure because I don't know whether or not,
in the classroom, the scrupulous examination of literature and ideas has been
undermined by transitory and faddish ideologies. I must confess that the biases
of the website make me feel old and wary and out of touch. And tired.

Well then, what does take place in the classroom?

Let's sample some evidence.

In days of yore, I enrolled in "Elizabethan and Jacobean Drama," a course taught
by the distinguished scholar and teacher David Novarr. The course was organized
as a chronological march from Kyd and Marlowe in the 1580s right through to Ford
and Massinger -- the last playwrights of significance before the theaters went
dark in 1642. I remember savoring some delightful comedies by Ben Jonson and
Francis Beaumont and also a couple of ferociously brilliant tragedies by Thomas
Middleton -- writings, I suspect, that 2020s English majors are not destined
to encounter -- even though an acquaintance with these plays is essential
background for understanding the timeless works of Shakespeare.

There's no equivalent course in the present curriculum, but there is an
analogue, and it appears in the catalogue of offerings thusly:

ENGL 3240. Blood Politics:  Comparative Renaissance Drama

Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be
obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern
period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a
marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a
dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage
when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in
terms of blood?.... Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality,
conversion, and death.

The course description itself is a mess -- both incomprehensible and
meretricious. I'm shocked by the catchpenny pandering. Do 2020s teachers need to
lure students into their classrooms with "vampires" and "videos?" The assertion
that "blood is a dramatic player in its own right" is nonsense. The description
reads like advertising copy for a cheesy low-budget horror flick playing at some
louche all-night grind house.

Moreover, "blood" isn't "everywhere." Goodness gracious!

I'm afraid that these entrancing plays are doomed to be put through the
"cultural studies" homogenizer. Or "theorized" out of all compass.

Ah, well.

Back in 1960, I had a summer job in Ithaca and therefore happened to be loafing
around the campus when the University hosted its returning alumni. Among the
returnees were the old folks  -- some few of them members of the class of
1895 -- who had walkered and wheel-chaired to their Sixty-Fifth. Geezers, I
thought. It's sobering to realize that those codgers were the same age -- 86 --
as I am now. Should I  return to Ithaca this coming spring, for my very own
Sixty-Fifth, I will be perceived by the young 'uns exactly as I observed those
Class of 1895 guys: as ancient and irrelevant.

It follows, therefore, that my reservations about the 2025 English curriculum
have their exact parallel in the 1895ers perspective on my 1960 curriculum. It's
not hard to imagine that they -- I mean the members of the class of 1895 --
who had been educated in elocution and Old Norse, would have been shocked and
perhaps outraged by the 1950s "modern" curriculum that I found so enticing and
illuminating.

And now, because I don't want to go full curmudgeon and become the kind of
superannuated guy who shakes his ebony stick at the modern world and deplores
the decline of civilization, I'm going to make an effort to find out what's
really going on in 2025. I have therefore set myself the task of reading a
representative sample of the books written by members of the present-day English
faculty.

I'll report on my studies right here.

Stay tuned.

[January 18] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Vivian, you are right about the course
description. It's a disgrace. It's badly written and ridiculous. Why didn't you
include the name of the prof. who wrote it?  He/she needs to be exposed. What
"populations are being expelled and colonized" by Volpone or The Changeling? 
And did you look other course descriptions -- are they equally silly?  What's
worst about the course description is that it doesn't respect the plays that the
class is going to examine. They're not important interesting dramas to the
teacher -- they're just fodder for an ideology.

[January 19] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "Mr. Starr, I didn't identify the
author of the course description because the website doesn't identify him/her.
Just as well. Also, I didn't read other course descriptions though I might do so
in the future. I think you're correct that the course description does not
respect the dramas or their authors. Which is, as you suggest, mighty
disappointing."

[January 19] Bernhard Starr replies:  "I think I'd rather study Old Norse."

[February 4] Thurston Dale replies:  "I guess I'm a geezer, too (Cornell, '65).
I'm glad I majored in English before criticism turned crazy. Great teachers --
Mizener, Abrams, Parrish, Novarr."

[March 17] Anatole Miles Webber writes: "Vivian, you were naive back in the
1950s and you're still naive now. You assume that the Cornell English Department
of your youth, 65 years ago, was normative and normal. You were then and still
are oblivious to the fact that the Department's 1950 curriculum was the product
of stress and change and compromise. Try to remember that there were at least
three forces at work and that various faculty members had various degrees of
commitment to them. The first group was the oldest -- the traditionalist who
studied, as they had always done, literature as history and biography and
philology. Get the text and the context right was their primary concern. Then
there were the 'new critics" -- heirs to Leavis and Scrutiny in England and the
southern agrarians (Ransom, Tate, Warren) in the US. But the main intellectual
current riling English Departments were the fierce critics out of New York
(mostly Jewish) circles (Kazin, Trilling, Fiedler, Paul Goodman, Irving Howe,
etc). In retrospect, even though Cornell brought both Lionel Trilling and
Cleanth Brooks to Ithaca during your and my years there, the new winds made
little impression on our education. Cornell was peaceful, isolated and non-
ideological. It appears from your writing that you preferred it that way and
still do. It was stable until the theory people brought in novelty and confusion
and excitement.

[April 15] Parnell Pratt replies: "And also monumental pretension. And eventual
collapse and failure."

[May 3] Lance Birdseye (Lt., USAF) writes: "What a funny website this is. Hey,
folks, join the real world."

Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-no

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 2
Date: January 12, 2025

To begin my project of getting a fix on Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English, I attempted to read Professor Jeremy Braddock's Collecting as Modernist
Practice (Johns Hopkins, 2012).

My plan is to read these Cornell contributions to knowledge with as much empathy
and as little prejudice as I can muster.

Despite my good will, I got off to a bad start. The title of Braddock's book,
Collecting as Modernist Practice, struck me as dispiriting and uninviting. It's
an uncompromising coterie title that seems to say to me (and to every general
reader), "I don't care whether you read this book or not." And indeed the copy
that I borrowed from the university library had sat on the shelf unthumbed and
pristine for the twelve years since its publication. Perhaps it's the minuscule
typeface.

Collecting as Modernist Practice is not a page-turner. I found it rough
going, and I now confess that I read closely only the introduction and one
chapter -- and skimmed the rest.  Braddock studies the work of collecting and
anthologizing art and poetry in the modernist (mostly 1920s) period. The chapter
that I studied, The New Negro in the Field of Collections, was enlightening
and I was glad to have read it. Braddock is an indefatigable researcher.
Sentence after sentence is supported by extensive archival work and a plenty of
footnotes. I do wish that the author was as interested in the art and mystery
of literature as he is in literature's reception. Collecting as Modernist
Practice might be more at home in a department of sociology.

Braddock's prose style is awkward and forbidding. He loves long static sentences
with complex subjects and predicates that are sutured with weak verbs. In the
pages that I studied, I rarely encountered a metaphor or any other figure of
speech. Braddock is also partial to newly-coined polysyllabic abstractions that
he may think add heft to his thesis, but which in fact frustrate his readership:
minoritarian, identitarianism, anthologization, narrativizing. On the whole,
entirely too much suffixizationality.

I will always be grateful to Braddock for introducing me to Witter Bynner's 1917
Spectra hoax, of which I was ignorant, and especially for acquainting me with
the fabulous name of one of poets that Bynner invented: Anne Knish.

[January 13] Oksana Sartry writes:  "Vivian, I don't think that you're entirely
fair to Braddock. It's true that his prose style is imperfect, but remember that
the book is most likely his dissertation.  And for a diss. it's quite good. I
also think that when he writes about poetry, he's quite thoughtful and
insightful."

[January 13] Marianne Morrison, Ph. D. writes:  "Vivian, your too harsh about
Braddock's vocabulary. Those words that you poke fun at are the regular
vocabulary for people of his generation; your out of touch.

[January 14] Oksana Sartry replies: "I wonder why Johns Hopkins published this
diss. in its modernism series. Good diss., but immature book."

[January 17] Sean R. Fine writes:  "I'm interested in modernism, but frankly,
this book is absolutely unreadable. Whatever value it has is buried beneath tons
of jargon. Gives academia a bad name."

Source: 2025/01/words-of-my-life-poop

Title: Words of My Life -- Poop
Date: January 20, 2025

Nowadays, the ordinary meaning of the noun "poop" is feces. Perhaps because
"poop" is a nursery word, it is apparently less offensive than "crap" or "shit."
And yet less infantile than kaka or doodoo.

But "poop" did not refer to the work of the lavatory until about 1720. Nor do I
remember it being in general use during my childhood.

I myself first encountered the word "poop" in the escapist seagoing novels
to which I was addicted as an adolescent: the Bounty trilogy, the Hornblower
series, Treasure Island, Mr Midshipman Easy, and the buccaneering books of
Rafael Sabatini, Jeffery Farnol, and many many others whose names have been
long forgotten. In these romantic novels, it was often the case that a handsome
young midshipman and a pretty maiden, her golden hair cascading over her shapely
shoulders, would flirt while leaning against the taffrail of the "poop." Had
I known or suspected that "poop" carried stercoraceous overtones, my budding
fantasy life would have turned to dreck. Thank goodness I knew nothing.

The poop deck, I soon deduced, was the roof of the cabin built into the aft of
a sailing vessel. Why "poop?" From the French word for stern, poupe, itself
derived from the Latin puppis (also signifying stern). Wherefore puppis? No one
knows -- the word has no analogues in other ancient languages.

Shakespeare used the naval "poop" in the celebrated passage in Anthony and
Cleopatra in which Anthony was greeted by Cleopatra. It's the epitome of
classical conspicuous consumption as well as Shakespearean eloquence.

Source: 2025/01/cornell-entlish-then-and-now

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 3A
Date: January 25, 2025

I am absolutely buffaloed by Laura Brown's book, The Counterhuman
Imaginary (Cornell UP, 2023).

The title is a puzzle. Why does the adjective come after the noun? And what does
the word "counterhuman" mean?  (One hundred and forty-six pages to go and I'm
already off balance. I'm worried that if I can't understand the title I'm going
to have a heck of a difficult time with the content.)

I took a guess that the coinage "counterhuman" would signify something
monstrous or terrifying, like a vampire, troll or ogre. But I was not even
in the ballpark. "Counterhuman," I have now discovered, is a term of art in
contemporary literary criticism that refers to everything that is not human:
not only animals, natural phenomena such as storms and earthquakes, but also
"things" or objects -- anything that is constructed or manufactured. Not
"inhuman' -- just not human. (But why "counter" rather than "non" human?)

Moreover, the word "imaginary," which I have for a lifetime understood to
be an adjective signifying what is not material but rather a product of the
human mind, as for example, art and literature and dreams, has also undergone
metamorphosis. According to wiki, the adjective-turned-noun "imaginary" "is the
set of values, institutions, laws, and symbols common to a particular social
group and the corresponding society through which people imagine their social
whole.” That's a deal of territory, but I think I understand: "imaginary" is
essentially a synonym for what I might, naively, have called "culture." (Might
an alternative to The Counterhuman Imaginary be The Culture of Things? It's a
more inviting title and much less pretentious.)

But now I'm stopped in my tracks. The "imaginary, it appears, is "the work of a
particular social group." How in the world, then, do the "counterhuman," who are
incapable of thought, possibly generate "a structure of ideas?" Pots and pans
and volcanoes and marmosets don't have brains that think or speak, except when
we humans attribute such traits to them.

In a whimsical moment, Duke Senior, in As You Like It, proposed that there are
"tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones." Am I to
understand that this author takes seriously what Shakespeare regarded as an
ironic jokey extravagance? Gosh, I hope not.

I think I now get the point: Laura Brown, the prestigious Class of 1916
Professor of English at Cornell University, intends to defend a paradox. She
will explain to me how non-humans, things without an intelligence, can create
a culture. I'd better pay close attention. Or perhaps the author means to
advance the trivial but more sensible and less sensational idea that humans can
attribute culture to animals and things.

Nevertheless, I must say what's on my mind -- what a deliberately off-putting
title. It's clearly designed to repel the general reader, someone like myself,
and to speak only to coterie fellow-travelers who might understand either
or both of the words "counterhuman" and "imaginary." Not a large potential
audience.

Do I have a chip on my shoulder as I turn from the title to the Introduction   .
Yes, I believe I do                                                            .

[January 25] Marianne Morrison, Ph.D. writes:  "Vivian, you should not go on
with this. Your so prejudiced against this writer that you cant give her a fair
hearing."

[January 25] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Marianne, I'm trying my best to be
fair and honest."

[January 26] Petal Rivera writes: "Vivian, I think you're naive to suggest a
less pretentious title. I hate to say it, but the point is not to avoid
pretense, but to be pretentious. No modesty in this book."

[January 27] J C Occhiogrosso writes:  "Vivian, you're being deliberately
obtuse. C'mon, it's not so difficult."

[February 4] Vivian de St. Vrain responds:  "Ok, J C, if it's so easy, why don't
you suggest a better title."

[February 12] Winifred A. Walker writes: "Like it or not, this is typical
academic jargon. If you want to read this book, you must master the idiom."]

Source: 2025/01/cornell-english-then-and-now-3b

Title: Cornell English Then and Now: 3B
Date: January 30, 2025

I'm still trying to come to terms with Laura Brown's book, The Counterhuman
Imaginary. I've wrestled the title to a draw, and now I'm going to take a crack
at the Introduction. Is this task a good use of my limited time?

Let me quote a sentence that I take to be the very heart of the book and the
heart of the problem. It's a doozy.

"Human story telling is found to provide a subtle scenario for affirming the
other-than-human, based on an imputed commonality that replaces human priority
with cross-species inclusivity that transcends the human."

Laura Brown's prose reads as if it were first drafted in German and then
rendered into English by Google Translate.

It takes effort, but once you penetrate its peculiar idiom, it makes a kind of
sense. For those of my readers who are still with me, let me try to parse this
sentence. I suspect It may mean something like, "human beings project thoughts
and feelings onto animals and objects."

"Human story telling" [that is, literature]

"is found to provide" [the passive "is found," should be deleted even though it
functions as a compliment to the person (i.e. the author herself) to whom this
insight has been revealed.]

"a subtle scenario" [I don't know exactly what the phrase "subtle scenario"
means; nor do I think that anyone else does.]

"based on an imputed commonality " [I understand "commonality" because I know
that humans and animals share many features. I don't see the necessity for the
word 'imputed"; imputed by whom? who other than humans can "impute."]

"that replaces human priority" [i.e. there should be no preference for humans
over animals and rocks, despite the paradox that humans and not animals can
think about the equivalence.]

"with cross-species inclusivity" ["inclusivity" is implicit in the previous
rejection of "human priority." Wow, these abstract nouns do pile up
(commonality, priority, inclusivity). Suggested simplification: "that includes
other species"]

"that transcends the human.]. Transcends, in this final clause, smuggles into
the argument a new idea, because "to transcend" means "to surpass." The claim
now, as this snake of a sentence winds its weary way to conclusion, is that
the meaning that humans attach to things is greater than the humans who do the
attaching. At least I think that is what it may mean.]

So after completing this investigation, I think that the claim is that
literature projects ideas onto animals and also things. And sometimes these
projections illuminate and enhance both things and animals.

I'm exhausted. I had planned to discuss the Introduction at greater length, but
I've had enough. Instead of proceeding with the introduction, I'm going to try
to understand the chapter on Robinson Crusoe (a novel that I first read as a boy
and have read several times since, and which I feel that I understand). Stay
tuned.

[January 31]  Petal Rivera writes:  "So it seems that Brown's book is not a
novelty of ideas, but a novelty of language."

[January 31] Sean R. Fine writes: "I agree with Ms. Rivera. Simple ideas cast in
pretentious language to make them seem important. This emperor of literary
criticism has no clothes. None whatsoever,"

[February 1] Joel Salzberg writes: "Vivian, good job of unravelling that
sentence even though I still don't quite understand it."

{February 1] Viola Pilbeam writes: "Vivian, you're too kind. Why don't you
just  admit that this whole book is absurd American nonsense."

[February 4] Helena Hotchkiss-Jones replies: "This absurdity can't be blamed on
the Americans. It's as much the fault of Deleuze, Adorno, etc."]

[February 4] Joel Salzberg replied: "Who is Deleuze Adorno?"

[May 2]  Evelyn Efflandt writes: "Joel, you always were a couple of candles shy
of a menorah."

[May 3] Vivian de St.Vrain replies: "Evelyn, you always were a nasty bigot."

Source: 2025/01/cornelll-then-and-now-3-c

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 3C
Date: January 31, 2025

I'm a lifelong fan of Defoe's Robinson Crusoe. I love all the shipboard stuff,
the adventure, the exoticism, Crusoe's self-reliance, his  psychological
complexity, his religious ponderings, and especially the recapitulation of
nascent capitalism on the island. I'm as entranced as ever by the attempt to
domesticate goats, by his attempt to build a boat, by the single footprint on
the beach, by Friday's escape and the battle with the cannibals. With a little
effort, I have been able to set to one side the novel's faults: the author's
careless repetitions, his appalling colonialist racism, those last anticlimactic
adventures and the return to England, the unnatural absence of sexuality or
passion, the paranoia and the unnecessary violence. Massive defects, yes indeed,
but Robinson Crusoe is still a great eternally wonderful mishmash of a novel.

So it came as a surprise to read Laura Brown's one-sentence summary of the
novel in The Counterhuman Imaginary: "Robinson Crusoe enacts a self-creative
other- than-human vitality by setting matter in motion through the persistent
repetition of irresistible succession."

Maybe Robinson Crusoe does "enact" and "set matter in motion" -- I don't know,
can't say. But I do not plan to undergo the pain and woe of making sense out of
her ungainly and mystifying sentence. For Laura Brown, Robinson Crusoe is not
the pleasure and challenge that it has been for three hundred years -- it's just
raw material for her dry-as-dust ideological machine.

And a waste of my precious time.

[February 1] Bernhard Starr writes:  "Brown transforms the gold of literature
into the dross of criticism."

[February 1] Professor Merlon Crenelle, Southwestern Louisiana U., writes:
"Vivian, you're totally unfair. You take one sentence out of the chapter and
make fun of it. You don't even bother to see how the sentence is related to the
larger argument. You owe Professor Laura Brown an apology. You're
irresponsible."

[February 1] Marianne Morrison, Ph. D. writes: "Vivian, I agree with Mr. (Ms.?)
Crenelle. Youve not tried to understand Brown. Your lazy."

[February 2] Vivian de St. Vrain responds:  "Whether I'm lazy or not, Brown
writes in an obscure code. Why should I have to try to crack the code?  Why
can't she write in English? She's a Professor of English, for goodness sake.
It's not my job to figure out what she's trying to say; it's her job to make it
plain."

[February 2] Sean R. Fine writes: "It makes me wonder about the "imaginary" in
which Laura Brown seems to thrive. Closed, cloistered, self-congratulatory."

[February 3] Thurman Valentino (SVDGA) writes: "I think that Vivian de St. Vrain
is absolutely correct not to try to figure out what that sentence means. It's
not a reader's responsibility. My opinion is that Laura Brown is smart enough to
produce a complicated argument, but not smart enough to make complicated
argument clear."

[February 3] Michael F. Bristol writes: "Or maybe, dear Viv, you're not smart
enough to figure it all out."

[February 4] Vivian de St. Vrain replies: "OK, Bristol, if you're so smart why
don't you just tell us exactly what "persistent repetition of irresistible
succession" means."

[February 4] J C Occhiogrosso suggests: "One thing regularly follows another?"

[February 7] Beulah Withee writes:  "The problem is not with just that one
sentence. It's that whole paragraphs and pages are filled with such difficult
sentences. After each of these, a reader has to pause and interpret before going
on to the next one. It puts far too much burden on the reader."

[February 9] Gabriel Cussen III writes: "I tried to read the book but I didn't
get very far. Do visitors to this blog remember the criticism of academic
articles and books: "What is new is not true and what is true is not new." This
book is even worse, because what's true is utterly trivial."

[February 9] Bernhard Starr responds: "Gabriel Cussen, I agree with you. 
There's no there there."

[February 13]. Herbert Lecovin (Cornell '61) writes: "The important question is
what is going on in her classroom. Does she lecture in this dialect and does she
expect her students to write as she does?

Source: 2025/01/on-the-mall-1

Title: On the Mall
Date: February 02, 2025

After a severe cold snap, it's a welcome warm Friday afternoon. We're on the
semi-famous mall enjoying a long-postponed promenade. A woman, in her seventies,
stops us. "Can you help me?" I'm embarrassed to confess that my first reaction
to her plea was that she must be one of our many panhandlers. But not so. She
continued: "It's my husband, he has Parkinson's, can you help me get him to
the car?" He, Bill, was standing frozen, unable to speak, unable to move, his
balance precarious. "Two years ago," she said,"he was robust. He's having a bad
day." And indeed he was. I took Bill's left arm under the shoulder, his wife
the other arm. Lynn grasped my left hand and carried Bill's useless stick, and
together we shuffled him infinitely slowly and gently to the curb. "I thought we
could go out for coffee," she said, "but I was wrong." While we stood quietly,
Bill's wife went to fetch their car which was parked only fifty feet away. She
backed it to where we stood (Lynn now supporting Bill on his right side). We
helped Bill into passenger seat. His wife buckled him in.

I asked her, "do you have help?'  "Yes, she said, "friends." "Do you have
children?" "Yes, but they don't live nearby." She thanked us generously and
drove off.

I was sad for both him and her. He, because his dreadful disease is going to
kill him very soon. And she, because her life now consists of morning-to-night
care taking -- in bed, out of bed; dressing and undressing; into a comfortable
chair for a while and then and out of it; brief awkward walks; three times a
day lifting the spoon to his lips. And what's known in the care taking trade as
"toileting."

I'm convinced that she doesn't know how bad he is. Caretakers are always behind,
always catching up. If she knew, she'd have had a wheelchair at the ready. He
needs constant care-- not just family or friends, but professional assistance.
Can they afford a place in a memory care facility or nursing home? Not everyone
can.

Afterward the incident, we went to a coffee shop -- a normalizing activity for
us. But, sitting there, I was shaken. Certainly profound sadness for the ill
husband and the encumbered wife, and in addition a touch of personal PTSD.

And then the inevitable pondering. "To this favor must we come." It's not just
Bill. We're all doomed -- even that cute infant in the next booth, rapturously
examining her fingertips. A host of diseases, some as bad as Parkinson's,
waiting at the door, waiting.

Source: 2025/02/gravestones

Title: Gravestones
Date: February 08, 2025

I've never visited my parents' graves. I don't even know where they are buried.
I've been told that my father is buried between my mother and his sister Mollie,
but I don't know where they lie. I have a paper that tells me where my sister
Susan, who died as an infant, is buried, but I've never been there. I don't know
where my brother Eugene lies.

I know exactly where Althea and Phyllis are buried -- just up the hill, under
the big maple. I visit once a year and bring a stone to place on their markers.
Phyllis's is a bronze plaque affixed to a stone; Althea's is just the capital
letter A and her dates (1939-2016). It's what she wanted.

Dan Goss is buried in Staten Island somewhere. I visited once, with Althea. A's
mother, Grandma Anne, wanted her ashes divided in half and spread, part with
Phyllis and part with Dan.  She has no gravestone, nor wanted one.

I have told my family that I want my tombstone to read, "No more insomnia,
forever." But that's a joke.

Nowadays it's the custom to scatter the ashes on a favorite place, which is
nice, but there's no place to visit. Especially no place for those buried at
sea.

Source: 2025/02/mary-antin

Title: Mary Antin, The Promised Land (1911)
Date: February 12, 2025

I have just read Mary Antin's autobiography, The Promised Land, first published
in 1911. It is a book that I should have known much earlier in my life but only
discovered a week or so ago. The larger part The Promised Land is the familiar
story of immigrant life in a new country -- the author's struggles to adapt to
an unfamiliar culture, her achievements and triumphs, and her unabashed flag-
waving patriotism. More strange and more informative, is the picture of life
"old country," as viewed through the eyes of a young woman.  Antin grew up
in provincial, impoverished Polotzk, a small city now in Belarus, but which
at various times has been administered and exploited by the ungentle hands of
Varangians, Poles, Lithuanians, and Germans. During Antin's youth (she was
born in 1881), Polotsk was a part of Russia. It was not a good time to be a
Jew in Polotsk or indeed anywhere within the Pale of Settlement. (Her story is
especially pertinent because I myself have a hunk of Belarusian-Jewish genes --
as do, therefore, my children and grandchildren.)

Antin's life in that bleak part of the world was, I think, triply suppressed.
In political freedom and standard of living, by the Russians; in domestic and
personal relations, by oppressive Hasidism and the rabbis who enforced its
demanding rules; and thirdly, because Antin had the misfortune to be born
female. She had every reason to leave Polotsk behind.

Antin recognized early that she was a "prisoner" because "the Czar" commanded
Jews to stay within the Pale. She "accepted ill usage from the Gentiles as one
accepts the weather. The world was made in a certain way and I had to live
in it." Polotsk was a place of constant ethnic strife fueled by dangerous
superstitions. "The Gentiles said that we had killed their god and that we used
the blood of murdered Christian children in the Passover." The Jewish community
of Polotsk was always under threat of violence -- "the peasants would fill
themselves with vodka, and set out to kill Jews. They attacked with knives and
clubs and scythes and axes, killed them or tortured them, and burned their
houses. This was called a pogrom." There was also the threat of the draft,
where recruits served until the age of 41. (My maternal grandfather, Joseph
(Usilewski) Green told me that he had been drafted into the Russian army for a
twenty-year term; I now understand that he must have entered the army at age
21. In 1904 Grandpa, age 26, deserted and came to America. Good move.) Some men
escaped the draft by paying crippling bribes to conscription officers. Taxation
was onerous. "Peace cost so much a year in Polotsk."

Antin also explains that as stifling as was the Czar, the rules of religion were
harsher. "Within the wall raised by the vigilance of the police, another wall,
higher, thicker, more impenetrable was the religion of  the Jews." The rabbis
favored piety (as they conceived it) to independence or freedom or prosperity
and they enforced the most minute regulations and prohibitions of all actions
day and night. Antin tells of a wife who found a blemish on the chicken she was
preparing to cook. She consulted the rabbi who pronounced the chicken traif.
That night, the family went hungry.

Polotsk seems to have had no dissenters or freethinkers, or at least none that
Antin notes. I imagine that those who challenged orthodoxy either left of their
own accord or were shunned.

Girls were offered little outside the family kitchen or nursery.  They were
expected to marry young and produce many children, especially sons who could
distinguish the family with their Torah studies. Schooling was discouraged for
girls, who were taught to pronounce but not understand Hebrew.

At its prime, Polotsk had 60,000 inhabitants, perhaps 60 per cent of whom were
Jewish. There were twenty-three synagogues. Today there are no synagogues and no
Jews.

Source: 2025/02/wisdom-from-my-father

Title: Wisdom from my Father
Date: February 13, 2025

When dealing with a child, always make your appeal to the better side of his/her
nature.

No one owns anything; the most you can say is that you have a lifetime lease on
it.

As far as I can tell, I am just a long link in a chain going from nowhere to
nowhere.

If you lose your man, go directly to the basket.

Never omit an opportunity to do a favor for a friend, and never be embarrassed
to accept a favor from a friend.  People like to help one another.

Anyone can make money if he makes it the sole business of his life to do so.

When the stock market is going up, everyone is  a genius.

The czars and the rabbis kept our family in darkness for a thousand years. It
took hundreds of years for us to fight our way out of the ghetto, and they (the
orthodox and the Hasids) want to put themselves back in it.

Don't forget to wash behind your ears.

Source: 2025/02/cornell-english-caruth

Title: Cornell English Then and Now - 4
Date: February 15, 2025

Vivian de St. Vrain writes: "Cathy Caruth is the Frank H. T. Rhodes Professor
of English at Cornell University. She has written quite a number of books but
the one that I selected for this Cornell English Department project, partly
because of its engaging title, is Literature in the Ashes of History. Alas, the
title is misleading, because Caruth doesn't concern herself with literature in
any recognizable way. Rather, the book investigates psychoanalytic theories,
especially of loss and trauma. Although in an earlier part of my life I read
and studied all of Freud's major works, I found this book to be far too subtle
and abstruse for my downright brain. I have therefore asked assistance from
my long time friend A. Barnett Langdale, Jr. Barney is a very smart medical
school graduate, a therapist, and psychologist (though not a psychoanalyst) and
a person for whose opinions I have great regard."

A. Barnett Langdale, Jr., writes: "Thanks, Viv, for entrusting me with the of
task of reading and evaluating this book. I fear that I shall disappoint you,
because I had a hard time understanding Literature in the Ashes of History. In
order to profit from reading this book, one must accept certain assumptions
about Sigmund Freud and about the art of psychoanalysis. Caruth sets out to
modify and reinterpret the famous fort-da episode in Freud's Beyond the Pleasure
Principle. This became an immediate problem for me, because I have never
agreed with Freud's analysis of his grandson's play -- perhaps because his
interpretation clashes with what I have  learned from long years of closely
observing children in my professional practice. Events such as fort-da can
generate a spectrum of meanings and a variety of interpretations equally as
valid or invalid as Freud's. As I result, I read this book with a great deal of
resistance to its assumptions and their ramifications.

Many of the arguments that Caruth creates ("suggests" is her usual verb) are
too arcane for me. She carries her readers away from common sense. She inhabits
an intellectual world in which every event or fact carries its own negation.
And that negation bears a consequent negation, and so on ad infinitum, like the
images in a pair of opposed mirrors, leading inevitably to a situation in which,
as Macbeth says, "function/ Is smothered in surmise and nothing is/ But what is
not."

Vivian de St. Vrain responds: 'Many thanks, Barney. In the course of reading
Literature in the Ashes of History, I came to think that its procedure is, in
a sense, a lot like theology. If you make certain assumptions about god and
angels and creation, you can generate a fantastically complicated superstructure
of ideas that has absolutely no relations to the world in which we dwell. This
book is not theology, it's psychoanalytic theory, but it shares a similar
procedure, because, despite its highly-elaborated complexity, its assumptions
are unprovable if not absolutely false. Intelligence and sophistication can
take you only so far. I'm afraid that in the end, there's no more heft in this
kind of study than there is in theology -- the "subject without an object."
Ultimately, it's Cloud-Cuckoo-Land."

[February 15] Walter Balletto writes: "Before you dismiss this intelligent book
out of hand, you might want to read the ecstatic review by Michael Levine in The
Undecidable Unconscious: A Journal of Deconstruction and Psychoanalysis. It's
online. Levine makes the effort to read carefully, which neither you nor your
friend Langdale do."

[February 15] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "At first I thought that Mr.
Balletto was being ironic, inventing an improbable self-parodic name for an
academic journal. Who would believe there is actually such a publication? But I
looked it up and, by golly, it's real. Moreover, it's published, mirabile dictu,
by the University of Nebraska Press!!!"

[February 16] Janet Rich asks: "You haven't said anything about Caruth's
presence in a Department of English. Shouldn't she relocate to Psychology?"

[February 16] Herbert Lecovin (Cornell '61) asks: "I wonder how many of Caruth's
colleagues can read and understand her work?"

[February 16] Anita Robillard writes: "Caruth is on an island, and instead of
welcoming friends to join her, she erects walls and barricades to keep them
out."

[February 17] Joel Salzberg writes: "What do you mean by "island." She teaches
at Cornell; Cornell's not an island."

[February 17] Anita Robillard writes: "It's a metaphor, Joel."

[February 17] Herman S. Levi writes: "I don't understand why you compare
psychoanalysis to theology. They're nothing alike."

[February 18] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Professor Levi, let me refer you to
a familiar passage in the Leviathan, where Hobbes writes of "names that signifie
nothing, but are taken up and learned by rote from the Schooles, as
hypostatical, transubstantiate, consubstantiate, eternal-Now and the like
canting of Schoolemen." Similarly, the words of psychoanalysis, such as pleasure
principle, Ego, etc. signify nothing at all. Theologians and psychoanalysts can
be very smart people, but the net practical result of their involuted
speculation is transitory, wrong, useless, specious, and false."

[April 1]  Skye Barasch writes:  So, Vivian, is there anyone on the Cornell
English faculty whose work meets your antiquated approval?  It's all bad,
according to you.

[April 1]  Vivian de St, Vrain responds: Actually, Ms/Mr Barasch, I'm just about
to add a paragraph on a member of the faculty whose book was very informative
and comprehensible. No abstruse jargon, I'm glad to say.  Stay tuned;  my
comments will appear here in a day or two. I do wonder, now that I think of it,
if I'm unconsciously picking the least approachable books to report on. I'll try
to mend my ways.

Source: 2025/02/cornell-english-then-and-now-5

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 5
Date: February 21, 2025

Elisha Cohn is an associate professor in Cornell's Department of Literatures in
English. Her Still Life, Suspended Development in the Victorian Novel (2016)
strikes me as two books in one. The first is quite lovely and filled with a
variety of splendid apercus. Cohn explores "lyric moments" in the novels
(confession: I read closely only the chapter on Thomas Hardy, the novelist
with whom I'm most familiar). She observes that Hardy (a poet as well as a
novelist) occasionally stops the progress of the story and allows his characters
to experience a moment of stasis or reflection or reverie that is more a
characteristic of lyric poetry than prose. I was much impressed by her analyses
of these moments -- and wondered why I had failed to notice such events --
or non-events -- myself. So criticism did what it's supposed to do -- widens
our understanding and appreciation of works of literature. I returned to the
Victorian novel armed with a new way of seeing. In fact, I'm now reading Little
Dorrit again for the express purpose of ascertaining whether a non-poet like
Dickens employs the same Still Life method. So far, not the case -- Dickens has
his own particular (and very successful) methods of expanding the consciousness
of his characters.

Ah, but then there's the other side of Cohn's book which attempts to develop
her useful insights within the slough of "theory." I half suspect that Cohn
felt obliged to make herself relevant or contemporary or tenure-worthy with
her tumble into this quicksand -- but perhaps I'm wrong. Perhaps she devoutly
believes in an apparatus that I find so incomprehensible and transient. In
this second part of the book, many famous names are invoked and admired; some
of these are very French and very revered; others  are merely professors at
American universities. Pages of text and footnotes defend against the horrid
possibility that Still Life might be "insufficiently theorized." And in these
speculative paragraphs Cohn discusses the deprivilegization of hierarchical
thought in favor of forms of lateralization in which individuations are
impersonal and singularities are pre-individual and which reterritorialize
along the lines of preexisting structures of power which re-consolidate into
static concepts, etc., etc. Which is when I either descend into a reverie (or
nightmare) of my own or hurl he book across the room.

[February 23  Audrey ap Howell writes:  "Vivian de St. Vrain, you've go it
wrong. The notion that there are poetic moments in the novels is well
established. The originality of this book lies in its theorizing of these
moments. You would know this if you had read carefully and not skimmed."

[February 24] J C Occhiogrosso writes: "This is a well-written book. Complicated
but not obscure."

[February 25]  Reuben Musgrave writes:  "I bet that Cohn is a delightful teacher
-- if she keeps to the events in the novels and stays away from bewildering
'theory.'"

[February 25] Savannah Courtermanche writes:  "All novelists pause the plot for
moments of reflection. Nothing new here."

[March 5]  Joy Jourgenson writes:  "This difficult monograph would have been
more useful as a series of short, insightful essays.  Too bad it had to be
expanded into a repetitive static book. Not the author's fault -- just the tune
of the times."

[March 6]  Eli Munn writes:  "Vivian, you're too old and out of it to have an
opinion worth anything. Shut it down and go back to your knitting."

[March 15] Rogers Roggen writes:  "I wonder, Vivian, how you can work yourself
up into such a snit about Cornell when the USA is going to hell in a handbasket.
Shouldn't you put your effort into more pressing matters."

[March 18] Homer vanNess writes:  "Reuben Musgrave, are you possibly the "Cousin
Rube" that I heard my parents mention? I know there's a Musgrave branch to my
family. (I found your name doing a random googlesearch). If you are Cousin Rube,
could you pm me at [email protected]. I'd love to hear from you. I think you
went to Cornell; so did I but much later."

Source: 2025/02/words-of-my-life-text

Title: Words of My Life -- Text
Date: February 28, 2025

I first encountered the word "text" -- as did everyone else of my cohort -- as
the first component of "textbook." At P S 217, textbooks were issued on the
first day of school. Then, later in the day, we ritually scissored brown paper
grocery bags and improvised protective book covers. It was not unusual for the
covers to be in better shape than the retirement-eligible books. At college,
I was surprised to find that I was required to purchase my own textbooks -- a
discovery that busted a hole in my precarious budget.

And then the word "text" sat still for a number of years until it emerged as
a term of art in critical theory. "Text" became a generic word for anything
written: novels, poems, plays, signs, advertising slogans, tattoos -- anything
that could be analyzed and discussed. I think, in retrospect, that the idea
was not to "privilege" one form of writing over another. "Text" is to poem as
"provider" is to doctor.

Nowadays, "text" has emerged from the gloom of academic criticism and has become
the most frequently used of words. Who could have predicted it? I myself,
formerly a writer of letters and postcards and until recently of emails, and for
many years at one point a user of the telephone, now send and receive multiple
"texts" in a day.

The noun has also acquired a variety of verb forms: "I'll text you"; "I texted
you";   "Text me when you arrive"; "Talk to you later.  I'm texting."

All derived, ultimately, from L. texere textus, to weave; or textor, a weaver.

The use of "text" in religious ceremony, as in a cleric's, "today's text is..."
has never been a part of my life.

Source: 2025/03/universe

Title: It's Big! We're Little!
Date: March 05, 2025

Can it possibly be true that the universe as we know it is becoming larger and
larger? The more we learn, the more it seems to expand. The scientists who
know about such things now brag that the Milky Way numbers between 200 and 300
billion stars, nearly all of which are probably circled by planets. Moreover,
these same experts now claim that there are something like one or two trillion
such configurations -- some of them small but most larger than our own personal
galaxy. And to top all that, there's a rumor circulating that our universe might
be just one of an untold, possibly infinite number of other universes. Some of
them Big Banging, some expanding, some collapsing.

These numbers are staggering and incomprehensible, at least to me. I can't even
get a hold of a million of anything, even grains of sand, let alone a billion (a
thousand million!) enormous stars.

Now they tell me that our universe began 13.8 billion years ago, more or less,
and will go on for a hundred billion more. That's another very large number for
me (or you) to assimilate.

It's all mighty perplexing. And then let me add the toughest question of all:
why is there something rather than nothing? Yes, why is that? How come?

There are some who find this sort of information dismaying because it confirms
the triviality, the meaninglessness of our individual lives. How can I possibly
worry about last night's insomnia or my latest nosebleed -- or indeed my very
own life -- in a world of a gazillion planets, stars, ultramassive black holes,
neutron stars, galaxies, and a universe which may have no discernible boundary
or beginning or ending.

Yet I myself find all this information not dismaying but comforting - maybe even
inspiring.

What are the odds that a planet might support life? Very small. And that the
planet's precarious lifeforms would evolve for a couple of billions of years
and then generate intelligent life?  And that a million years of mating and
surviving by various evolving primitive and then recognizable humans might lead
to my ancestors -- and that after thousands of lucky matings eventually resolve
into my parents Manny and Lil who happened upon the precise instant to beget Me.
And that I, in the second half of my 80s, way past my shelf life, would still be
here to enjoy these extra innings.

All this work of creation and evolution and luck to culminate in Me.

It's a miracle of cosmic proportions and should be hosannahed. Here I am,
enjoying my still functioning brain. My stomach is mellow after a full meal
and my skin is glowing from a stroll in the warm sun. At the end of the day, I
will crawl under the covers with my bedmate and ladylove. Truly the stars have
aligned to my benefit.

Nor let us not underestimate  the consummate joy of mattress and blanket.

My assemblage of molecules has had a great run -- much more than could be
reasonably anticipated.  Soon my molecules will disassemble and then reassemble
into someone else. I'm very glad to contribute to this phenomenon.

But if so -- if we are so fortunate, as I believe us to be, why don't we as
a people celebrate our good fortune? Take pleasure in our lives. What's the
need for this continuing strife and wars and enslavements and genocides? What's
the point of it? We're all sitting here, billions of us, for a second or so in
an infinitely boundless and timeless universe. Why must half of us make life
miserable for the other half? Why can't all we just get along?

Truly we are a horrid species.

I wonder whether other planets that support intelligent life have done any
better. I hope so.

Source: 2025/04/driftin1

Title: Driftin'
Date: April 01, 2025

Every once in a while, I experience something that I call a "cultural
convergence" -- perhaps an event reported in a daily newspaper that closely
resembles something on the very page of the novel that I happen to be reading. A
cross-genre overlap, let us say.

Here's in example of such a coincidence that amused me much.

Yesterday evening I watched the classic western The Magnificent Seven (1960)
and this morning I read, once again, Shakespeare's Twelfth Night. It's hard to
believe but yes, there is a very brief moment where two such very distinct works
brush against one another.

Unlike TN, The Magnificent Seven is a violent spectacle that steers clear of
humor, or subtle characterization or extensive dialogue. After the climactic
concluding battle to preserve the Mexican village has been both lost and won,
the two surviving gunmen share a moment before trotting off on their separate
ways. Chris Adams (Yul Brynner) inquires of Vin Tanner (Steve McQueen) if he
has a plan for what comes next. Laconic Vin, cowpoke and gunslinger, responds,
"driftin'.

In Twelfth Night, there's a similar question and a similar answer, but in a far
different idiom. Antonio asks Sebastian, who has survived a shipwreck, about
his plans. Sebastian's view of his future is essentially the same as Vin's, but
there is none of that "ah shucks" minimalism in his reply. Instead, Sebastian
responds, "My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy."

[While Vin's one-word answer is clear as clear can be, Sebastian's "mere
extravagancy" requires a bit of a gloss. Nowadays, "extravagancy" (usually
"extravagance") signifies a "lack of restrain in purchasing luxury goods." Not
so in 1600, when "extravagant" remained much closer to its root etymological
inheritance. The word descends from L. vagare, "to wander." Extra-vagance
therefore means something like "wander beyond." Here's a more familiar example
of the word at work: when Roderigo characterizes Othello as an "extravagant and
wheeling stranger," he does not criticize Othello for spending too many ducats
on his fancy get-up. He means that he's a rootless and wandering non-native.
(Wheeling? my dictionary glosses wheeling as "roving, wandering, drifting"). And
also: "mere" did not then connote triviality; its meaning is closer to "pure."
"Determinate" meant and still means "decided.")

Therefore Sebastian's sentence --"My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy" --
is directly equivalent to  Vin's "driftin''". Cultural convergence at its best.

It's just two ways of talkin'.

I sometimes wonder about Shakespeare's intent here. Why did he bother
to put such a difficult sentence in Sebastian's mouth? For purposes of
characterization, certainly. But at the expense of clarity. Wouldn't it have
been more economical, more transparent, for Sebastian to say something plain,
such as "I don't have a plan, I'll just wander." It's certain that some
percentage of Shakespeare's audience, perhaps most, will not grasp the meaning 
of the sentence as written and will be left puzzled. Yet as he so often does,
Shakespeare preferred eloquence to transparency.

In my opinion, Shakespeare delighted in his own fluency.  And sometimes I think
that Shakespeare wasn't just writing to be heard by his Globe or Blackfriars
audience. He was writing to be read and studied --  although I doubt he could
have imagined a future in which his sentences would be glossed with crowded
inches of small-type footnotes.

It it possible that Shakespeare also had an inkling that, as Beethoven once put
it, he was writing for "a latter age?"

Source: 2025/04/cornell-english-then-and-now-6

Title: Cornell English Then and Now -- 6
Date: April 03, 2025

After struggling through a run of mysterious and puzzling works, I'm cheered to
discover a book written by Cornell English faculty member that I could read with
pleasure from beginning to end. And understand. And which alerted me to books
and poems with which I was not familiar. No theory, no pretentious jargon; just
honest scholarship and intelligent stylish analysis,

It's Facing the Abyss, American Literature and Culture in the 1940s, by George
Hutchinson, who is Cornell's Farr Professor of American Culture.

Unlike Professor Hutchinson, who is a considerably younger man, I myself was
alive (although barely sentient) during the 1940s. I was too young for serious
reading, so 1940s culture didn't come to my aluminum desk until the 1950s when
I belatedly came to awareness. As a result, I read many of the books that
Hutchinson discusses a decade past their relevance. Hutchinson also mentions
many influential books that I didn't read at all and therefore came as a
surprise -- and which underlined my ignorance. For example, during the 1950s,
my high school and college years, I read many books of 1940s Jewish American
writers to whom Hutchinson devotes a long chapter: Mailer, Bellow, Malamud,
Rukeyser, Arthur Miller, etc. But my acquaintance was incomplete. I confess that
I had never heard the names of Jo Sinclair or Isaac Rosenthal, both of whom
Hutchinson scrutinizes at full. One name missing from Hutchinson's survey is J D
Salinger, who started to publish in the 40s but only became famous with Cather
in the Rye in 1951. Just as well -- I never caught Salinger fever although many
of my friends were quite infected.

Hutchinson has presented me with a reading list of books that I should have
known but didn't and that will keep me engaged for months. I'm grateful.

Hutchinson's chapter on WWII is most revelatory. Without being unduly partisan,
it exposes and corrects the "greatest generation" mythology that I had half come
to accept.

After reading Facing the Abyss, I continued my investigation of Cornell English
faculty publications by taking a couple of wild swings at Elizabeth S. Anker's
mystifying On Paradox, the Claims of Theory (Duke UP, 2022). (Anker holds a
joint appointment in Cornell's law school and its Department of Literature in
English.) I can say just two things for certain about this difficult book: a) I
didn't understand two consecutive sentences, and b) it's not about literature,
not even tangentially. In fact, I'm not sure what it's about -- as far as I can
tell, it's not about the law. I have rarely attempted anything in English prose
that I found quite so impenetrable. I never even grasped what Anker means by
paradox.

I'm sure it's mea maxima culpa, but so be it.

[April 4] PGB writes: "Every time you post something, it becomes ever clearer
that you're not the right person for this investigation. Give it up and stick to
something within your abilities, like basketball. You write well on basketball.
Do yourself a favor: stay away from the deeper issues that Anker discusses."

[April 4]  Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Perhaps you're right, PGB (whoever you
are). The shoemaker should stick to his last. This Anker book is not intended
for me, but I I wonder for whom it is intended. It's got to be an extremely
small specialized audience. Six or eight people, worldwide. I doubt anyone on
Cornell's English faculty then or now could make heads or tails of it."

[April 6]  Artie Greengroin writes: "Thanks for hanging in there.  I hope you
find other Cornell English Professors who know how to write English. I'm not
optimistic, though. BTW, I think PGB is harshing on you, but I agree that your
basketball essays are pretty good."

[April 8] Vivian de St. Vrain responds: "Thanks for the recommendation, Artie
and PGB. If anyone is interested, my basketball essays are here.

[April 9]  Charles Evans (Mercer College) writes: "I agree. Vivian, your notes
on basketball are quite good. But you're just not smart enough to understand
philosophy."

[April 10] Joe J. Keen (Northwest Nazarene University, Nampa, Idaho) writes: "I
agree with Charles Evans. The basketball entries are amusing. But, Vivian,
you're no philosopher."

[April 16] Vivian de St. Vrain writes: The "Artie Greengroin" who posted on
April 6 does not exist. Artie Greengroin is not a real person; he's a character
invented by the WWII novelist Harry Brown. Come on, Artie you can use your real
name. Don't be afraid. Don't hide behind a pseudonym. We're all friends here."

[April 30]. Chester Bacon writes: "Thanks for bringing the Hutchinson book to my
attention.  I've read and been enlightened by it. But following your
recommendation I'll stay away from the Anker book. And I do like your basketball
essays."

Source: 2025/04/trump-chaucer-etc

Title: Trump, Chaucer, etc.
Date: April 16, 2025

Chaucer's Pardoner, some will remember, has long blonde hair and speaks in
a high treble voice. Chaucer calls him "a gelding or a mare." A gelding is
obviously a eunuch; what Chaucer means by mare is less clear -- perhaps "female
eunuch" -- whatever that entails -- or a gay male or possibly even a woman
cross-dressed as a man. In any case, a person of ambiguous sexuality -- "gender
fluid" in modern idiom.

Update: the Naval Academy Nimitz library at Annapolis has purged from its
shelves a book by Robert S. Sturges called  "Chaucer's Pardoner: Gender
Theory." Isn't it reassuring that our national security will no longer be
endangered by a discussion of the Pardoner's identity.

The list of 381 censored books can be found at

https://media.defense.gov/2025/Apr/04/2003683009/-1/-1/0/250404-
LIST%20OF%20REMOVED%20BOOKS%20FROM%20NIMITZ%20LIBRARY.PDF

Source: 2025/04/new-old-books

Title: New Old Books from the 1940s
Date: April 22, 2025

I read George Hutchinson's Facing the Abyss, a report on the culture of the
1940. Hutchinson assesses books that were influential during that troubled
decade.

When I came of age in the 1950s, I encountered a good share of these books. I
was a curious, library-addicted lad and 1940s culture lingered in the 1950s air.
Yet Hutchinson brings to attention whole shelves of important writing of which I
was shamefully ignorant. Through the resources of Interlibrary Loan and second-
hand internet bookstores, I've now become acquainted with a bunch of new old
books. Here's some of them (with more to follow).

Hutchinson claims that Jo Sinclair's Wasteland (1946) is an important
contribution to the Jewish-American novel. Perhaps it is, by priority, but I
found it disappointing and superficial. The main man, Jacob Braunowitz changes
his name to John Brown and hides his Jewishness, but it doesn't work -- he lives
in a "wasteland" neither integrated into America nor bolstered by his inherited
religion. Along comes a Freudian psychoanalyst and in a few magical sessions
Brown is liberated to embrace his Judaism. For me, the novel was simplistic and
implausible. Harry Brown's A Walk in the Sun (1944) is the most persuasive and
realistic war novel I've ever read -- it accomplishes more in 150 pages that
Norman Mailer achieved in 600. Aldo Leopold's Sand County Almanac (1949 is a
pioneering classic of environmentalism -- though nowadays less widely known than
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring but much more learned and innovative. It's a very
good book but frankly I found the "lyrical" prose a bit too gooey for my taste.
Isaac Rosenfeld's Passage from Home is a distinguished novel of adolescent
alienation. It's kinky (about a boy's semi-sexual relationship to his deceased
mother's sister). It's a far better novel, I think, than Salinger's similar
and imitative Catcher in the Rye. What a pity that Rosenfeld died of a heart
attack at age 38!  A great loss to literature. I also read Anatole Broyard's
Kafka Was the Rage, a memoir of Greenwich Village in the 1940s although not
published until 1985. It's a noteworthy collection of short essay, able to be
much more candid about sex and sexuality than if it had appeared during the time
it chronicles. Broyard claims that 1946 was the best year ever: the war was over
and he had freedom and the G I Bill.

A pretty good for me too -- in 1946 just seven years old, sitting on the sunny
stoop eating raisins.