Title: "Geographical Dyslexia," or "Directional Disability," or, People Who Lose Their Way
Date: September 23, 2006

[January 17, 2012.  There are at this moment three pages of comments appended to
this entry, which I wrote almost six years ago. The comments are most
interesting and revealing.  Don't miss 'em -- Vivian].

In The Accidental Tourist (New York [Knopf], 1991), Anne Tyler describes
a malady that, as far as I know had never before been acknowledged in
literature.  All four of her eccentric Leary siblings share "a total inability
to find their way around." Macon Leary, who writes travel books for a living and
is the novel's focal character, christens this trait "geographical dyslexia."

I'm not convinced that "geographical dyslexia" is a good name for the Learys'
condition. An alternative, "directional disability," is not much better.
Whatever the name, sufferers will know what is meant.  There's a class of
people (I'm one of them) who are chronically lost; who take a few steps in a
strange city and can't find their way back to the hotel; who don't know how to
exit the building they've just entered because they've strolled a corridor or
two; who are totally befuddled and even panicked when they drive into a familiar
intersection from an unaccustomed direction; who break into a cold sweat when
someone says, "you know how to get home -- just reverse the directions"; and
who, because they're frequently lost, are subject to ridicule and mockery from
their very own families and from their most intimate friends.

Macon Leary has a theory about his persistent dysgeographica. He thinks he's
disabled because all his life he's moved from house to house, and "people who'd
been moved around a great deal never acquired a fixed point of reference,
but wandered forever in a fog." I know of no evidence to support this wholly
improbable suggestion. Macon clutches at a straw because there's no data (and
there's no data, at least in part, because there's no accepted name for his
condition).

Every sufferer nurses his own unscientific, anecdotal theory. I was once
convinced that my dysgeographica was related to my total absence of rhythm --
as a child I could never learn to pump a swing or even to jump rope. My brother
thinks that it must be connected to his aversion to heights. My niece takes
the view that it's somehow related to her motion sickness and to her bouts of
dizziness. A friend thinks that the trouble stems from the fact that she was
naturally left-handed but was trained to be right-handed. In fact, no one knows
whether dysgeographica is connected to any other trait, or whether it's one of
a cluster of traits. In terms of hard science, the directionally disabled have
been allowed to languish in the dark ages.

I'm almost convinced that dysgeographica runs in families. My father was
monumentally disabled, and one of my brothers is so impaired that he's
occasionally looked to me for directional advice. Barking up the wrong tree, is
he!! (I have another brother who always knows exactly where he is -- perhaps
he's adopted.) In The Accidental Tourist,  Anne Tyler, who's a very sharp
observer of mankind, tellingly attributes dysgeographica to all four Leary
siblings.Tyler also notes that Macon has learned how to cope: he "kept a
stack of index cards giving detailed directions to the houses of his friends
-- even friends he'd known forever." Coping mechanisms are essential to the
dysgeographical. When I have to drive any distance without a navigator, I
write the directions with a thick pen in a notebook and keep it open on the
passenger seat. For some reason, I can't seem to retain more than one or two of
the approaching turns in my mind, so I must continually refer to the notebook.
Mapquest has proved to be a boon, especially if I remember to print out in very
large type.

In The Accidental Tourist, no one pokes fun at the Leary siblings. But in real
life, it's considered quite amusing to laugh at the chronically lost. People
don't understand that dysgeographica is a disability like colorblindness.
I can't say how many times I've been instructed to "concentrate," or "pay
attention' -- advice which is just as effective as commanding a color blind
person to make an effort to register shades of yellow or blue. Without a label
and without a support group, the dysgeographical will continue to be ridiculed.
It's time for us to unite. Unless we do so, we are not only doomed, like Macon
Leary, to be "adrift upon the planet, helpless, praying that by luck [we] might
stumble across [our] destination," but doomed to be humiliated as well.

(July 22, 2007.  I've written again on directional dyslexia.  If anyone is
interested, take a look here, here, and here.    And now one more.)  And
also.