Title: The Sculpin.  Slimy or Mottled?
Date: August 14, 2008

Knowing little of the finny tribe, I borrowed the Bradford Public Library's
copy of Langdon's introductory Fishes of Vermont (2006). It's an excellent,
informative, helpful guide. With Langdon's help, I can now declare that it's
undeniably the brown bullhead, a species of catfish, that has been multiplying
in our pond, The bullhead, a villainous omnivore, is one of the causes of the
steep decline of our population of frogs. The butt-ugly, scaleless, bebarbelled
brute gobbles frogs' eggs.

Readers of this blague will not be astonished to learn that Dr. M .has fallen
deeply in love with fish names. Take the brown bullhead, for example. It's
also known by such evocative and lunatic denominations as the horned pout, the
mudcat, and the minister. Minister?  To whom, and under what circumstances,
would a brown bullhead minister?

My favorite Vermont fish, nomenclature-wise, is the slimy sculpin, also
performing under such titles as the blob, the chucklehead, the rock cusk, the
stargazer, and the cockatouch. The slimy sculpin should not be confused with its
near cousin, the mottled sculpin -- which can also be addressed as the slowfish
or gudgeon.

Many of the common Vermont fishes have lost their colorful historic names. The
bowfin was once called the John A. Gindle, the stonecat was the doogler, the
lake trout was the togue or longue, the burbot was variously ling or lawyer
(lawyer? minister?  why not accountant? or dentist?), the quillback was the
buffalo, and the gar was the needlenose. On the other hand, the blandly-named
pond perch of olden days is trending in the reverse direction: it's now called
the pumpkinseed -- a name which seems curiously vegetarian for a denizen of the
deep.

If I had known that there was a fish called the cisco (known on jolly days as
the tollibee and on prosaic days as the sand herring), I would long ago have
promoted Galen Cisco to my all-time-great Baseball-Fish Team, adding him to such
piscine luminaries as Catfish Hunter, Dizzy Trout, Chico Salmon, Sid Bream,
Bobby Sturgeon, Art "Red" Herring, and Shad Roe. And Mudcat Grant.

No Sculpins in MLB that I can recall, but In a more poetic universe, "Slimy"
Sculpin would have been a spitball pitcher, or perhaps even a team owner.