Title: Alien Abductions and Other Irrationalities
Date: February 18, 2006

In Abducted:  How People Come to Believe They Were Abducted by Aliens (Harvard,
2005), Susan Clancy recounts interviews with fifty or so "abductees." Each
person's experience is unique, but the various stories can be melded into a
composite narrative. "I was having problems with anxiety and depression. I was
at Fenway Park with my buddies watching a game. The next thing I remember, I
was on Mission Hill and it was five in the morning. I was always interested in
science fiction. I read Communion; I saw E. T and Close Encounters. I went to a
hypnotist, and memories started flooding back. I started sobbing uncontrollably.
They were long and tall, with huge black eyes that went around their heads. I
remembered them fastening a device like a suction cup to my genitals to suck out
the sperm painfully. They inserted a foot-long tube into my nostril. I know it
happened because I get nosebleeds. My dad thinks it's a transmitter they put in
there.  They've programmed other memories to disappear. Until I experienced the
aliens, life was empty, meaningless. Now that I have my memories, I understand
everything. What happened to me was overwhelming. It was real. I can't explain--
I felt it. I was changed from the person that I was.  It was the most positive
event of my life. It helped me to see life as beautiful, as a gift."

Alien abductees may hold to false beliefs, but they have powerful faith. Clancy
reports that once, at a convention of abductees, she tried to talk about the
unreliability of anecdotal evidence, the fragility of memory, the nature of
the sleep-paralysis syndrome, the creation of false memories under hypnosis,
Occam's Razor (the employment of the most economical hypothesis to explain a
phenomenon), etc. According to Clancy, there was a long silence, and then one of
the participants said, "tell her about the metallic tube that came out of Jim's
nose, the one that went down the sink before you both could catch it."

Eventually Clancy brings herself to discuss the obvious parallel of abduction
to religion, which, she says, she is reluctant to do because she has "about a
thousand Irish Catholic relatives [she] doesn't want to offend." Nevertheless,
she concludes that "alien-abduction beliefs can be considered a type of
religious creed, based on faith, not facts." Kind to her extended family, Clancy
does pursue the argument to the next logical step: that ordinary, accepted
beliefs of supernatural intervention in human affairs are exactly as credible --
no more, no less -- as belief in macrocephalic waifs with black wraparound eyes
who stick needles into your navel to produce hybrid children.

She also reports that one of her informants, when challenged, responded, "I
trust my gut and my gut says aliens." Is there a better argument for listening
not to our guts but to our brains?