Title: Neanderthal News
Date: March 15, 2013

We were not always the earth's sole hominid. Neanderthals (and Denisovans, and
Homo floresiensis (if they were truly distinct species) overlapped our time. 
Here are two skeletons, one of ours and one of theirs.

The first Neanderthals appeared perhaps a quarter of a million years ago
and certainly by 170,000 years BP. They seem to have supplanted Homo
heidlebergensis, a more distant cousin of ours, and they flourished from Spain
to Israel, as far north as Finland, and possibly as far east as the Altai
mountains in Siberia. In order to live in cold climates, they would have
clothed themselves, though of course not a trace of a garment has survived.
Neanderthals, it's been newly determined, carried a gene associated with pale
skin and red hair. Their brain cases were slightly larger than ours, but shaped
differently --  bulging at the sides and protruding in the back. Their rib
cases flared at the bottom and their pelvises were broad, which meant that their
strides necessarily involved a lot more hip rotation than our straightforward
gait. They were more robust than we, with heavier bones and muscles, and they
were much stronger. They ate more than we did and matured more rapidly -- their
wisdom teeth developed at six years of age. Earlier Neanderthal populations
appear to have been scavengers, but later ones were predators, capable of taking
mammoths and wooly rhinoceroses. The plaque of Neanderthal teeth reveal traces
of phytoliths which occur in the roots and leaves of plants. It's known that
they ate dates, barley and legumes. Both meat and plants were cooked. There is
some fragmentary evidence that they practiced cannibalism, but, I'd prefer to
think, only "survival cannibalism."  Neanderthals lived in bands or perhaps 8
or 10 members. They occasionally buried their dead, but left behind no evidence
of ritual or ceremony. They knapped chert and flint into scrapers and hand axes
and the knew how to bind stone to wooden handles with adhesives and sinew, but
they did not make use of bone tools.

They were gone from the earth about 20,000 years ago, displaced by homines
sapientes and perhaps reduced by changes in the climate or by other destructive
natural events.

Humans of European origin (but not of African or Asian) interbred with
Neanderthals, so that as much of 4% of human DNA is Neanderthal. On ther other
hand, no Homo sapiens DNA has been discovered in Neanderthal populations. No one
knows why the one and not the other.

This report is filched from Ian Tattersall's Masters of the Planet (2012), an
excellent book that brought me up to date on human origins. I recommend it
with genuine enthusiasm. It's learned, clearly written, and sensible. And it
displaces the cartoon history I grew up with in which monkeys lead to apes and
then to Piltdown (!!!) man and then to insurance salesmen in tie and jacket. 
The modern picture is more complicated and far more fascinating and also replete
with unsolved puzzles.