Title: Basketball in My LIfe
Date: December 13, 2023

My father, who was born in 1904, was a basketball enthusiast when the game was
in its infancy. He played guard on Eastern District High School's team and later
played as a freshman at CCNY under legendary coach Nat Holman. But Dad came
from an impoverished family and left college after one year because, he told
me once, "I couldn't see how I could stay in school when my family needed so
much." So while his formal education went by the wayside, he was able to make up
the difference by a lifetime of reading. And although he was not a complaining
sort, it was clear to me and I think to my brothers that he felt a bit grieved
that his formal athletic career had been cut so short. He kept at it, though,
on his own. Well into his forties, he was absent from family dinner one night
a week. "Wednesdays," my mother explained, long before I could understand what
the words meant, "your father goes to the gym." And Saturday mornings, in warm
weather, were reserved for tennis. Dad very much wanted his three sons to carry
on his athletic tradition, but I think, in retrospect, that in the long run we
all disappointed him. Both my brothers were fine athletes although not big or
fast enough for professional careers; I was, alack and alas, a disappointment.
Dad, who had also been a semi-pro catcher in baseball, taught Gene and Jon
how to throw an "inshoot" and an "outshoot," but he could not bring himself
to coach me because it was obvious that with my 55 mile an hour fastball and
scattershot arm, I wasn't going anywhere, pitching-wise, and although he showed
me a couple of basketball moves he was, I recognize, a bit embarrassed by my
want of athletic skill. (In my defense I must report that although I was more
academic than athletic, I was voted "class athlete" by my P. S. 217 (8-5) eighth
grade class -- a group which must have been, now that I think of it, quite a
collection of klutzes). My older brother was a good enough basketball player to
play for his college team for a year, and my younger brother was an outstanding
sandlot all-star in baseball who once struck out Joe Torre, who, it will be
remembered, finished his major league career with a .300 lifetime average. (The
second time he pitched to Torre, my brother says, the future MVP hit a ball that
"is still circling the earth.") I myself had the briefest career on the diamond.
The pinnacle of my experience was that, once, playing second base, I turned a
double play -- took the toss from the shortstop, stepped on the bag, gracefully
wheeled, and pegged the ball perfectly to the first baseman. It happened once
and once only, but it was glorious -- definitely a Hall of Fame moment. The peak
of my basketball career occurred in the slippery court (which doubled as a dance
floor) in the basement of the Flatbush Jewish Center on Coney Island Avenue and
Avenue J. I was, I estimate, thirteen years old. Wearing number 3, in black and
gold, I was steaming down the left side of the court on a fast break and was
forced away from the basket, so instead of a layup I managed a sweeping running
left-handed hook which caught nothing but net. There was modest applause. None
of my teammates guessed that I had intended to bank the ball off the backboard
and that it had slipped out of my hand and swished, entirely by accident. I only
reveal this deep secret now, very now.  Another high point in my career: I once
won a local foul shooting contest. I hit 23 of 25. One small caveat, though.
The contest was conducted in the P.S. 217 schoolyard, where the baskets were,
how shall I say this correctly, unsteady and soft. As a result, they were like
sewers -- everything flushed. I doubt that I would have made 23 on a standard
rigid rim. Nevertheless, I did win the medal and the other competitors all used
the same ball and basket as I -- so, therefore, a modest triumph. And then
playing basketball faded into the background, because I didn't get my growth
until very late and for a while I was playing at 4' 11" or 5' 1" against hairy
guys who had already reached their full mature height. But I continued to pursue
my undistinguished career -- including the most competitive activity of my life
-- three on three half court in the EHHS gym, one basket wins, and "winners
out." And then a little intramural in Ithaca; an occasional pickup game in
Cambridge. Oh, and twenty years later on, I played a bit with my own offspring,
all three of whom were more athletic than I. My last pathetic hurrah (almost a
decade ago, now) was being obliterated at h-o-r-s-e by my granddaughter Ella.

Nevertheless, I retained my interest in the sport. No longer a participant, I
became a serious spectator. I know enough about roundball to appreciate both
player and play. For thirty years or so, I had a good seat at the home games of
the CU Buffaloes -- it was high quality college basketball (although the Buffs
rarely enjoyed a winning season). One source of interest and fun for me was to
evaluate the talent and try to predict which of our guys (or the visitors') had
the skill and size to move up to the next level. Over the years, I followed
the early days of many a later NBA regular -- and even a couple of stars. I
remember in particular Jay Humphries, who played four excellent seasons for
CU and then averaged in double figures during an extended NBA career. Also
local lad Chauncey Billups, "Mr Big Shot" himself. Andre Roberson, a terrific
defender and rebounder who never lived up to his potential because he just
couldn't master the corner three; Matt Bullard, a fine outside shooter; Scott
Wedman; Alec Burks; Derrick White (still playing for Boston and getting better
each year); and Spencer Dinwiddie, whom I didn't judge to be an NBA player but
who has become a steady professional. The high point of my CU spectatorial
career occurred in 2006 when the Texas Longhorns brought to our stadium a
gangly teen- ager named Kevin Durant. One didn't have to be a sophisticated
evaluator of talent to recognize that KD had a spectacular career ahead of him;
it was grandly obvious. It took him only two years to lead the NBA in scoring.
I stopped attending CU games when the athletic department, an independent
entity with only a loose connection to the University, demanded that I make a
donation of $400 for the privilege of purchasing season tickets. I resented the
presumption, and I felt that there were many causes more worthy of my limited
philanthropy than CU basketball. Although I stay away from our local Events
Center, I'm still an occasional arena visitor. In fact, just last season, LERM
and I bought incredibly expensive tickets to watch the Cavaliers take on the
Pelicans at the Smoothie King Arena in New Orleans. The venue was up-to-date
but way too brightly lit, and crowded, and noisy. Moreover, I dislike the
theory that attendees must be continually entertained and placated with garish
novelties. I don't go to basketball games for the half-time acrobats or the
animal acts or the costumed dancers or the "kiss-cam" or the ear-popping "music"
nor to be commanded when to cheer or when to chant "DE-FENSE." I go to watch and
admire the players. Despite the distractions it was a good game, even though
Zion Williamson was out with an ankle injury. These pros, even the unheralded
ones, are fabulous athletes and they are especially impressive in person.

So for most of my life it's been the electronic medium that has kept me abreast
of the game. It all started with radio; I suspect that very few readers of this
entry will be able to recall the fast-paced narration of Marty Glickman on WHN,
but he was, let me tell you, a hoops artist who could bring the Knicks alive
with voice alone. Then came television, sometime around the early 1950s. The
thirteen inch black-and-white Dumont that my father acquired displayed an image
that seemed miraculous at the time but paleolithically primitive compared to
the 60" HDTV that entrances me nowadays. It's all present -- right there before
my astonished eyes. Incredible no-look passes and sensational blocks and three-
pointers from downtown -- and also horrid tattoos -- in brilliant color. In my
TV-basketball saturated brain is stored the entire history of the NBA from then
until now. In the 50s, Max Zaslofsky, Harry Gallatin, Sweetwater Clifton, Carl
Braun, the McGuire brothers Dick and Al, and Ernie Vandeweghe, who played only
home games because he was a full-time medical student. A team that was good but
always managed to lose to the Celtics -- who had Cousy and Sharman and later
Bill Russell, the Jones boys (Sam and KC), Havlicek and Heinsohn. I was in those
years a most loyal and enthusiastic fan of our own New York Knickerbockers --
the championship teams composed of Willis Reed, Dave DeBusschere, Bill Bradley,
Earl Monroe, and Walt Frazier, names and faces as present in my memory as
the more celebrated Dodger boys of summer. Then came the Magic-Bird era, LA
"showtime," Michael Jordan, Duncan-Ginobili-Parker-Popovich, and now LeBron
James, who, although, he is certainly the most effective player in history, is
less exciting to watch than his innovative contemporary, Steph Curry. During
this last while, I've become a devoted GSW fan; when they were at their best, a
few years ago, they played an extraordinarily beautiful game. There were nights
when they'd score 30 baskets on 25 lovely assists. It's been a great ride that's
now coming to an end, but there's another generation of players on the horizon
and perhaps I'll be around long enough to enjoy them. After all, I've been there
for the entire history of the NBA. What developments I have seen! What was once
a local, coterie sport has gone international, with many of the best players
coming from overseas or south of the border. Where once all the players, save
a few, were White and middle-class, now 75% to 80% are Black and inner-city,
bringing with them a heck of a lot of skill and flash and dazzle. Lumbering
awkward centers, with their slow roundhouse hook shots, have been superseded by
astonishingly mobile 7-footers who can protect the rim but also drift outside
to nail a three. Salaries, in the old days, were little more than nominal and
now there are marginal players making millions off the bench. The athletes have
become celebrities -- and their shoes have become almost as famous as they
are, and more lucrative. Franchises, which once went for a song, are now worth
billions.

When I'm watching a game on a Sunday afternoon, I think about my father. I wish
he could sit with me and discuss the progress of the sport. I'd like to show
him what has happened since he left us in 1985. He'd like it that the players
are bigger, faster, stronger, in better shape, and that the shooting is more
accurate and the defenses more subtle and sophisticated. He'd love the pick-and-
roll and the pick-and-pop. He'd appreciate the alley-oops and the accurate full
court passes. I also know what he wouldn't like -- the overhasty three, the
lenient interpretation of walking and palming, and the occasional showboating,
Most of all, he'd hate it that the NBA is now in cahoots with the gambling
establishment. He would see it, as I do, as a major miscalculation -- as a
scandal waiting to happen.

Every once in a while, even at this advanced age, I dream that I'm in the midst
of a game, and I rise up and with an effortless flick of the right wrist launch
a perfect 40-foot three that hardly even grazes the net. A childish fantasy,
perhaps, but still very  satisfying.