Title: First Days at Cornell, September 1956.
Date: March 07, 2020

Early in September of 1956, I found my way from Flatbush to Hoboken and there
boarded the old Lehigh Valley Railroad (the 'Leaky V') for the eight-hour ride
to Ithaca. Surely I was the most naive and callow lad ever to set foot on the
grounds of Cornell University. I was ignorant and provincial and I had never so
much as visited a college campus. Although I lived a bicycle ride's distance
from Brooklyn College, I had never been either enterprising or curious enough
to ride by and take a gander. What I knew of higher education was what I had
gleaned from 1940s black-and-white movies in which mature-looking but prankish
fellows in raccoon coats smoked pipes and harmonized and made fun of the 'prexy'
and of the bespectacled 'profs' and who were unworthy of the attractive coeds
they pursued until just before the final fadeout when they reformed themselves
enough to earn a kiss and a wink. Nor did I have the slightest idea what was
signified by the wink.

I arrived at Cornell a few days before classes began. During those first days I
had three separate mind-shattering experiences.

The first: one morning, I took my newly-purchased map and set out on a long
walk (probably to avoid one of those atavistic rah-rah events which Cornell
favored and to which I was constitutionally averse). Sometime during the day's
wandering I came across a road sign that read "CITY LIMITS." It was as if I had
been struck by lightning. Until the moment that I encountered that sign, I had
no idea that a city could have limits. Regular readers of this blague know that
I spent my first seventeen years in the interior regions of darkest Brooklyn, a
large borough in an even larger city from which there was no exit and certainly
no "limit" -- especially not while on foot. My family, my family of origin, was
automobile-free and I myself had left the neighborhood precincts only a handful
of times. Although unworldly, I was nevertheless capable of extrapolation.
If it was possible to pass beyond the city limits, then perhaps it was also
possible to re-negotiate other limitations that I had assumed were eternal
or unalterable. I walked past the sign and transcended the city of Ithaca. I
couldn't go very far because my map went blank, so after a hundred or so feet I
hustled back -- but for the first time in my life I had stepped over the line.

The next day: terra incognita of an entirely different order. I wandered into
the McGraw Library and found myself in the periodical room. Until the moment
that I entered that space, I was acquainted only with magazines that would be
found in a barbershop or in a dentist's office -- Life and Look and Collier's
and The Saturday Evening Post and, for profound intellectual stimulation, the
National Geographic. And yet here was a room with an apparently limitless number
of periodicals: Journal of Physical Chemistry, Journal of Theology, Journal of
Metaphysics, Journal of Medieval Studies, Journal of Biblical Archeology. I had
no idea that there were such periodicals nor did I know that there were such
areas of knowledge. Was there in truth a subject called anthropology?  and
various shades of anthropology -- cultural, physical, linguistic? To say that
I was wide-eyed does not do justice to width of my eyes. I spent hours leafing
through these publications. I didn't understand much of what I read, but I did
realize that there were things going on in the world for which P. S. 217 and
EHHS and Flatbush had not prepared me.

A third and most miraculous occurrence. My assigned roommate arrived. His
name was Harry Wallace Blair II. He was delivered to campus by his parents
and his grandparents. I was introduced to his family, and, wonder of wonders,
his grandparents spoke English. Coming from immigrant Brooklyn, I had never
encountered grandparents who spoke English. Or imagined that there could be any
such. Italian, yes. Polish, certainly. Yiddish, of course. But English, never.
I was totally flabbergasted. I wonder whether Harry's grandparents noticed my
repeated gasps.

Oh, yes, I forgot one other event of the first Cornell week. Classes began.
I enrolled for introductory chemistry -- a big mistake. Chem, I quickly
discovered, was not where my talents lay. It was a large lecture class --
possibly 300 or 400 students. We all sat for a math screening test. Quite
in error, I was assigned to a special advanced section of twenty students
supposedly talented in mathematics. In the class were nineteen men and one
woman. Can you guess, grandchildren and regular readers, who was that woman?