Title: Some Mondegreens
Date: February 15, 2010

When, In a Canterbury bar many years ago, I ordered a cider, the East Kent
cockney bartender responded with a question that I interpreted as "strong
Boer what knees?" Why would he ask me about the joints of a South African
farmer? I was absolutely befuddled even when he repeated the question several
times. Finally, in frustration, he held up two bottles of cider: the first was
labeled "Strongbow" and the second "Watney's." He was simply asking me if I
preferred Strongbow or Watney's -- but how was I to know?  Some years afterward
I mentioned this incident to an English friend who countered with a story of her
own. On her first visit to New York City, she said, she ordered a sandwich and
the counterman asked her "fur rear oughta go?"

I recalled these events while musing on two moments of childhood linguistic
extremity. The first was when I asked one of my P. S. 217 friends what they did
during Religious Instruction (in the 1950s, Roman Catholic kids were released
from class for two hours a week to study at the local parish church, which in
my neighborhood was St. Rose of Lima -- popularly known as "Roe Salima."  Our
teachers took the opportunity to catch up on the local newspapers while students
twiddled the collective thumb). My friend's answer, "Cat kiss 'em." It was many
years before I understood that the word I had no hope of understanding was
"catechism." I was even more puzzled when a Jewish student, who could not know
that I came from a family that regularly celebrated Yom Kippur with a roast
pork dinner, asked me, "do you put on to fill in?" I construed the question to
be some sort of insult, but after a decade or so I realized that I had been
asked something rather serious: "Do you put on tefillin? -- tefillin being small
leather boxes containing biblical verses donned by observant Jews during morning
prayers.

In my neighborhood, it was common for people to shout "doozie pots" at each
other.  I had no idea what that expression meant, except for a strong feeling
that it wasn't praise. It was not until I studied a little Italian that I
understood that what I heard as "doozie pots" was a Sicilian variant of tu sei
pazzo, "you're crazy."

None of these misunderstandings, strictly speaking, meet the mondegreen
threshold;  let's call them near-mondegreens. (The best-known mondegreen is
"I led the pigeons to the flag" -- a mishearing of "I pledge allegiance to the
flag." The word mondegreen derives from one of the Child ballads: "They hae
slain the Earl of Murray/ And laid him on the green," the second of these lines
misheard as "And Lady Mondegreen"). In my long list of personal mondegreens,
the two that are most vivid in my memory are connected to my incomprehension
of religion.  They are a) the luscious "round young virgin" of Silent Night,
and b) the theologically implausible "The Lord is ice, the Lord is made of ice"
in one of the choruses of The Messiah ("even so in Christ, shall we be made
alive"). Here's another mondegreen from my childhood:  "Who knows what evil
lurks in the hot cement?" March 12:  Last night at dinner, I remarked  that
one of my favorite innovations of the second half of the twentieth century was
"fitted sheets."  A guest said, "You're right;  we didn't used to have feta
cheese."