Title: "Paradise" in Measure for Measure
Date: November 14, 2011

The word to watch in a most riveting speech in Measure for Measure is "paradise."

Young Claudio. whose head is scheduled to be lopped off tomorrow morning, is the speaker. He panics -- and why shouldn't he? After all, his only slip is that he has impregnated his ladylove Juliet. A venial sin, yet in newly-puritanical Vienna, the act of love has led directly to the executioner with his ax and his big black block. Although everyone, certainly including Shakespeare himself, knew that there were many things far worse than to depart this vale of trouble and tears, Claudio is so terrified by his imminent execution that he goes off the philosophical rails. He argues the extreme position (and here comes the speech and the crucial word) that "The weariest and most loathed worldly life/ That age, ache, penury and imprisonment/ Can lay on nature is a paradise/ To what we fear of death." A "paradise?" Goodness gracious!

Although everyone can sympathize, no one should agree with Claudio. Neverthless, the three-and-a-half lines of verse that contain the climactic  word "paradise" (and indeed the long speech in which these lines reside) are so brilliant and colorful that they almost persuade us to do so. One of the reasons the sentence is so wonderful is because Shakespeare brings to bear one of his favorite and most useful figures of speech. To depict Claudio's hysteria, Shakespeare employs a full-throttle hyperbole.

The most transparently hyperbolical words are the grammatical superlatives "weariest" and "most loathed." The hyperbole that resides in the word "paradise" is less obvious but more potent. "Paradise" is the climax -- the word that any good actor or reader must hit hard when he recites or reads the passage. An hyperbolist less gifted than Shakespeare might have written "The weariest and most loathed life is pretty darn good compared to dying," but our author pulls out all the rhetorical stops. To lie in poverty, in pain, in prison is, Claudio asserts, compared to death, a "paradise."

If, dear attentive and intelligent reader, you will now return to quotation, and read Claudio's lines again, you will feel the hyperbolical power of "paradise." Try it, please. And when you recite the sentence, you will also notice that the initial "p" in climactic "paradise" is prepared for by the plosives in the words that precede it -- "penury" and "imprisonment."

And if you are following instructions and reading aloud, you should be aware that in Shakespeare's time, "ache" was pronounced "aitch" -- a pronunciation that produces a strong and ingenious contrast between the affricates (age, aitch) and the plosives (penury, imprisonment, paradise).

Claudio's hyperbolical lines bring to conclusion a speech which is querulous at the start and panicky at the end.  Here they are in context.

Ay, but to die, and go we know not where.

To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;

This sensible warm motion to become

A kneaded clod, and the delighted spirit

To bath in fiery floods, or to reside

In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;

To be imprison'd in the viewless winds

And blown with restless violence round about

The pendent world; or to be worse than worst

Of those that lawless and incertain thought

Imagine howling.  'Tis too horrible.

The weariest and most loathed worldly life

That age, ache, penury and imprisonment

Can lay on nature, is a paradise

To what we fear of death.

("Cold obstruction" means that the body no longer moves -- as opposed to "sensible" (i.e capable of sensation or feeling) "warm motion".  A "kneaded clod" is what a "warm motion" is compressed or compressible into by death. A "delighted spirit" is generally glossed as "formerly capable of delight" but is better understood as "darkened" -- that is, de-lighted. "Viewless" means simply "invisible.")

Shakespeare does not feel obliged to distinguish or judge between these painful visions of an afterlife; instead, he prefers simply to heap together naturalistic, Christian, pagan and "lawless" ideas.

Students of hyperbole will take note of the inventive phrase "worse than worst," where, it seems, "worst" is insufficiently superlative. Here Shakespeare pushes against the limits of grammar. Bad, worse, worst suffices for most writers, but Shakespeare invents a new adjectival category -- a comparative superlative.

Shakespeare's interest in the worstness of things will reappear in King Lear  when Edgar, encountering his blinded father, realizes that he has not yet touched bottom: "O Gods. Who is't can say "I am at the worst?'/ I am worse than e'er I was." And then an worser insight comes to him: "And worse I may be yet: the worst is not/ So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'" For Edgar, of course, death, that so frightens Claudio, is understood to be a relief and a liberation. Edgar's father dies "smilingly."