Title: Red Pines
Date: June 22, 2021

Our stand of magnificent trees is composed of red pines, pinus resinosa.

Each tree is between 60 and 65 feet tall and they are all exactly 51 years old.
How can I be so sure about height and age?

Height is easy to determine with the Calloway 300 Pro Laser Range Finder. Age? 
Here's the history. In 1970, some friend or acquaintance, I can't remember
exactly who, acquired a hundred red pine seedlings for a forestry project. He
couldn't make use of all of them and so he gave us ten -- each one perhaps 4-6
inches long and the sum of their stems no thicker than a #2 pencil. I didn't
know exactly what to do with these treasures, so i planted them in a row in the
vegetable garden. Which is where they sat until 1972, when I decided to plant
them on the dike of the newly constructed pond, where they remain.

In doing so i acted in defiance of the local wisdom, which is, never plant a
tree on the dike. Why? Because the tree will eventually die, and the "water will
follow the roots" and weaken the dam. I judged this reasoning to be faulty.
In the first place, red pines, like all conifers, are shallow-rooted. The
surface of the dike is fifteen feet above the level of the water in the pond,
so when the pine eventually dies, its rootball will still be above water level.
Moreover, red pines are reported to live for centuries (some say three hundred
years), and I just can't bring myself to worry about what's going to happen to
a dike in the far distant future when, no doubt, the pond will long since have
reverted to the thick swamp that it was before we dug it out.

But why red pines rather than the white (pinus strobus) which is generally
considered to be the much superior species? Because a), I owned these red
pine seedlings and b) because at that time many of the white pines in our
neighborhood were suffering from a insect-borne disease that killed the leader
shoot and therefore deformed the tree (leader shoot disease seems to be a
thing of the past and now our young white pines are again growing up tall and
straight).  And red pines as consistently healthy.

For their first decade, the red pines made scarcely any impression on the
landscape. Now they dominate. When I sit in their shade, I am pleased to recall
their entire history, which allows me to tell them, proudly, "I knew you when
you were just a sprout!"