Title: An Informal Survey
Date: April 23, 2007

OK, it's time to get going. Could we put the house lights on, please. Here's the first question. Raise your hand if you think that the loss of 5.000,000 e-mails by the White House was simply an accident. That it was unintended. Anyone?  Yes, I see a couple of hands in the back, and there's someone here on the left. I guess most of you think it was 'accidentally-on-purpose.' Fine. OK now, here's another question. The White House claims that Karl Rove didn't use the Republican National Committee e-mail address to bypass the records act, but just simply to keep politics and government business separate. If you believe that, please raise your hand. I'm not seeing any hands at all -- oh yes, there's someone, and there's someone else near the center aisle. There's two hands -- no, I'm sorry, three.  Ready for another question?  The President is willing to let his advisers talk to congressional investigators, but not under oath, not publicly, and with no transcript. If you believe that he's not trying to hide something, raise your hands, please. Did I make that question clear? Let me say it again. If the president's argument is persuasive to you, raise your hand. If you think he's just protecting himself and his advisers, keep your hand down. Hands? I see two on the left, and one there in the back. Same person as before, I think. OK now, -- next question. Karl Rove's lawyer admits that Rove systematically erased his e-mails, but only because he thought that they were preserved elsewhere. Anyone believe that one?  Please raise your hand. Nobody?  OK, there's someone down here. Sorry, I almost missed you, ma'am. So we have only one person who believes that story. Ready for another question?  Attorney-General Gonzalez says that he would never fire anyone for political reasons or to interfere with an investigation in progress. Do I have any hands on that one? No, none at all?  Interesting?  I'll wait. Still nobody? Let me try another question. Anyone here believe that Gonzalez is a tool of Rove and that he does exactly what Rove tells him to do?  OK, now we're finally getting some response. I thought no one was paying attention. Looks like about two-thirds, maybe three-quarters of you. Maybe more. We only have time for one last question.  Anyone here convinced that Karl Rove is a vicious liar who deserves to hang by his thumbs in a Gitmo prison, please raise your hand. Whoa, almost everyone. Please, I can't keep count if you raise both hands. Just one hand, please. Look, shouting isn't necessary  -- I just need to count the hands. What's that you say?  I can't hear you -- there's so much noise. Oh, you think he should hang by his nuts. Very good. OK, thanks a lot, everybody. Thanks for your cooperation. That was very helpful.