Title: No Words, No Words?  Hush.
Date: September 27, 2007

A few nights ago, I attended a performance by our local treasure, the ever-
glorious Takacs Quartet. Without asking my leave, they chose to play works
by Aarvo Part and Philip Glass. I suppose that there must be virtues to
"minimalist" music, but a single motif played over and over again in the same
tempo, with the same unvarying dynamics, and in the same non-key -- what's the
point? Music without melody, harmony, or rhythm is like a novel without a plot
or like a severely abstract painting. Sorry folks, I'm antediluvian. A relic. I
want a story and I want it dressed in rhyme and meter. It's exhilaration that I
crave, not forty-five long minutes of total ripvanwinkleization.

I was already in a sulky mood at the intermission when Mr. and Mrs. Talkative
behind me, after gushing over the minimalists, directed their intellects toward
Shakespeare. Mrs T. announced, "You don't need to read a Shakespeare play before
seeing it. Just read a plot summary so that you know what's happening." Mr. T.
agreed:  "Absolutely. Going to the theater is all about the costumes and the
set and the business. As long as you have a general idea of the story, you don't
need to understand the words."

No need to understand Shakespeare's words?  Go to the theater and ignore the
words of the finest poet in human history?  What are the Talkatives thinking? 
The costumes are the work of the costumer; the business is the work of the
director and the stage designer. The only part of the performance that is
Shakespeare's is the language.

One of the teachers of my youth, the late and much lamented Alfred Harbage  --
the finest Shakespeare scholar of his generation -- used to say that he didn't
care what the actors did on stage as long as he could hear the words.  I'm not
nearly so tolerant. I don't want Rosiland and Orlando to send email messages to
each other -- I want them to articulate. I don't want Cinna and Metullus Cimber
to be dressed as blackshirt fascist thugs. And I certainly don't want Snug and
Bottom to ride to the Duke's Oak on motorcycles. Such antics are stupid and
distracting.

The performance for which I'd pay a premium price is one at the Theatre, or
at the old Globe, or at the Blackfriars during the years when Shakespeare was
teaching the parts to Burbage and Hemmings and Kemp. Dollars to doughnuts he
insisted that the actors pronounce the words distinctly.

After the grating intermission, the Talkatives ran out of insights and my
indignation began to wane. Eventually Ed, Andras, Karoly and Gerry returned to
the stage and played one of Haydn's great Opus 76 quartets. It was transcendent
-- melodic, intelligent and intelligible, warm, robust and sensuous. It was
music.