Title: Representative Markwayne Mullin Back in the News
Date: April 27, 2017

Four years ago, I listened to a radio interview with Markwayne Mullin, a new
member of the House of Representatives from eastern Oklahoma, and was absolutely
flabbergasted. Astonished and dismayed, I wrote a few paragraphs about him.
Here''s what I said then: "It wasn't that he was inarticulate or stupid. It was
that he was so utterly smug, so absolutely and entirely certain of himself. He
has no doubts. He knows exactly what ails the country -- too much government
-- and he knows how to fix it -- lower taxes, less regulation, more free
untrammeled capitalism. He does not seem to be aware that the United States of
America is a big, complicated, multi-faceted country. Markwayne Mullin possesses
all the arrogance of ignorance, in spades."

And here he is, Representative Markwayne Mullin, smiling in front of the
mandatory flag.

I went on to report on Mullin's views, which were the usual list of utterly
unoriginal, thoughtless, simplistic tea party talking points. I concluded by
offering the hope (or might I say it) the prayer, which was "that Markwayne
Mullin, who as he begins his congressional career is superficial to the very
core of his being, will come to Washington, meet some folks from different parts
of the country and from different ethnic backgrounds, learn a little about the
world, come to an appreciation of the complexity of things, and grow up to be a
useful broad-minded compassionate public servant. It's not impossible, but it's
not going to happen until Mullin realizes that he doesn't know everything about
everything, and that the practices that made Mullin Plumbing such a success may
not be the same practices that will promote the general welfare over all of the
US of A. I'm hopeful, but frankly, I'm not at all optimistic."

Well, the calendar has shed a few leaves, and it's come to pass as I feared.
Representative Markwayne Mullin has no more brain than earwax. He's learned
nothing.

He's back in the news:

"An Oklahoma congressman is facing scrutiny after a video posted Monday showed
him telling constituents at a town hall that they do not pay his salary.

“You say you pay for me to do this? That’s bull crap. I pay for myself,”
Rep. Markwayne Mullin told constituents at a town hall in Jay, Oklahoma. "I paid
enough taxes before I got here and continue to through my company to pay my own
salary. This is a service. No one here pays me to go.”

“Pays you to go where?” a constituent objected.

“This is a service for me, not a career, and I thank God this is not how I
make my living,” Mullin responded.

“Oh please, then don’t run,” a constituent said."

As I understand the exchange, Mr. Mullin believes that inasmuch as the taxes
that he paid before he became a congressman exceeds the salary he now draws,
that he has limited or no responsibility to his constituents. Not at all a
persuasive argument, because like the rest of us, Mullin's taxes go to the
defense department and to HEW with a few dribs and drabs left over for social
programs and only a trickle for paying for the House of Representatives

But that's not the heart of the matter. The important question is this:  why
the heck is Mullin in congress? Obviously, he hates the job and and even more
obviously he hates his constituents. He has no respect for government.

Perhaps it's time for Mr. Mullin to reconsider his career. What everyone wants
in a representative is someone who will inform himself, be sensible, broad-
minded, be able to work with all parties, and be respectful of his constituents.
Mr. Mullin fails on all counts. Let's assume he's a good plumber. Look, Oklahoma
needs  good plumbers. Please, Mr. Mullin. Do the work you were called to.
Markwayne, go back to where you came from, fix those pipes, and stay away from
government. Please, don't run again. You've done your bit; let someone else take
a crack at it.