Title: 0h no, not again!
Date: May 31, 2009

Here's my latest 'personal best.'  It's now seven consecutive airplane trips
in which the person next to me has been an obese hulk. The kind of person who
spreads his (or her) legs, drips his (or her suet) onto and over my armrest
and claims and colonizes territory that I have purchased and which should be
inviolate.

As usual, we've arrived early.  We have the aisle and the middle, and we're
hoping that the window will be unoccupied, but we know that to wish so is
probably hopeless.  I watch the doorway.  Any number of slim - size 2,
size 4 -- young ladies appear, progress down the aisle, glance at my row,
and continue on their way.  Small nine-year-old boys whom I would joyously
welcome emerge from the doorway.  They too pass by.  Elderly grandmothers,
too frail and slight to threaten my space, totter to the rear. Then,
finally, here he is, my destiny.  Just my luck once again!  An enormous
whale, big enough to block the sun, swims and jiggles me-ward.  Clouds
of thick tobacco smoke rise like mist from his clothes.  He pauses. "May
I?" he says, unapologetically, shamelessly.  We stand, exit the row, and
wait in the aisle while he slowly maneuvers his massive bulk into place,
sighs, and crushes his seat. He loosens the seatbelt to maximum girth. By
the time I return, he's already claimed the armrest  and his keachy elbow
has broken the imaginary plane.  Now he spreads his heroic sumo thighs.  In
all fairness, there's no way he could get both legs under his seat, nor any way
that his flabby arms could be confined to the space that he has paid for. I
huddle to one side, forced to list to the left.  I am majorly pissed but too
polite (or inhibited) to utter the vindictive words that form themselves in my
brain:  "Hey, buster, next time buy yourself two seats. Or a whole row."

In my near future:  four-and-a-half hours of undeserved compression. Back ache.
Head                                                                       ache.

Why little old me?